London Borough of Barking and
Dagenham
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 29 April  22 May 2014
Report published: 7 July 2014
The overall judgement is requires improvement

There are no widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being
harmed or at risk of harm. The welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and
promoted. However, the authority is not yet delivering good protection and help and
care for children, young people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

requires
improvement


requires
improvement


requires
improvement
requires
improvement
requires
improvement

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is
requires improvement
The LSCB is not yet demonstrating the characteristics of good.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the local safeguarding children board


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority requires improvement and is not yet good because

Too many children experience the trauma of being removed from the care of
their parents by the police. This often takes place before enough information
has been gathered from other agencies and family members. This was an area
for improvement at the last inspection in 2012.


The thresholds for children with lower levels of need are not sufficiently
understood or applied by all agencies. Although the guidance provided is clear,
agencies are not always clear about when a child may be identified as in need.


Agencies working with families in the area struggle in responding to the fast
and significantly changing demands of the population and the rapid growth in
the number of young children in the borough. This is leading to high pressure
and workloads across the key agencies.


Some assessments focus too narrowly on immediate presenting concerns about
children and fail to explore all potential risks and needs. Social workers do not
always assess the impact of all aspects of parents behaviour on the children.
This means that childrens needs may not be fully identified or met.


Only a small number of children and young people who are privately fostered
are known to the local authority, despite active work by the local authority to
find out about these arrangements.


Some children in need and some who are looked after wait too long to be seen
and spoken with by a social worker, which affects the timeliness of assessing
and addressing their needs.


The very low and reducing level of police attendance at child protection
conferences means that sometimes decisions about childrens lives are made
without all key agencies considering the full information within the meeting.


The views of children are not recorded well enough. As a result, childrens plans
do not always reflect their wishes and feelings or what they would like to see
changing in their lives.


Some child protection and child in need plans are too focused on adult needs
rather than those of the child and do not address all areas of identified need.
Some child in need plans are not followed through quickly enough.

assessments and plans are good.


consistently well managed and, in some cases, this means that children and
families do not engage with services or do not receive timely help.
achieved this. While many of these children remain in stable placements as a
result of changed plans, these do not involve legal permanence.
identify their long-term hopes and aspirations. Although reduced, a high
proportion of these young people continue not to be in education, employment
or training.
to drive forward the necessary changes and improvements across the whole
service.
not being well used to support service development and drive improvement.
Not all services are being evaluated through audit. This means the local
authority does not yet have a full understanding of the impact all services have
on children.
The local authority has the following strengths
Purposeful work with vulnerable families leads to improvements for most
children, such as increasing school attendance and the early provision of
support for very young children with additional needs.
of a child protection plan if they do not engage with services. When families are
not making the progress needed, decisive action is taken to protect the child,
including escalation into public law and transition to a safe and settled future.
Inspectors saw examples of proactive, skilled social work sensitive to childrens
needs, giving parents a clear understanding of what is expected of them. Social
workers are creative in the ways in which they engage and communicate with
children. These include observations and other work with pre- or non-verbal
children.
effective and make a positive difference in many individual cases. Family group
conferencing supports children and families well.
together at all stages. The average duration of care proceedings within the
family court is improving, despite an increase in the number of proceedings.


can be placed safely with skilled and well supported carers. Placements are well
supported by the local authority, resulting in positive attachments and high
levels of stability. The use of special guardianship has increased and there is a
low rate of placement disruption.
engagement and participation of families. Parents attendance at conferences is
good and their feedback is routinely collected. Almost all parents told inspectors
that they had been helped to understand the concerns for their child.
at risk of child sexual exploitation and those who go missing from home, care
or education get a well-co-ordinated response.
experienced adoption team. Post-adoption support is also a strength and is
valued by those who have used the service.
allocated workers. Young people report that training programmes are valued
and the service overall is very accessible and welcoming.
practitioners. Strategic bodies, such as the Childrens Trust and the Health and
Wellbeing Board, have a shared understanding of these pressures. Extra
staffing has been recently agreed to help childrens social care meet its
responsibilities.
has developed good communication from front line practitioners across the key
agencies. This is an effective approach to understanding what is happening on
the ground.

What does the local authority need to improve?
Areas for improvement
unplanned removal of children from their families. This concerns the exercise of
police powers of protection. This was an area for improvement in the last
inspection.
ensure that timely and appropriate decisions are based on all relevant
information.


families, are clearly recorded, have engagement from all relevant agencies and
identify clear and achievable outcomes.
subsequent child protection conferences through regular attendance by all key
agencies.
thorough consideration of parenting difficulties, their impact on the child, and a
full analysis of risk.
and thorough, and written plans consider all areas of need and identify the
outcomes sought.
earliest point when children become looked after, as well as tracking of the
timescales for individual children with a plan for adoption.
through increased representation of looked after children in the children in care
group.
a greater focus on those not in education, employment or training, or with
other vulnerabilities.
living with their carers as part of staying put arrangements.
take account of known and estimated increases in amount and type of demand
for the whole range of services for vulnerable children.
chairs and independent reviewing officers, as well as formal social worker
supervision, to reduce drift or delay in assessments.
members to achieve greater awareness and accountability across the local
authority.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 5 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted
and two associate inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Brendan Parkinson, HMI
Team inspectors: Mike Ferguson, Wendy Ghaffar, Graham Tilby, Penny Fisher (HMIs)
and Sara Goodinge and Nick Stacey (associate inspectors)


Information about this local authority area
Children living in this area
 Approximately 56,2002 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Barking and Dagenham. This is 29% of the total population in the
area.
 Approximately 34.9% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 22.2%3 (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 25.5%4 (the national average is 15.1%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 62%5
of all children living in the area, compared with 25% in the country as a
whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are Black/Black British and Asian/Asian British (2011 Census). Black African
(24%) and White Other (11.2%) are the largest minority ethnic groups in
the Barking and Dagenham school population (School Census 2014).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 48.3% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 37% (the national average is 13.6%).
 This area has seen a large and continuing increase in children and families
population in recent years. Those newly arriving are from a wide range of
ethnicities, cultures and religions, with many children and families whose
first language is not English.
Child protection in this area
 At 29th April 2014, 2,065 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a slight
decrease from 2,161 at 31 March 2013.
 At 29th April 2014, 328 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is a significant increase from 200 at 31 March



GLA 2013
Spring Census 2014
Spring Census 2014

LBBD age 0 to 17 years BME (including White Other) 2011 Census


population in a very short time, so the numbers are proportionate to the
population and the socio-economic demography.
 At 29th April 2014, 14 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from 12 at 31 March 2014 and an increase
from 7 at 31 March 2013.
Children looked after in this area
 At 29th April 2014, 450 children are being looked after by the LA (a rate of
children) at 31 March 2013. Of this number:
the authority area
authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 22 adoptions
subsequently returned to be looked after
moved on to independent living
now living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The previous inspection of Barking and Dagenhams safeguarding
arrangements and services for looked after children was in July 2012. The
local authority was judged to be Good for safeguarding and Adequate for
services for looked after children.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since September 2009.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since August 2011.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
require improvement
made a positive difference to the lives of their children. Childrens centres in the
borough, pivotal to the early help offer, are considered by inspection to provide
outstanding services. Early help is effective for most children, particularly in
identifying additional needs and improving school attendance.
range of agencies, and particularly well by schools. Assessments are generally
good and lead to effective team around the child meetings and outcomefocused action plans. There are fewer than expected referrals made by adult
oriented services, such as substance misuse and mental health services.
Additional links have been recently introduced to address this, but it is as yet
too early to see their impact.
within the context of the challenging demography, the right families are
targeted for early help, although the numbers rise continuously. New impact
measures are being introduced using the implementation of an electronic CAF,
to enable a more accurate overview of the effectiveness of every early help
plan initiated as well as a dedicated early help evaluation service.
school roll meet statutory requirements and are effective. The local authority
has gone further in also collating information on children and young people not
accessing full-time education. The quality of alternative provision for those
children not in mainstream provision is good.
the main statutory agencies in the area, enabling consequent response by
social care to be effective. However, the application of thresholds for other
children in need are less well understood and less effectively applied by
agencies.
harm are identified quickly and receive a timely and appropriate response.
Information sharing between agencies and professionals is timely and effective
within the triage and multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH). The recent colocation of childrens social care, health, the police, including a child sexual
exploitation officer, and multi-agency panel (MAP) coordinator, is effective in
supporting all key services to be fully informed and involved in plans for these
children.
MAP coordinator ensures prompt access to early help, supporting agencies to


initiate early help assessments. Performance in relation to repeat referrals
within 12 months of a previous referral is very good, and below the national
average, indicating that when children are referred to childrens social care they
receive a service that meets their needs.
and are screened in the MASH. Those referrals sampled by inspectors in the
MASH evidenced good, timely information sharing, a good analysis of risk and
consideration of historical factors recognising the potential physical and
emotional risks to children. A domestic abuse risk assessment tool is used by
senior social workers within triage and MASH to assess and to inform safety
planning. This is used effectively to ensure that children are protected.
Management decisions at this initial stage are well recorded, analytical and
included detailed direction to social workers about next steps in safeguarding
the child.
prior to referrals being considered by the MASH. Where child protection
concerns are identified and parental consent cannot be obtained, referrals still
progress through the MASH, ensuring that information is shared in a timely
manner. Non-social care professionals can seek advice and support and
clarification from a qualified social worker in the MASH and triage services.
Professionals told inspectors that they welcome this, ensuring that safeguarding
expertise informs decision making.
addresses, or fails to clearly identify concerns. While the quality of many cases
was clear, detailed and specific to the child as well as identifying risks, some do
not include this key information. This results in a significant amount of time
being spent subsequently identifying the level of concern before being able to
progress these referrals.
childrens social care. Cases that may benefit from a multi-agency meeting do
not always have one. These discussions take place only in the most high risk or
complex cases, such as child sexual exploitation. Many strategy discussions are
poorly recorded, with most limited to the decision to proceed with child
protection enquiries. Few strategy discussions record concerns and risks to the
child and none identify agencies actions and responsibilities.
promptly to qualified social workers. At the time of the inspection there were no
unallocated social care cases. While there are no delays in dealing with those
seen as most at risk, children with lower levels of need are transferred and
allocated within the duty and assessment teams and experience delays in being
seen. This does not compromise childrens safety but does result in delays in
assessing other needs.


experienced social workers. Children are seen and seen alone for the purpose
of child protection enquiries, and in the majority of cases these interviews are
well recorded and detailed.
insufficient capacity to respond to all urgent needs. A very high proportion
(43%) of children becoming looked after are taken into care during the out of
hours period. While many children are appropriately returned to live with their
families, they are subject to the traumatic experience of being removed from
home and coming into an unplanned care placement. The re-commissioned out
of hours service (in partnership with three adjacent boroughs) is yet to show
impact or the effectiveness of the changes made.
assessments that are timely, comprehensive and consider the childs history. A
small number of assessments seen focused primarily on the presenting
problem, not sufficiently addressing or evaluating all areas of potential risk and
need. Assessments completed and authorised have shown a very large
increase, from 1,271 in 201213 to 2,760 in 201314. This has contributed to a
reduction, albeit slight, in timeliness of completion of assessments, dropping
from 77% in 201213, to 71% 201314, which is below the national average.
has had an adverse impact on quality. Many practitioners seen did not readily
understand or apply this new approach. Also, assessments that feature parental
domestic abuse, substance misuse and mental health issues do not always fully
analyse the impact of parental behaviours on children.
with children and young people, including in large families, resulting in good
outcomes. Children are seen, and seen alone at all stages of involvement.
Creative methods of engaging and communicating with children to gain their
wishes and feelings about changes needed to improve their safety and support
are used well. However, this work was not consistently well recorded.
This is in the context of a substantial increase in the number of child protection
plans in a short time, from 200 in 201213 to 317 in 201314. Targeted work
by the Child Protection Reviewing Service (CPRS) has been effective in ensuring
child protection plans do not drift. The number of children who had been on a
child protection plan for more than two years has reduced from 8% in 201213
to 3.8% in 201314, below the national average. This very good performance is
supported by a significant reduction in those who are the subject of plans for
more than one year.
parents, carers and young people to access, clearly identifying what changes


are needed by when. Most child protection plans seen were good, with clear
actions, responsibility and timescales for outcomes recorded, and have
contingencies if the plan is not successful. However, some plans seen by
inspectors were too brief, did not address all areas of concern and were too
adult-focused. It was not clear what needed to change or what support the
child required.
taken. Parents who fail to engage receive appropriate challenge. In some cases
this has resulted in improved engagement by parents and good outcomes for
the child. Where this has not happened, matters are appropriately escalated
into legal intervention. Many children subject to child protection plans make
good progress, as indicated by the low numbers subject to a second or
subsequent child protection plan; at 11.5% for 201314. This is well below the
national average of 15% and is strong performance.
or delay in achieving positive changes. In response to this the local authority
has provided additional child protection chairs to ensure that those identified as
being in need have robust plans that are regularly reviewed. It is too early to
see evidence of impact of these changes.
all agencies involved, although the police only attend 8% of initial and 1% of
review conferences and GPs also do not attend sufficiently. Decision-making is
potentially less than robust as a consequence.
varied from adequate to good. The strengthening families model, aiming to
engage families and identify resources and strengths as well as risk, is used
effectively in most cases seen, ensuring the participation of families and
agencies in assessing risk. Most meetings were clearly guided, parents were
supported in understanding the concerns, and were effective in identifying what
improvements were needed. Few children attend conferences, although this is
beginning to take place through support from the participation team. Advocacy
for parents and children attending conferences is available, although not
extensively used. While parental feedback is mostly positive, with many
reporting that they had been helped to understand concerns, social workers do
not always share reports with parents, resulting in less effective parental
engagement.
resulting in better parenting for children. However, the involvement of adult
mental health services is limited and, in a small number of cases, several core
groups had been cancelled reducing the oversight and drive in implementing
plans.


unclear, other than to monitor the childs general well-being. Records do not
make sufficient reference to progress against the plan. Transfers of cases
between teams are not consistently well managed and, in some cases, the
effectiveness of engaging children and their families is not secured.
of families was seen in many cases. For example, a parents approach to the
childs autism, informed by cultural and ethnic factors, was understood well by
a social worker, enabling them to engage effectively with the parent. With
another family, the social worker showed skill and sensitivity in planning and
intervention with an Asian family where there was domestic abuse. An
understanding of cultural matters, together with a robust response enabled the
parent to engage wider family members, resulting in considerable change and
positive outcomes for the children.
effective contributions from partner agencies, reducing risk through information
sharing and action planning. In most cases involving domestic abuse there is
effective work in supporting children. Services are available for women and
children who have experienced domestic abuse, including a young persons
Independent Domestic Violence Advisor. However, the high reported incidence
of domestic abuse exceeds capacity, with no local programmes for perpetrators.
Out of borough there is also a waiting list for the Everyman programme. This
lack of provision contributes to delays in some child in need and protection
plans being progressed.
abuse, is carried out in schools through the ARC theatre group. The group
positively engage with young women around sexual violence, domestic abuse
and forced marriage. Workshops are provided in schools to promote awareness
and signpost young people to support services, with evaluation of the impact of
these also being undertaken.
through a shared strategic commitment to ensuring harm reduction, with recent
strengthening of these arrangements with the introduction of the Multi Agency
Sexual Exploitation (MASE) subgroup of the LSCB. Early identification and
information sharing on children missing is timely and effective. The daily report
of children missing is sent to the MASH and to schools and hospital emergency
departments. A dedicated officer in the MASH identifies those at risk of child
sexual exploitation (CSE). Reports presented at both strategy and MAP
meetings support the planning and delivery of safeguarding interventions. This
was effective in cases tracked by inspectors, with good identification of risk at
an early stage.
roll meet statutory requirement and are effective. There are currently only a


low number (18) of children whose whereabouts are unknown. The local
authority goes further, coordinating information on those currently not
accessing full-time education. The tuition service provides good quality
alternative provision commissioning and quality assuring other specialist
provision within the borough.
educated are all followed through a regular multi-agency meeting, with actions
set and tracked. Active enquiries and plans are made with all key agencies halftermly. This involves good information sharing and timely responses. Children
missing from home who do not have a social worker are tracked through the
restorative mediation and family group conferencing (FGC) team. This service is
proactive in making contact with children and their families to offer support.
The strategic leads of childrens services, education, health and senior police
officers meet on a termly basis to discuss individual high risk cases, monitoring
patterns and trends. Data on missing children is also considered by the
performance management sub-group of the LSCB. The effectiveness of these
arrangements is evident in the low numbers of children missing from home and
numbers and repeat episodes have reduced further in the year 201314.
appropriate assessments to ensure their safety and well-being. The recent
increase in privately fostered children known to the authority, whilst an
improvement, and mostly now in line with an average for London, continues to
be a small number, despite some active work in raising the profile of such
arrangements.
those working with children or vulnerable adults. Referrals from a range of
agencies are subject to timely and proportionate enquiries, particularly so in
relation to educational settings. Awareness of the Local Authority Designated
Officer role is promoted well amongst local organisations including faith groups,
with well established relationships with local churches and mosques.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence require improvement
effective. The range of targeted services, often through the access to resources
team (ART), have a positive impact. They keep most children in their families
and support return home, including as part of parallel planning during court
proceedings. These services lead to a high number of children being effectively
diverted from care into stable, safe placements for children, either at home or
to relatives.
prevented from becoming looked after or had left care through family group
conferencing (FGC), crisis intervention and restorative justice team
interventions. Over 90% of the children benefiting from these interventions in
indicate good targeting and effective interventions.
under voluntary arrangements. Inspectors found no children inappropriately
within the care system through these arrangements. The demand for looked
after children provision continues to rise sharply, but is in line with the rapidly
changing child population profile; between 2013 and the beginning of the
inspection the rate of children being looked after had risen sharply (from 72 to
population has increased from 20% of the total population to 30% in the space
of four years; those in poverty have increased markedly, as has the number of
homeless families resident in the borough that have come from other parts of
London.
their parents through the police exercising their powers of protection prior to
sufficient checks and enquiries being completed with, for example, other
agencies and extended family members. Although the number of these
episodes is reducing slightly and a higher proportion are leading to care
proceedings, many of these children do return to live with their families,
appropriately and after a brief period. This could indicate that they did not need
to be in local authority care.
interventions benefit from legal and social care services working constructively
and closely together within the public law arrangements, which is used
effectively at all stages including throughout proceedings. The local authority
has the fourth highest number of care proceedings in London, heavily
influenced by the large changes in the population profile, but maintains a
strong performance for the timely completion of these, being in the top third
overall.


authority. This, together with the high quality training staff receive, enables
matters to go through court quicker, with a reduction in the need for experts to
be appointed or assessments ordered. Early active work to consider alternative
permanence for children has resulted in a reduction in the number of additional
assessments being undertaken in proceedings. Effective work with childrens
guardians and through the family justice board arrangements, have actively
supported appropriate, timely action in planning permanence for children.
willingness of some children to trust their social worker. This is further
weakened by fewer than 80% of monthly visits and just 61% of 6 weekly visits
taking place within the expected period, although here has been a recent
improvement in this.
relationships with the children placed with them and, together with other
professionals, play a key role in helping children understand what is happening
to them. Work undertaken by a play therapist is valued by carers in supporting
some children to move placement, and in providing training and consultation
for carers.
access advocates to help them in making and following through on complaints.
The childrens rights officer maintains active involvement until there is a
resolution. Several examples were provided of children being well supported in
achieving child-centred planning and having their voices more effectively heard.
Regular reporting also takes place directly to senior officers. However, those
children seen by inspectors were unclear about how to make a complaint.
supported through individual support packages, there are some who return
home where the quality of support is less assured, with poor arrangements in a
minority of cases that provide less positive or robust support. This tends to be
the case where young people drive decision-making.
good support and guidance to keep themselves safe from bullying. There has
been a strong focus on cyber-bullying and e-safety within schools. This was not
an issue for those children and young people seen by inspectors or in those
cases seen.
them to reach their potential. These include Subwise, an effective local drugs
service open to all young people with links to the borough. It supports looked
after children living in nearby authorities. The youth offending service is
proactive in prevention of offending and diversion from court. This has led to a
decrease in the already comparatively low figures for looked after children


offending. Before making placements, workers ensure appropriate services are
in place to meet the specific needs of the child.
school is valued, notably in maintaining children in educational provision
through comprehensive packages of support. A large majority of children attend
good or better schools. No looked after child is missing from education and
almost all are receiving full time education. Absence from school is reducing,
including persistent absence, although this remains above national averages.
schools. Unfortunately, one young person has been excluded from a secondary
school outside of the borough. Most children have an up-to-date personal
education plan (PEP) in place, although almost one in five do not. Those PEPs
seen are sufficient to inform plans and provision for pupils, with many children
having continuity of schooling as part of the arrangements. The local authority
is also working to ensure that PEPs and reviews are held outside school time.
the impact of the pupil premium can be seen. Key Stage 4 results for that year
were poor. Only two of the 25 pupils (8%) achieved five good GCSEs including
English and mathematics, which is well below national and statistical neighbour
averages. Systems to track and monitor childrens progress do not ensure that
the virtual school has comprehensive, up to date information. However, for
those children where data is known, most are making good progress.
health assessments for children looked after. At 94.7% it is now well above the
London average (88%). A similarly high performance is shown for both dental
checks and eye tests. Healthy lifestyles are strongly promoted in reviews, with
data showing higher take-up of health checks through initiatives such as the
Splash health reward cards.
and social workers value the weekly consultation from the child and adolescent
mental health services (CAMHS) as well as the signposting to other services
that can meet childrens emotional needs. There are clear pathways in place for
accessing CAMHS for Looked After Children with waiting times for this service of
less than one month for an initial appointment.
through participation in relevant activities. For example, a child attended a wide
variety of creative arts facilities, clearly aiming to enhance and improve her selfconfidence as well as to form attachments with her carers and with peers
outside her school.
current quarter). A robust reporting procedure notifying connected workers is in


place. While identifying actions if young people are missing for more than two
days, there are no specific actions for those missing for multiple shorter
periods. Effective feedback systems are in place after children return, including
personal interview. For children missing and known to be at serious risk, these
are addressed at chief officer level, with a range of responses including, where
appropriate, secure accommodation with a clear exit plan.
plans consequently needing improvement as they are mostly descriptive and
lacking a sufficiently clear time frame. Those assessments prepared for Court
are good, including a clear analysis with a sharp focus on addressing risk.
Issues of diversity, including ethnicity, culture and religion, are consistently well
considered in care plans as is contact with family members. Children are
encouraged, where appropriate, to keep in contact with their parents, siblings
and extended families. Sibling attachment is a cornerstone of plans and is
strongly promoted in placement reviews.
parents and children. Written reports from agencies are not routinely provided,
reducing the full picture of service coordination in place around the child. There
is very good attendance of children in their reviews (98% in 201213).
Independent reviewing officers (IRO) work constructively with advocates and
the childrens rights officer to ensure that children are kept informed of and
involved in planning for their future. Action has been taken to improve the
timeliness of reviews (Overall 82% in time in 2013-14) and although
improvements are noted it is too early to see the full impact of this
improvement on outcomes for children. Independent visitors are also provided
for all children who need them, wherever they are.
meetings seen there was strong, constructive challenge to include childrens
wishes and feelings. In other cases, however, there is a lack of challenge in
terms of care and permanence planning. For some children, this has
contributed to some delays in permanence planning.
agency records nor consistently through formal supervision. Social workers are,
however, well supported by their managers through continuous availability and
open access to consultation.
to ensure that looked after children are placed with local foster carers.
Recruitment strategies are appropriately based on recently assessed need, with
strong recruitment in adjoining boroughs. This has supported a reduction in the
number of placements more than 20 miles from their home in recent years
(13.1% of those placed since October 2013). Of particular value is the fact that
the support packages, training and support groups for in-house carers are
available to external providers as well. Management of almost all out of


borough placements is good at all stages, including for children placed in
residential homes a considerable distance away. Children are consistently
placed in provision judged as good or better by inspection. These homes were
positive about all aspects of their working relationship with the area.
enabling children to be placed safely with skilled carers. All local authority
carers have an annual review with high retention rates of appropriate carers.
Carers are highly positive about the support and quality of training they receive,
considering it well targeted on key issues such as challenging behaviours and
child-parent separation. Children are reported by carers to find the welcome
book in each foster home helpful. Records show a well-coordinated approach to
family finding between social work teams and the fostering team. The
proportion of children placed within family settings is good (81.5% in foster
placements, and 89.5% in family settings generally) compared to similar
authorities and England in general.
challenge, with just 17 adopters recruited in 201213. Placement matching is a
particular strength. Placement staff have very good knowledge of providers and
the local consortium has helped to improve quality overall. Good consideration
is given to diversity including ethnicity, culture and religion when placing
children. As a consequence high levels of placement stability are evident. Long
term stability is 74.8%, higher than national averages and those of similar
authorities. The proportion of children experiencing three or more placements
in a year is also consequently very low (9%).
to live in families, reducing the need for residential care. Pitstop is a foster care
scheme using a range of proven methods. This short term scheme is proving
highly effective in supporting stability, with almost all children remaining in their
family settings several months after intervention. Intensive support packages
put in place to address difficulties also help in reducing the number of children
and young people having attended three or more schools while looked after (10
children in the last year).
and happy in their placements. All those in foster care placements felt safe and
happy with their carers. Those who were less content understood why they
were in that particular placement. The high number of special guardianship
orders to carers of children placed is a purposeful strategy by the local
authority as a stable, continuing alternative to adoption, where it accords with
childrens wishes and feelings.
the corporate parenting board. Some service changes have been achieved as a
direct consequence of the group, such as the health passport for over-16s; a
more sensitive process around arranging emergency care; and the recently


revised, user friendly format for carers welcome books. However, there are too
few children and young people involved, with many childrens views not
represented, including those out of borough. None of the children spoken with
by inspectors, other than those in the CiC, know of the pledge, the care website
or how to make a complaint.
The graded judgment for adoption performance requires improvement
many plans for those who have been waiting a long time to be adopted now
changing to other arrangements. A low proportion of those with adoption plans
move in with their new family within the target of 20 months (at 43% this is
much lower than the national average of 55%). While timeliness is improving,
there has been a lack of urgency for some children, hampered by a lack of
parallel planning (planning for adoption at the same time as other outcomes,
including return home). Family finding is not being started quickly enough in
the planning process overall.
subject to an Adoption Order (18 compared to 21 in 201213). At 6.6% the
proportion of children leaving care through adoption is below national and
statistical neighbour averages. IROs do not consistently provide sufficient
challenge when plans are delayed or changed. There are no arrangements to
prioritise and track those children most at risk of drift.
adoptive family, a significant proportion (36%) now have a plan for long-term
fostering or Special Guardianship. However, for many, the change of decision
away from adoption to long-term fostering is in accordance with their wishes
and feelings and reflective of the strong attachments they have formed with
foster carers, prioritising stability over permanence.
rapidly changing population profile. Although the number of adopters approved
increased from 17 in 201213 to 35 in 201314, this still falls short of the local
authoritys target. Both the recent two-stage assessment process, implemented
from September 2013, and the preparation training are well regarded by
prospective adopters. The Adoption Support Grant is targeted on increasing
capacity of the adoption service, but these developments to strengthen and
provide more tailored marketing and recruitment strategies have not yet had an
impact. The local authority is also yet to formally introduce a fostering to
adopt scheme.
identify appropriate potential adopters. The authority has successfully placed
some older children and sibling groups within adoptive families. Matching
arrangements are effective and are well supported by foster carers, who


demonstrate good knowledge of the childs needs. As a consequence,
disruption rates have remained low for several years.
looked after in foster care, through the use of life story work and memory
boxes. Particular attention is paid to sibling attachment and childrens emotional
well-being through the direct work of a play therapist. This has contributed to
some plans involving sibling separation being changed, with consequently good
outcomes for the children. Later life letters are completed in a timely way but
are variable in quality, as are the child profiles and photographic records. The
agency has also taken part in activity days, through BAAF, but these have yet
to result in suitable matches being identified.
experienced, stable adoption team. Prospective adopters reports are mostly
good, although the child permanence reports are more variable, with some not
being current or outlining the childs story sufficiently well. The panel receives
appropriate legal and medical advice, although there have been some delays in
obtaining timely medicals. Oversight of practice between the independent panel
chair, panel advisor and agency decision maker is under-developed, not
enabling a full view of performance improvement.
carers, social workers, special guardians and adopters is highly regarded and
the authority is well-advanced in its implementation of the adoption passport.
Adopters are positive that the help they receive matches the post-adoption
support plan. Comprehensive arrangements for face-to-face and letterbox
contact with birth families are in place. Counselling for birth families is provided
by a commissioned service, with plans to introduce a birth fathers group in
June 2014 to supplement the current birth mothers group.
service demonstrates senior management commitment to improvement. The
revised adoption service plan details a full range of priorities for the local
authority with timescales for action, but does not include performance impact
measures of timeliness and quality improvements of adoption practice from the
initial identification of children and adopters.
The graded judgment for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
requires improvement
welcoming for young people, some of whom commented positively on the easy
availability of advice and support. The service has sufficient staff resources,
allowing manageable caseloads for social workers in the transition part of the
service (16 to 18 years) and young persons advisers working with those over
entitlements is good. Care leavers report that staff are well informed and


knowledgeable. The care leavers pledge, however, is not widely known and its
influence and impact are limited.
meaningful tools in purposefully guiding and supporting care leavers progress.
Some plans and interventions seen by inspectors were of good quality, reducing
risk behaviours, and have clearly resulted in better outcomes for those young
people. The electronic format of these plans makes them unnecessarily lengthy
with a consequent lack of clarity, resulting in delays in service delivery.
for young people aged 16 to 18 years in supported, semi-independent homes.
These settings offer a range of independence programmes which augment the
rolling group preparation programmes provided by the service. The availability
of independence preparation training is good, with young people commenting
that they are offered helpful inputs on cooking, budgeting, managing to sustain
tenancies and maintaining healthy lifestyles. There are no care leavers living in
bed and breakfast accommodation, although a small number of care leavers
told inspectors that they feel unsafe in the area their accommodation is located.
carers after they are 18 under supported lodging, staying put, arrangements,
although this is improving. A high proportion live in semi-independent and
independent settings (66% compared to 37% in similar authorities). There is
insufficient management information to reliably establish the quality and safety
of these residencies. The number of care leavers known as living in suitable
accommodation has reduced in the past year, although it is important to note
that there are few tenancies that break down. The service has an
Accommodation Officer who undertakes quality assurance work with
accommodation providers, but this post was vacant during the inspection.
looked after by the local authority, particularly for those aged 16 to 18 years, is
good. Comprehensive, tailored packages of support are provided in supported
housing settings where their language, learning and independence needs are
purposefully addressed.
people has three transition points involving a transfer of worker. This can
reduce consistency and continuity of professional relationships for looked after
young people at a time of many other changes in their lives. Some care leavers
commented to inspectors that the frequent changes of worker were unhelpful.
The current arrangements do, however, support a strong focus on
independence preparation for looked after young people as they approach
adulthood.
available for care leavers is good. A health programme as part of the


independence training, delivered by a specialist nurse for looked after children,
substance misuse and mental health services, helps with providing clear
information for young adults. This nurse provides valued health consultation
and advice to young persons advisers. The implementation of a health
passport for care leavers, providing the health histories of young people to
them, is about to be implemented.
years, are not in education, employment or training, adversely affecting their
current and future prospects. Contextually, the area also has very high general
rates of both youth and adult unemployment. Despite this challenging profile of
the borough, not enough is being done to assist many care leavers into
apprenticeships, training or stable employment. There is a limited resource
dedicated to promoting employment, but this has insufficient impact.
higher education and university is good compared to both national and similar
authority rates. Care Leavers say they value the recognition of their
achievements and progress, however modest, through an annual awards
ceremony.
are often descriptive, with the work undertaken not being fully linked to the
priorities identified within pathway plans. Supervision and case management of
practitioners was regular and with good access to consultation. Supervision is
strongly task focused, but limited in overall evaluation or reflection.
monitoring and management of the service does not fully evaluate the
effectiveness of the support provided, particularly for those young people who
are more vulnerable and/or harder to reach (for example, those experiencing
substance misuse, emotional or mental health difficulties or who are
disengaged from services). Inspectors saw evidence of some individual
practitioners tenaciously tracing care leavers who had disengaged from the
service, but there are no management tools for routinely assessing risks,
complexities and vulnerabilities at a service level.
Leadership, management and governance requires improvement
services will be able to meet demand beyond the immediate and into the
medium to long term future. The area continues to have a significantly
changing profile and rapidly increasing child population, with large numbers of
families arriving, mostly from other parts of London. The challenges posed by
high and rising rates of domestic abuse (currently the highest in London), the
significant increases in the number children with complex needs and the
consequent rapid, persistent rise in referrals to childrens social care, as well as


looked after children and those with child protection plans, are not supported
by clear forward planning. Many agencies, including childrens social care are
working to, or beyond, their capacity.
number of additional temporary social work posts, but caseloads remain high.
Key agencies such as police and health have been successful in procuring
agreement to additional resources although these have yet to be put in place.
While understanding this context the local authority has yet to make clear,
albeit difficult, resource decisions to meet these needs.
but have not exercised sufficiently strong and effective strategic leadership.
Childrens services have achieved substantial additional temporary funding for
practitioners, with some recently put into the base budget. While sufficient to
meet needs identified some time ago it does not keep pace with the rapidly
changing demand. Scrutiny has been challenging in specific areas of activity but
there is no systematic, detailed examination of core childrens services
responsibilities in relation to help, protection and looked after children.
supported by other key statutory agencies, particularly housing, police and
health. The key strategic leaders within the local authority meet regularly,
engaging in honest, open and robust dialogue and consideration of data and
implications of specific pressures on services, with direct discussions and
mutual challenge evident between agencies. As a result the local authority has
a good understanding of performance and pressures on the system.
LSCB Chair, Lead Member, Leader of the Council, Chair of Corporate Parenting
Group, DCS and Chief Executive hold a monthly trigger meeting to jointly
consider high-level data and other information, such as child protection and
workforce data. However, arrangements for the Chief Executive to hold the
LSCB chair fully to account are acknowledged to be insufficiently well
developed.
Family Justice Board, and its relationship with Cafcass is positive, helping to
reduce and minimise the risk of delay for children in care proceedings.
However, there remain some significant unresolved long-standing challenges
across the agency partnerships, for example in addressing the very high
numbers of children subject to exercise of police powers of protection, and the
capacity of the child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS), other
than for looked after children.
appointed Principal Social Worker beginning to work closely with social workers
toward a better understanding of front line work issues. Regular access to


consultation is valued and staff present as buoyant and optimistic about the
future. Practitioners have high caseloads that also have significant complexity,
with practitioners seen working with 20-30 children at any one time.
ensure that assessments and plans are of a high quality or that they focus on
the right things, with improvements for children being achieved at the earliest
point. Managers authorise and sign off work that is of variable quality. Formal
reflective supervision is often poorly recorded, with drift or delay not always
addressed and minimised. When these issues arise they have also not been
picked up by conference and reviewing officers. Childrens services have taken
action to remedy these shortcomings, but the necessary changes are not yet
having a sufficiently consistent impact.
an ambitious workforce development strategy. However, at the point of the
inspection almost half (46%) of current social work posts are vacant, with all
but a few filled by medium-term agency workers. The local authority has
initiated a range of initiatives to recruit and support permanent staff, including
newly qualified social workers, of whom there are 13 across the area. It is too
early for the strategy to have had much impact. While there is not a large
turnover of staff the number on short-term contracts remains too high.
to redesign the social care service, incorporating further significant increases in
capacity, particularly with regard to managerial oversight. The significant
additional resources necessary to implement this have only recently been
approved by the local authority. While this transformation plan is ambitious, it
remains a long way from partial delivery, let alone full implementation.
with evidence of positive impact. However, the recently appointed Chair of the
Corporate Parenting Group does not yet express a full understating of the range
of key issues for children and young people. There is dialogue with the children
in care group Skittlz which, while small in numbers, have engaged in addressing
some issues of concern. The local authority receives feedback from a broad
range of young peoples groups, which, in some instances, has resulted in
positive changes in practice. These have included contributing to staff
appraisals, out of borough feedback events and the development of the
younger children in care group.
individual basis, with the DCS taking a direct interest in ensuring any learning
feeds into practice. While there is limited capacity in this part of the service,
feedback to improve practice is given to individual practitioners as well as
through the regular meetings with the DCS and senior managers.


specialist support for children and families. These include a range of domestic
violence services, independent visitors and advocacy for looked after children.
On a wider basis, Barking and Dagenham is also a member of other panLondon consortia for procurement of looked after children provision, engaging
well with adjacent local authorities over some shared services; for example,
alongside three other boroughs over the newly established out of hours
childrens service. There is a clear sufficiency analysis and evaluation of likely
need linked to a year one action plan. While this has timescales for the
appropriate objectives across looked after children, adoption and care leavers
services, the plan does not identify who is responsible for carrying these actions
through.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The effectiveness of the LSCB requires improvement
Areas for improvement
boards work in the Health and Wellbeing Board.
practitioners to ensure it targets improvements in outcomes for children.
forums in promoting multi-agency working through improving the attendance of
social workers.
ensure all such children are identified.
addressing local needs and on evaluating progress made in achieving improved
outcomes for children.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
independent and uses this independence well to hold partners to account, for
example through direct communication with the metropolitan police and crime
commissioner, and with NHS England over a range of issues which have a
potentially adverse impact on local safeguarding work.
agency representatives attend regularly, actively contributing to the work of the
Board and its sub-committees. However, effective arrangements for the Chief
Executive to exercise full accountability of the chair of the LSCB and hold them
to account are not clear. The Young Peoples Safety Group, the lay member and
voluntary sector representative each have protected time on the Boards
agenda to ensure the contribution of those partners likely to find it more
difficult than others to have a voice at the LSCB are fully heard.
agencies is a positive approach to tackling shared concerns. This is aimed at
enabling agencies to work together to identify issues under a range of
previously agreed themes (for example, pressures in the system) encouraging
a more robust approach to problem-solving and forward planning. These
discussions lead to an agreed action plan, and while it is too early to see impact


from this, or how it will link with other existing priorities of the Board and other
strategic planning arrangements, this is a positive approach that is being taken.
the Childrens Trust, attending regularly, and feeding back on the work of the
Board. However, the LSCB Chair is not a member of the Health and Wellbeing
Board. This weakens the LSCBs link with and influence on the work of this
body.
collating and monitoring progress of the priority risk issues for each partner
agency as well as shared ones. Detailed consideration of the issues facilitates a
sustained focus on those issues most important to partners as well as in the
identification of areas where partners should take action to support one another
to improve outcomes. Key issues at the time of the inspection include the
impact of health service changes, workforce difficulties and limits to
commissioning capacity across several agencies. While the difficulties around
the extent of exercise of police powers of protection and dwindling attendance
at conferences have been escalated there remains no satisfactory outcome to
these issues.
local needs and the desired outcomes for children. This limits its effectiveness
as a tool to understand what needs to change for children, and for ensuring
that progress in achieving this is evaluated.
thresholds document. The Board has also undertaken some monitoring of the
understanding and effectiveness of thresholds by agencies. During the
inspection, some practitioners presented as unclear about the threshold for
children in need, although they were clear about those in need of protection.
There is also regular reporting of performance information by most agencies.
This gives the Board a fuller view of the work being undertaken by practitioners
across the area.
areas for development along with progress achieved in addressing previously
identified issues. The action plan for improvements identified as needed is
appropriately monitored through the LSCB business manager.
appropriately senior level by the Metropolitan Police Detective Chief Inspector.
This sub-committee ensures that the LSCB is well informed of the complexity
and emerging picture of the extent of child sexual exploitation within the
borough. It further enables the LSCB to have a clear overview of work in this
area, contributing to coordinated focus and support.


missing children, including those missing from care and missing from education.
The LSCB website also contains clear information and publicity materials about
private fostering, although it does not examine or monitor this area of work
effectively. This is important as it is acknowledged that a relatively low number
of private fostering arrangements within the borough are known to the local
authority.
partnership. It also monitors training applications and attendance, identifying
any trends in non-attendance. Immediate feedback from attendees is collated
and reported to the board. This provides a picture of attendees views on the
value of training, facilitating the further development and tailoring of courses.
There is, however, no evaluation of the longer-term impact of training on the
practice of front line professionals and managers or on outcomes for children.
months. SCRs are initiated appropriately. A previous SCR (from 2010) has been
a source of considerable learning in the local authority, also resulting in the
setting up of a practitioners forum. The LSCB learning and improvement
framework positively and actively involves front-line workers from the beginning
of the SCR process of understanding events. This ensures that the experiences
of front-line workers directly inform the findings.
discussion and debate of current professional challenges. The results of these
are feedback to the Board giving it a direct view of current practice and
practitioners views on improvement. However, the attendance of social workers
at the forums has declined, reducing the effectiveness of this positive initiative.
local themes, but does not evaluate the impact of the work undertaken.
Similarly, the LSCB annual report has a comprehensive range of feedback from
the Board, sub-groups and partners but does not pull this together into an
overall assessment of the effectiveness of local services. This limits the reports
effectiveness as a tool to understand what works well and what needs to
change.


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


