Metropolitan Borough of Barnsley
Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 2 June 2014  25 June 2014
Report published: 8 August 2014
The overall judgement is requires improvement
There are no widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being
harmed or at risk of harm. The welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and
promoted. However, the authority is not yet delivering good protection and help
and/or care for children, young people and families. It is Ofsteds expectation that,
as a minimum, all children and young people receive good help, care and
protection.

Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Good


Requires
improvement

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is
requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of the Education and
Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local authority functions carried out under section 136
of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out
under the Local Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
Section 1: The local authority - Summary of findings
Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB



Section 1: The local authority - Summary of findings
Childrens Services in Barnsley require improvement because:

Although the officers in the local authority know their services well, there are
many planned improvement actions still in progress and it is too early to
evidence the impact of some improvements made. In addition, there is one
area for improvement that was identified within the previous inspection in 2012
that still has to be addressed. However, a detailed and comprehensive
improvement plan is in place which is consistent with many of the areas for
improvement identified through this inspection.


Not all professionals working with children and their families in Barnsley
understand when it is best to support families with early help and when to
make referrals to childrens social care.


The police and childrens social care do not use the same risk assessment
model and so do not have a shared understanding of the risks involved with
domestic abuse in families, resulting in some families not receiving the right
help at the right time.


Health professionals are not always included within strategy discussions and are
not therefore part of the decision making for children who may be a risk of
significant harm.


The plans that are made to protect children from harm and to meet the needs
of vulnerable children are not always of a good quality, which means that risks
are not always properly identified and it is not always clear what needs to
change to reduce risk for children. Children who have been identified as being
at risk of sexual exploitation or who are missing from home do not always
receive a good service.


Services to prevent children needing to come into care are not effective for
teenagers with complex problems.


The educational achievement for children in care in Barnsley is not good. The
plans to help children in care achieve better at school need to be improved to
make sure that everyone working with the children understands their progress
and needs.


Some permanency plans are not made as quickly as they should be, and some
children wait too long for an adoptive family to be identified.


Managers and political leaders (the corporate parent) could do more to support
the needs of children in care and care leavers to help them feel secure and to
succeed in life.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
The inspection did not find any areas for priority and immediate action.
Areas for improvement
Family Strategy to ensure the overarching approach to early help is properly
understood and implemented across the partnership. This should include
developing a system to evaluate its effectiveness.
advice and guidance, and be supported through training to improve the quality
of early help planning for individual children and their families.
they are considering making a referral to childrens social care. This is in
addition to the current practice of offering information and advice regarding
children with less complex needs.
embed at key transition points of a childs journey, to include thresholds for the
Stronger Families Teams and referral to Childrens Social Care.
needed to sharpen the focus and clarity of contact and referral work.
level of risk to children and their families where domestic abuse is a concern.
more effective.
considered and reflected in assessments.
and their role in monitoring progress against plans.
enhanced.
with a permanence plan who no longer need to be looked after by the local
authority.


and for children looked after needs to be improved so that all involved can
easily read and understand the review records.
leavers needs to be improved and the provision of information about childrens
and young peoples life history should be developed in a way that makes it clear
and more easily understand.
data and personal development information which is updated at every review to
ensure that attainment for individual children looked after improves.
personal development of all children in care from babies to care leavers to
ensure the gap between educational outcomes for children looked after and all
children is narrowed.
reflects a broader age-range of children looked after and care leavers.
provide effective challenge to managers and to improve outcomes for children
looked after.
sharing and promoting good practice and informing service developments.
within the 26-week target.
be addressed in order to deliver improved outcomes for children where
permanency is appropriate.
ensure timely decision making, improved quality and the effective achievement
of progress for children.
ensure that plans consistently identify how the needs of individual care leavers
will be met, including the support that will be provided to help them gain skills
and identify their aims for their future.
recommended best practice.
case work, and this should be consistently recorded within case supervision.


embedded to support social workers in their current positions and future
careers.


The local authority has the following strengths:
childrens social care and the police to keep them safe. Other professionals also
work well with social workers when children continue to be at risk of harm.
abuse, parental mental health, or alcohol and substance misuse issues have
been identified.
make sure their views influence plans and the services being provided.
and care are identified, and the local authority works well with other
professionals to ensure children are safe.
protected when allegations of abuse are made against professionals.
many are supported by an advocate to attend and contribute to their meetings.
protected. This includes working closely and effectively with some families
before court proceedings begin.
provide good support to children and their parents to make sure that this goes
smoothly. This includes agreeing plans to keep children safe and supporting
parents to gain confidence in their parenting skills.
They have appropriate contact with their families, live in stable homes, and
have good access to leisure activities. Children in care also benefit from
knowing their social workers and other professionals, such as their independent
reviewing officers, well.
first indication that school attendance is reducing.
going to be adopted.
carers and adoptive parents) and provide them with good support after they
are approved to care for children.


placements after their 16th and 18th birthdays to make sure they can choose to
live more independently at the point they feel ready.
courses. If they prefer to get a job, they also receive good support and advice
from social workers and personal advisors to help them.
opportunities as apprentices within the Council, which has helped them to feel
more confident and skilled in the workplace.
live in suitable accommodation and they say they feel safe in their homes.
they have put effective plans in place to improve services for children and their
families. They also regularly check the work that social workers are undertaking
with children and their families to make sure it is of a good standard.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of five of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and an
additional inspector from Ofsted, and one local authority seconded inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Jansy Kelly
Team inspectors: Lynn Radley, Sarah Urding, Rob Hackeson, Julie Winyard, Ralph
Trevelyan-Butler, Sue Williams.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 49,000 children and young people under the age of 18
years live in Barnsley. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 24% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 22% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 19% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 3% of
all children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a
whole.
 The largest minority ethnic group of children and young people in the area
is the mixed group, at 1.5%.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 3.4% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 2.3% (the national average is 14%).
 The ONS mid-2012 estimates suggest that the 0-15 years population in
Barnsley will increase by 3.8% overall by mid-2017 (2.0% increase in Early
Years; 11.6% increase in Primary and 3.4% increase in Secondary). This is
region. Growth in the 0-15 age group is projected (to 2022) to be around
the England average but above the regional average.
 The local authority demographics provide a contrast of a small, but
growing, ethnic minority population (rising from 1% in 2001 to 2.1% in
deprived borough nationally).
Child protection in this area
 At 17 June 14, 1,251 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase
from 1,177 at 31 March 2013.
 At 31 May 14, 261 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 187 at 31 March 2013.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 At 13 June 14, 10 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a decrease from 18 children at 31 March 2013.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 May 14, 227 children were being looked after by the LA (a rate of
children) at 31 March 2013. Of this number
 but 39 (of the 78) children live within 10 miles of the Barnsley
boundary
 of the 18 placed over 50 miles from the Barnsley boundary, all are
placed as a result of securing long term arrangements including
adoption
authority area
authority area
area
 there are no unaccompanied asylum-seeking children (within the last
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 20 adoptions
returned to be looked after
moved on to independent living (of whom 5 are in semi-independent
living)
 there are no young people who have ceased to be looked after and
are now living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates three childrens homes. One was judged to be
outstanding in its most recent inspection and the other two were judged to
be good.
 The previous inspection of Barnsleys safeguarding arrangements was in
June 2012. The local authority was judged to be inadequate.


 The previous inspection of Barnsleys services for looked after children was
in June 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The inspection of Barnsleys adoption service was in October 2010. The
overall quality was good.
 The inspection of Barnsleys fostering services was in October 2010. The
overall quality was good.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since June 2013.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since January 2013.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
Key Judgement

Judgement Grade

The experiences and progress of children who Requires Improvement
need help and protection
recognised process for early help, but there is not yet a clearly defined early
help strategy in place that coordinates consistently effective contributions from
all partners. There remain inconsistencies in the quality of common
assessments and early help practice, and CAF professionals identify that they
need further training in how to write effective action plans with SMART targets.
School CAF professionals do not have access to formal and robust professional
supervision. The recent implementation of the Think Family Strategy and the
team around the family (TAF) is beginning to engage the whole family rather
than just focus professionals on the child.
good levels of timely support to families where there are more complex issues.
Good quality stronger families assessments are facilitating task-focused direct
work with families to prevent cases escalating to childrens social care, for
example, in relation to domestic violence, financial hardship and in supporting
educational attainment.
services to support children in need and families at risk of domestic abuse and
substance misuse, for example, Pathways and Phoenix. An evaluation of the
'Breaking the cycle' programme, which aims to support parents and their
families to reduce harm associated with substance misuse, identifies that in the
majority of cases a positive impact is achieved on improving parenting and
reducing substance misuse.
problems are effectively planned.
arrangements for both care leavers and child in need to support homeless 1617 year-olds.
a lower level and providing recommendations for a multi-agency approach
where additional support is required. Their role in escalating cases to childrens
social care is less well defined, and minutes of these meetings do not clearly
identify the level of need or whether escalation to childrens social care is
agreed. For example, in one case considered, a referral to childrens social care


did not contain the level of information discussed at the meeting, and this was
subsequently signposted for further family support when a social work
assessment would have been more appropriate. The use of Family Group
conferencing is underdeveloped.
In a small number of cases seen, children are not receiving the services or the
level of intervention that they need at the right time.
thresholds for social care intervention, and it anticipates that an increased
number of children may now come into care services as a result.
there are too many requests for information and advice to childrens social care,
which is placing additional pressure on the duty and assessment team.
with contacts and referrals are not as sharply focused as they might be. For
example, considerable information gathering by social workers is taking place at
contact point and even more information is gathered at referral stage, which
could more usefully be undertaken at the start of an assessment. Good
consideration is given to securing parental consent where appropriate, and
information sharing protocols are consistently followed.
of contact and referral services, including co-location with the Police, has
resulted in an improved response to children in need of services. Following
assessment, children in need are appropriately allocated to social workers in the
stronger families teams. However, a small number of cases were seen where
children presenting with complex needs were signposted to CAF without a full
social work assessment of their needs being undertaken.
duplication of work by incoming team managers. There are also delays in
allocating work for assessment in a small number of cases, although these
cases had been screened and risk assessed by a team manager and were not
cases where children required immediate protection. These pilot arrangements
are already under review.
notifications are immediately and appropriately progressed to childrens social
care for further action. All standard and medium risk-assessed domestic abuse
cases are screened in the stronger families teams by a team manager or social
worker. However, the criteria for categorising risk in domestic abuse
notifications are unclear and are not consistently applied or understood. This is
a result of police and social care staff not sharing or using agreed risk


assessment tools for domestic abuse and, in a small number of cases; this has
led to cases not receiving the appropriate response.
taken to protect them pending the outcome of an investigation. Children are
seen and seen alone. Strategy discussions between childrens social care and
the police consistently take place, with some clear and effective plans being
developed. However, discussions do not routinely include health professionals,
but arrangements to facilitate this via conference calls are underway. The out
of hours service is unable to offer a comparable service to daytime services, but
there is appropriate prioritisation of childrens cases and good levels of
communication are reported.
thorough and timely in the majority of cases. However, where needs and risks
emerge for children and child protection processes are initiated, the electronic
recording system is not consistently updated to reflect this change. In a small
number of cases, the rationale for not pursuing a joint investigation was not
clearly recorded.
factors in the family are consistently taken in to consideration. However, in
some cases, there are gaps in chronologies, and there is not a consistently clear
overview of management decision making. Case supervision is of a good
quality, is regular, appropriately directive and reflective and this is improving
practice. However, the recording of management challenge in respect of case
work and decision making is not consistent.
improving through effective use of social work forums, mentorship and training.
However, practice is too variable and cases remain where there is an
insufficiently robust assessment of childrens needs. There is a lack of
consistency in addressing long-standing risks and concerns for children, and in
some cases this leads to too many children being re-referred. In those
assessments seen by inspectors that were good, effective identification of
needs and experiences of children and learning from research are evident;
social workers are also using a range of tools to help them understand
childrens needs and the nature of risks to them. There are a small number of
notable exceptions where practice seen was outstanding, for example an
adoption case and a case of a child with a disability. In these cases social
workers thoroughly consider the needs, strengths and risks in relation to the
child; consultation with other professionals is wide ranging; planning is effective
and the welfare of the child is at the centre of all activity.
focused direct work with children and families to reduce risk and meet needs.
Social workers know and understand children well and their views are
consistently reflected in assessments and plans. Ethnicity is consistently


recorded, but needs arising out of identity and ethnicity are not routinely
reflected in assessments. Needs arising out of disability are consistently well
reflected in the work of the childrens disability team within their assessments.
While some good quality plans were seen, those that require improvement do
not consistently and explicitly reflect the assessed needs and risks identified in
assessments; they are also not all updated as risks or needs change.
have taken recent and positive action to reduce drift in planning for children.
This includes the implementation of the policy to consider the use of the Public
Law Outline at the third child protection review if there is little or no change,
and improving the understanding of the impact of chronic neglect through
focused training and support to social workers. It has been recognised that
current templates for plans are not helpful in identifying childrens needs and
the outcomes to be achieved. The local authority has therefore developed new
templates on the electronic recording system for children in need, children
subject to child protection plans and those looked after and these are now
ready for testing and implementation. This will support social workers to ensure
plans more effectively reflect individual planning needs.
being held within timescale; they are also well attended by most agencies.
Attendance and reports from GPs and adult services are inconsistent, and there
are plans to address this with an agreed reporting template. There is improved
practice in relation to sharing and receiving reports prior to conference and in
the timely distribution of conference decisions and minutes to agencies. Child
protection conferences and core groups observed were effectively and
sensitively chaired, with good attention to facilitating a positive and equal
contribution from parents and agencies. However, in a small number of cases
there are missed opportunities to explore and challenge issues such as school
engagement and parents not fully meeting childrens needs.
good quality reports were seen that present clear reflection and rationale for
recommendations made. However a minority of conference reports present as
over optimistic in relation to parental capacity to sustain change, and a small
number of cases were seen where recommendations were made to prematurely
step the case down for support under a CAF arrangement when continued
services for children in need would have been more appropriate. The number of
children subject to repeat child protection plans was high during 2012-2013 and
showed a drop in the first quarter of 2014-2015, which brought it more in line
with comparators. However, the local authority project the number of children
subject to repeat child protection plans may remain high during this year due to
previously over-optimistic decision making in relation to the potential for
sustainable change in some families experiencing parental substance mis-use
and domestic abuse.


focused, effective monitoring of the plan is not consistently achieved and a very
small number of core groups evidence a lack of clarity amongst agencies over
their purpose. For example, managing parental expectation regarding progress;
in one case seen, parents were given the impression that progress against the
child protection plan was more advanced than the subsequent conference
found it to be. Multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC) arrangements
are established and well coordinated, but action plans are very brief and the
impact of risk or the outcome to be achieved is not consistently clear.
education and care placements. Robust arrangements are also in place to track
and monitor those children whose parents elect to home educate them,
through an assessor who visits families regularly to check the quality of
education being offered. Senior managers monitor individual cases of children
missing from care, and return interviews are conducted by a commissioned
service, Safe@last, who also undertake awareness training and provide support
to schools, families and residential units.
home and those at risk of child sexual exploitation would benefit from further
development. A specialist team of four police officers and a specialist social
worker from Barnardos was set up in April 2014, and this is a positive
additional resource; however, it is too early to measure direct impact for
children. There is good partner representation at the multi-agency Childrens
Sexual Exploitation and Runaways (CSER) forum, but the forum lacks
robustness and it is not sufficiently clear how its work adds and links to child in
need and child protection processes. Children missing from home and care
procedures have not yet been reviewed in light of the new 2014 statutory
guidance. Senior managers have made recent and positive plans to invite
expert consultancy to review the effectiveness processes for children at risk of
sexual exploitation.
fostering arrangements, however, weaknesses have been identified in the
oversight and management of the service. There are currently 10 private
fostering arrangements, which is a reduction from 18 in 201213. An
improvement plan is now in place that appropriately identifies the need to
strengthen processes for aligning the work of private fostering with the
assessment of needs and protection of children. Tracking arrangements are not
in place to monitor the private fostering process, and so were not included
within the private fostering report for 201314 to the LSCB.
people are safeguarded where there are allegations of abuse, mistreatment or
poor practice by professionals and carers. Exceptionally comprehensive records
are maintained that provide a detailed overview of appropriate actions taken.
This includes timely strategy meetings, clear and appropriately-focused


direction to agencies, and very good consideration of the broader implications
for children. Occasionally there are delays in signing off tasks allocated for
completion when the local authority designated officer (LADO) is assigned to
other tasks, such as chairing child protection conferences; however, the
majority of these delays are appropriately monitored.
focus on embedding the learning from complaints in practice through discussion
at the weekly performance management meetings, although this is not yet fully
embedded. Barnados are commissioned to provide an effective advocacy
support service for children looked after and children attending child protection
conferences; last year 42 children were effectively supported to attend their
conferences. Children and young people are very positive about the support
they receive.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Key Judgement

Judgement Grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Requires improvement

children looked after, but further improvement is needed, particularly in
education, adoption and permanence planning.
looked after. These include parenting courses to build confidence and skill, and
a good range of services for children with complex needs, such as short breaks.
Family group conferences are available through a contract with a third sector
provider, but this service has been underused during the past year. The local
authority recognises that current services delivered by the stronger families
team do not identify and meet the complex needs of teenagers, and has plans
to develop a service able to meet these needs.
local authorities, but does not yet fully understand the reasons for this. The
local authority has worked with partners to clarify thresholds for access to
services, and anticipates that one of the effects may be a future rise in the
number of children coming into care. It acknowledges that some 16 to 18 yearolds who have entered care during the past year would have been admitted to
care at a younger age if the current threshold had been applied. There are
plans to evaluate more fully the effectiveness of services in reducing the need
for children to become looked after.
appropriate and in their best interests. The Public Law Outline is being used
effectively in work with families where the use of care proceeding is a
necessary contingency, and in some cases this focus has helped children to
remain with their birth families safely. Senior management oversight of the
progress of cases in PLO is improving, with the recent introduction of a tracking
system to avoid delay where care proceedings are required. Inspectors saw
good, purposeful work with families to enable children to return home. One
parent spoke very positively about the support received from social care: my
experience has been fabulous they put me through a programme with
Barnados which gave me a lot of knowledge to bring her up the best I can
once I took her home, the social worker took a step back, which I appreciated,
but they still meet with me to see everythings ok.
workers and they know them well. Young people who met inspectors were


positive about their experience in care, describing very good relationships with
both their foster carers and their social workers, although some had
experienced several changes of social worker over previous years. They knew
who to go to if there are problems and they have access to advocacy if needed.
In their experience, most matters are resolved easily and without the need for
a formal complaint.
bullying. One young person who had been bullied felt that these incidents had
not been tackled when initially brought to the attention of a teacher. When
raised again with a more senior teacher, the bullying was dealt with. The Youth
Council is devising a charter on bullying for use in schools, designed to raise
awareness that it is not tolerated.
robust. The Assistant Executive Director is immediately alerted to every child in
care who goes missing. Notifications of missing children are tracked daily by the
manager for safeguarding services, and recovery plans are escalated as
necessary. Return interviews and other follow-ups are carried out by
Safe@Last. From 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014, there were 192 missing
episodes for 44 children, with 13 children accounting for 5 or more episodes
each. The impact of interventions is considered on a case by case basis;
however, an overall analysis of trends has not been undertaken. Partners show
a strong commitment to working together for children looked after to manage
children at risk of sexual exploitation, but more work is required to ensure that
all plans are focused and seek to reduce risk for individual children and young
people. Good, coordinated work between the Youth Offending Team and social
workers ensures that the small number of looked after young people in care
who are involved in offending are diverted from this behaviour.
for carers and workers, with a target of five weeks from referral, although this
is not always met. CAMHS does not have capacity to offer a therapeutic service
to all children looked after who need this. A review of CAMHS provision is
currently in progress. Additional therapeutic services for looked after children
are commissioned by the local authority from independent providers on a case
by case basis. A dedicated substance misuse worker supports young people,
and there is no wait for access to treatment for those who need it.
the last inspection. A very high proportion of health assessments are completed
(95% in 201314). Children looked after in Barnsley receive their
immunisations by age five. Good systems ensure that all children who become
looked after are registered with a local general practitioner and have access to
dental services, and that initial health assessments are undertaken promptly,
including assessments for children placed out of borough. The quality of health
assessments and reviews has improved, with the designated nurse screening
them and taking up poor practice with counterparts in other areas. Health


professionals are beginning to take strengths and difficulties questionnaires
(SDQs) into account as part of their assessment in order to gain a holistic view
of the childs physical and emotional needs. It is, however, too early to
demonstrate the impact of this new approach.
Only 62% of children looked after attend good or outstanding schools and this
may have an impact on their outcomes. From their starting points at the end of
the Early Years Foundation Stage, children looked after make average progress
but by the end of Key Stage 1 attain below national expectations. In Key Stage
recent achievement data for 2014 indicate that both attainment and progress
are likely to be above average. However, achievement at Key Stage 4, although
showing signs of improvement, remains well below expected levels for children
looked after and the gap between children looked after and all children is not
closing quickly enough. The authority acknowledges that there is work to be
done to make sure that the progress of very young children is carefully tracked
from the moment they come into care.
rapid identification of those at risk of lateness or persistent absence. Once
identified, the authority has good individualised systems in place to support
young people back into high attendance. The number of fixed-term exclusions
is reducing and is below statistical neighbours and national performance at
Barnsley for the last four years.
children looked after and of how schools, both inside and outside the Borough,
are seeking to meet these needs. Data collection is robust and provides a clear
picture of the impact of schools work towards improving educational outcomes
for children looked after. The tracking information clearly states how, in the
majority of cases, Pupil Premium Grant is used to fund specific interventions,
but is unclear as yet about whether these are working to improve childrens
behaviour and/or achievement. There is some information about the progress
of children looked after during the Early Years Foundation Stage, but this is not
yet fully integrated into the virtual schools tracking system. Although the
authority initiated a variety of strategies to improve educational outcomes,
there has not been enough time for these to have a full impact on raising the
achievement, aspirations and future life chances of all children looked after.
Of the PEPs sampled, the child's voice came through strongly in terms of what
they like and do not like about their learning and their personal interests, but
there is no evidence recorded of the educational progress being made between
review meetings.


which they are encouraged by their carers to join and attend regularly. They
had also had sleepovers at friends homes agreed by their carers using
delegated authority.
childrens home which was inspected by Ofsted and rated inadequate. She
expressed her wish to continue to live there, and the local authority assessed
the situation to establish whether it continued to meet her needs and provided
additional support for a short period while the necessary improvements were
made, enabling her to continue to live in the home. This home is now rated as
good by Ofsted. Many of those who have moved during the past year have
done so for positive reasons, such as moving locally from an out of borough
placement, in line with their care plan. The local authoritys strategic aim is to
bring young people back to Barnsley where this is in their interests.
than 20 miles away from Barnsley. Children living away from Barnsley who met
inspectors were in well-matched placements. Young people and the staff in the
two childrens homes visited feel well supported by their allocated social
workers. Their education and health needs are met and they have regular
contact with their families.
generally clear and informed by updated assessments, and childrens views are
usually well represented. Some plans are not specific, measurable or time
bound. Reviews are held regularly and are well attended by professionals
involved. The review reports are difficult to read, and work is needed to
improve the review template on the computer system. The recent initiative with
Independent Reviewing Officers (IRO) writing to the child after each review is
positive and helps to bring clarity and relevance to the process. Children find
these letters helpful.
long-standing relationships with the child, so they understand their life history
and needs thoroughly. However, audits conducted for the inspection found
limited evidence of oversight and challenge by IROs. While there is evidence
within some case files and minutes that IROs do provide challenge, they
recognise the need to collate and report this more systematically. To this end, a
system for IROs to raise issues with colleagues has been introduced during the
past year, but it is not yet used consistently across the service.
and contact arrangements met the needs of children. Children who met
inspectors were all happy with their contact arrangements.
locally. Independent providers operating in the area supplement in house


provision and offer good placement choice. Children are carefully matched to
placements that meet their needs. Effective contractual arrangements with
independent providers are agreed through a regional consortium of local
authorities, and quality is tightly monitored through the consortium and through
Barnsleys own arrangements.
carers, and additional staff have been appointed, including a recruitment and
marketing manager. A wide range of training is available to Barnsleys foster
carers. The childrens rights service works with the fostering service to facilitate
the involvement of young people in recruitment and training. Foster carers
appreciate hearing directly from young people about their experiences. Carers
are positive about the support they receive from their supervising social
workers and almost all are also positive about support from the social workers
for the children.
the local authority. CAFCASS reports good communications with senior
managers and no concerns regarding quality or timeliness of court work by
Barnsley social workers. The latest data (January to March 2014) show Barnsley
averages 37 weeks for completion of care proceedings while the regional
average is 38 weeks. However, performance is not yet meeting the required 26week timescale.
permanence were appropriately developed, with long-term solutions being
secured for young children in a timely way, including reunification with birth
parents and a connected person placement. In other cases, there was delay in
securing permanence, such as delay in matching a baby relinquished for
adoption. Senior managers track the progress of children who come into care
through the placement resources panel, which helps to ensure that plans for
permanence are progressed in a timely way. The panel has yet to establish
what the plans are for all children who have been looked after for more than a
year. Special Guardianship Orders (SGOs) are currently underused to secure
permanence for children and young people placed with mainstream foster
carers. They are more commonly used with connected carers. The local
authority acknowledges the need to review its policies to encourage the use of
SGO applications.
has the capacity and expertise to progress this work, and a better quality of
work was seen in this area than in other parts of the system. Most case
recording is up to date. There continue to be delays in providing access to
records when this is requested by young people in care and care leavers. This is
a long-standing problem that was reported in the last inspection and is not yet
resolved.


senior managers recognise the need to develop consultation with children and
young people under 16. This work has begun, with two recent consultation
events with two different age groups which contributed to developments, such
as a new information pack for children when they first come into care.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is requires
improvement

motivated and committed group of staff who welcome the focus and
commitment brought by the new senior management team. The adoption team
has been strengthened through additional resources, and reorganised to focus
on key areas of performance recognised as requiring improvement. However,
these developments are relatively recent, and the service is not yet good as
there is still work to do, and improvements are not sufficiently embedded to
demonstrate sustained improvement and consistently good outcomes for
children.
against the national scorecard measure for the time taken from receiving court
authority to place a child and matching to an adoptive family is poor at 246
days, compared to similar authorities at 209 days and the England average of
delays.
underperformance: Barnsley recruited only 10 adopters in 20132014, less than
half the number of similar authorities. However, performance has improved
significantly as a result of the establishment of a recruitment and marketing
manager, and the local authority is now projecting a higher number of
approvals over the coming year: 16 adopters were recruited in 201314; there
are currently 17 adopters at stage one and 5 at stage two, and the team
manager estimates 17 adoptive families will be approved in the first six months
of 201415, with an ambitious prediction of 25-30 approvals this year. For
children whose needs cannot be met through Barnsley adopters, the authority
has placements identified through a range of agencies, including the Yorkshire
consortium and the national adoption register.
adoption panel are underdeveloped. The annual report for senior managers and
councillors for 20132014 has yet to be produced. There has been insufficient
engagement of the chair of the adoption panel with senior managers in the
authority to share learning from the panels experience and expertise.


of children to an appropriate adoptive home. Plans to separate brothers and
sisters are strongly challenged. The adoption panel is appropriately constituted
with a suitable range of panel members. The chair ensures that there is careful
preparation to enable close scrutiny of applications to adopt. Most reports are
of a good quality and contain the required information for the panel to make an
informed recommendation. There have been no reported placement disruptions
in the last three years, indicating the success of the matching process. There is
evidence of increasing use of parallel planning to reduce delay, however
fostering to adopt is at a very early stage of development.
and quality of permanence planning and have recently introduced a number of
effective initiatives. For example, increased capacity and reorganisation has
enabled social workers to concentrate on progressing permanence plans more
effectively alongside the childs social worker; recognition of the need to
engage all teams in assessing childrens needs has resulted in the recent linking
of adoption workers to relevant fieldwork teams; and advice and support is
provided to these teams to promote earlier identification of children for whom
the plan is likely to be permanence including adoption. Planning for
permanence through adoption is now improving, with strong performance now
in place to progress plans for children who have become looked after to move
more swiftly into an adoptive home. In Barnsley, children take an average of
percentage of children looked after waiting less than 20 months to move into
an adoptive home is also good at 66%, compared with 61% in similar
authorities and 55% nationally. The local authoritys data show that in the first
eight are placed for adoption, four have been matched and a further child is
waiting for a match.
Barnsley. Social workers in the adoption team who are now dedicated to
training and assessment are able to progress prospective adopters more rapidly
through stages one and two. Increased capacity has reduced delays in
commencing training. These improvements have increased the number
participating in the training and assessment. Recently approved adoptive carers
are very positive about the training and challenge in their assessment process.
through the appointment of a dedicated worker. Detailed adoption support
plans are routinely developed to enhance adoptive placements. These include
emotional support packages through CAMHS for parenting support for adopters
and access to specialist counselling services for children. There are 18 support
plans for current adopters. These plans are completed on a generic form, which
does not provide sufficient clarity in a user-friendly format. This has been
recognised by the authority and a more suitable template is to be developed.


groups run by the adoption support worker. However, not all adopters met with
were aware of their entitlement to ask for an adoption support plan. Good
attention is paid to needs of adopted children, with three support groups for
children. Some adopters are concerned that schools do not always recognise
the particular needs of adopted children. There is also concern that schools do
no sufficiently engage with adoptive parents to determine how best to use the
pupil premium funding. These issues are recognised by the team and meetings
between the coordinator and schools are arranged.
The graded judgement about the experiences and progress of care
leavers is good

accommodation. They get good advice on how to keep safe and make good life
choices, although they admit they do not always take the advice.
precisely how their needs are being met. There is very little detail about care
leavers health needs, and health passports are not provided. Pathway plans are
not a useful working record of the young person's journey out of care and into
independence. The authority recognises that there is more to be done to make
sure the health needs of care leavers are fully met. However, care leavers say
that they have access to health advice because their personal advisor (PA) is
proactive in making sure they are registered with a GP and dentist, and that
good advice is available through PAs regarding mental health and substance
misuse.
and responsible adults. Care leavers say that they feel able to cope with
independence and that if they need any help their personal advisor or another
member of the team is always there for them. Case files indicate that care
leavers are given every opportunity to develop life skills, like managing their
budget, maintaining a healthy diet and managing their relationships and
behaviour. The story of individual care leavers also emerges through detailed
case records. Care leavers are supported to make and maintain contact with
their families.
can stay put if they wish to, with the agreement of their carers. The large
majority of care leavers choose to stay put and are supported to do so. Young
people with learning and other complex disabilities are successfully supported
to stay put by placements jointly funded with adult services.
young people have a good range of choices for continued learning that leads to


employment. There are 23 care leavers, of whom 12 are not actively engaged
in education, employment or training at age 19 (at the end of quarter four
and the service is confident that their target of 45% NEET for participation will
be achieved.
Barnsley College that are tailored to meet individual needs. The college also
provides good support to help care leavers sustain their interest and
enthusiasm for education through the tutorial group mentors, who meet with
care leavers weekly to check how things are going. Other local FE colleges have
a similar approach. Most care leavers take advantage of further education, but
tend to dip in and out according to how their lives are going. Some want to get
a job as soon as possible, and are given excellent help and support on how to
apply and interview skills; most are helped with buying appropriate clothes for
their interview. One care leaver said, They bought me a suit to go to my
interview and it made me feel really good about myself.
leavers who are at University. This has risen from zero to five. One started in
four apprenticeships provided by the local authority, and plans are in place to
grow this scheme. These apprenticeships are working exceptionally well for this
small group of care leavers, and have an outstanding impact on their selfesteem, ability to cope with expectations within the workplace and ability to
plan the direction of their future lives. Those involved in apprenticeships say
this has been a life-changing opportunity.
to lead, and receive good support from their Connexions PA and the leaving
care team. The leaving care team celebrate achievements all the time through
their very regular contacts with care leavers, who highly value the advice and
support they receive. However, care leavers do not value the formal reward
system organised by the authority. For example, one care leaver was given a
certificate but she did not understand why this had been awarded or what
difference it would make to her ability to get a job.
the Borough is limited, providing insufficient choice. Most of this type of
accommodation is provided by private providers on a spot purchase basis. The
vast majority of care leavers are placed in suitable accommodation and
performance has improved over the past two years to 96%, compared to
statistical neighbours at 93.8%. Care leavers are not placed in houses of
multiple occupancy, although occasionally hotel accommodation is used for
short periods. Care leavers all say that they have a safe place to live.
issued with identity cards, but do not have passports unless a specific individual


need arise. The leaving care grant is considerably less than government advice.
Although care leavers spoken to by inspectors say they know what information
and support they are entitled to, the Childrens Rights Service report (2013
access to their case files and are offered support when reading these, although
there remain delays in providing care leavers with this access. They know how
to make a formal complaint and that they can have an advocate to support
them through this process.


Leadership, management and governance
Key Judgement

Judgement Grade

Leadership, management and governance

Requires Improvement

of November 2012. However, progress accelerated when the present Director
of Childrens Services (DCS) was appointed in June 2013 and was further
enhanced following the appointment of the Interim Assistant Executive Director
(AED) in October 2013. Well planned use of interim managers in key posts has
added impetus to driving necessary changes in practice. The DCS and her team
provide a transparent and candid approach to reporting performance, detailing
both progress and remaining challenges.
acknowledged and understood by the leadership team, with appropriate plans
in place to review and remedy the situation in the next two months.
or newly captured data. A comprehensive self-assessment provides an
accessible whole service overview, and their improvement plan is regularly
updated to provide real time consideration of areas for improvement against
actions, outcomes and impact. Significant and rapid progress has been made
over the last 12 months to implement and strengthen both performance
management and quality assurance systems. Performance information is used
routinely with managers at all levels to raise standards of practice, maximise
learning and improve the quality of work with children and their families.
Evidence of this can be seen in the increased understanding of the high
numbers of children subject to repeat child protection plans in 2013-2014 and
the need to provide greater training to social workers working with families
experiencing substance mis-use and domestic violence.
evidencing a strong commitment to get things right. Case file audits clearly
detail poor practice and managers acknowledge that work remains to embed
consistently good standards of practice across the service. Recently improved
and reliable management information allows senior leaders to quickly identify
emerging issues. Remedial action is put in place at the earliest opportunity. For
example, when the timeliness of health assessments began to fall the DCS
effectively challenged health partners, who promptly made additional resources
available with the result that good performance has been restored. Gaps in
service provision are openly acknowledged, such as the need for a specialist
service to intervene with young people on the edge of care. Appropriate plans
are either being developed or already in place to address them. The impact of
many of these plans on improving outcomes for children is yet to be realised.


Management oversight and supervision of case work is good and clearly
evidenced on childrens files. However, work remains to fully embed a system
of professional, reflective supervision and professional development.
guidance. Key leaders such as the Leader of the Council, Lead Member, Chief
Executive, LSCB chair and the DCS have established appropriate processes to
ensure clear working arrangements and distinction of roles and responsibilities.
Leaders have also been fully engaged with, and are key members of, the
safeguarding improvement board. The independent chair of the improvement
board has also been effectively engaged in essential dialogues by the Leader of
the Council, Chief Executive, Lead Member, DCS and independent chair of the
LSCB. Constructive dialogue regarding governance arrangements takes place
between the DCS and LSCB chair, who meet every two months. For example,
they have agreed the protocol in principle for the Health and Well Being Board.
Formalised arrangements are in place for the Chief Executive to meet with the
LSCB chair to review the Boards progress and to consider their annual report
and business plan. The DCS and Assistant Director undertake monthly visits to
social work teams to observe practice and gather feedback from front line staff;
the Chief Executive also visits social work teams on a regular basis. Whilst the
scrutiny panel routinely receives reports and challenges performance data
about some areas of childrens social care practice, they do not routinely
scrutinise the LAs performance with regard to children looked after. This means
they cannot be assured of the quality of the services delivered or challenge
performance
the work done by the DCS in partnership with a senior manager from the
Clinical Commissioning Group over the delivery and range of CAMHS for
children looked after has notably improved arrangements. Barnsley Childrens
Trust is a committed strategic partnership who are passionate about making
required improvements to comprehensively implement thresholds across the
partnership. Trust members are fully aware of the work still to be done to fully
embed a shared understanding at key transition points of a childs journey.
Whilst Early Help services provide a positive range of support for children and
their families, a coherent, overarching strategic approach is not yet in place and
evaluation of effectiveness is underdeveloped. The partnership has taken recent
action to progress this area of work and is developing an early help
performance scorecard. The Trust has yet to develop a fully shared
understanding and ownership of the early help agenda. Leaders across the
partnership keep front line staff well informed by regular electronic bulletins,
with a candid assessment of progress and a focus on recent work.
Senior managers are raising awareness and encouraging elected members to
act as pushy parents. However, there is very little direct evidence of their
influence being used to improve the lives of children in care. For example,
educational outcomes for children looked after require improvement. Meetings


of the corporate parenting panel are now more child focused, and elected
members have begun to appropriately challenge officers. For example, the
panel have recently challenged senior managers to resolve problems in foster
carer payment processes, a task which currently remains outstanding. Meetings
are now more frequent, but as yet no young people sit on the panel.
the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA). Costs are benchmarked with a
plan to reduce expenditure by 1.5 million over the next 3 years. The authority
has sought benchmarking information both regionally and nationally to ensure
that it effectively manages budget pressures. Elected members acknowledge
that the base budget for childrens placements had not been set at the correct
level historically. Action has been taken to address this, and sufficient funding is
now in place.
supplementing the local authoritys own provision, offering appropriate
placement choice. Recruitment of sufficient local adopters remains challenging
although recent improvements are reported. The Staying Put offer is good and
vulnerable care leavers with disabilities particularly benefit from joint-funded
staying put placements after they reach 18 years of age. Work remains to plan
and develop a range of locally available suitable accommodation for care
leavers. An effective operational joint commissioning group effectively identifies
joint funding solutions to support children looked after with complex needs to
achieve better outcomes.
standards of quality and timeliness in legal proceedings are satisfactory. The
authority is in line with local regional timescales at 37 weeks; however, it
continues to aspire to achieving the 26-week national target.
a firm foundation to sustain and build upon recent improvements. The use of
agency workers is very low and caseloads for social workers are manageable
and closely monitored by senior managers. There are currently three key senior
posts covered by interim managers, which creates some uncertainty; however,
the local authority has robust plans in place to recruit permanently to these
posts. Necessary work to implement a career pathway for social workers has
started and a well-considered certification scheme is to be implemented later
this year. A good workforce development plan links directly to improvement
priorities and staff report easy access to frequent training opportunities. An
evaluation of the impact of this strategy is not yet available, but all the requisite
components are in place to achieve the necessary progress.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) requires
improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.

Priority and immediate action
The inspection did not find any areas for priority and immediate action.
Areas for improvement
strengthening relationships with the Health and Wellbeing Board.
timely manner to improve practice.
and the triggers for the various assessments being utilised.
each other to account for improving safeguarding services in Barnsley.
effective early help services to children and their families.
safeguarding practice.


Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
effective governance arrangements between the local authority, the
Independent Chair of Barnsley Safeguarding Childrens Board, the Health and
Wellbeing Board (H&WBB) and the Childrens Trust. However, although a
meeting is planned, to date the BSCB chair has not met with the H&WBB and
therefore has not yet been able to ensure that issues relating to the
safeguarding of children are given due consideration by the H&WBB members.
attendance by the vast majority of agencies is good and consistent. The chair is
a member of the Childrens Trust Board and the Improvement Board.
time he has gained the respect and confidence of partners, and he is widely
recognised to have brought an improved focus and drive to the Boards work.
He has encouraged constructive challenge within the partnership and has been
successful in achieving 100% s11 returns, and is subjecting each return to a
challenge process. Efforts to engage the schools in submitting their s175
returns have proved more challenging, however, numbers are improving year
on year. The lay member has volunteered to support schools that have yet to
make a return. The Chair has, on a number of occasions, demonstrated his
ability to hold agencies to account for their practice. However, there is little
evidence that agencies effectively hold each other to account.
appropriate sub-groups. However, all but two of the sub-groups are chaired by
officers from the Local Authority and they would benefit from a wider range of
agencies taking these responsibilities. A very positive move is the establishment
of a new sub-group to oversee improvements in inter-agency work with
disabled children and those with complex health needs. The Board recognises
that links with faith groups in Barnsley are underdeveloped.
bring greater focus to the oversight and scrutiny exercised. The Performance
and Audit sub group takes responsibility for escalating any declining indicators
from a more expansive dataset. However, there is further work required to
ensure that the Board receives relevant data from health agencies and the
Police, and to complete the development of a scorecard to enable the Board to
evaluate the effectiveness of early help.
considered two multi-agency audits. The first multi-agency audit considered 31
midwifery cases and 10 social care referrals, to analyse compliance with the
pre-birth protocol; the second multi-agency audit considered 12 cases and
focussed on the quality, effectiveness and validity of child protection plans.
Both audits led to the development of appropriate action plans. However, child


protection plans seen during the inspection indicate that the impact of these
has yet to be embedded. There have been no audits on the effectiveness of
Early Help, and none are scheduled for 20145. A report on private fostering
was presented to the LSCB in May 2014; however, this did not reflect recently
identified areas for improvement within the service.
Overview Panel (CDOP) have recently been revised and the panel now reports
directly to the Board. The annual report is thorough and the number of child
deaths in Barnsley each year is low. There have been no serious case reviews
(SCR) in Barnsley since June 2012. There is a suitable learning and
improvement framework in place that complies with Chapter 4 of Working
Together 2013 and outlines the process for conducting serious case reviews in
Barnsley. Following challenge from CDOP, a case relating to a serious incident
involving a child in November 2012 has been subject to a systems-based
Learning Lessons review. Although a learning event has been held for staff
involved, the report remains in draft and the learning has not yet been
disseminated to the wider workforce, some 20 months after the event.
regarding Child Sexual Exploitation has led to very high attendance at training
and a conference has also been held. The sub-group has made strenuous
efforts to try to evaluate the impact of training by withholding continuing
professional development certificates until delegates return their personal
action plans to implement their learning, but returns are very low. This is
subject to continuing effort from the group.
protocols and guidance. The manual was last updated in March 2014 and
helpfully highlights new procedures brought in following the revisions to
Working Together in 2013. The procedures include the locally agreed Threshold
Document, which provides good information about levels and types of needs of
children; however, it does not make referral pathways sufficiently clear (e.g.
into the Stronger Families Teams), nor the triggers for the CAF, Stronger
Families Assessment or DoH assessment for children in need. The DCS and
Chair of the LSCB organised a successful meeting with front line workers from
one area of the borough to seek their views on current issues affecting their
work; this included a discussion about thresholds, and the professionals were
urged to use the escalation policy when they did not agree with individual case
decisions by childrens social care.
forward taken by the Board over the year. The report outlines how the Board
has begun to exercise greater oversight of partnership work to improve
outcomes for looked after children. However, it does not recognise the need to
improve oversight of the effectiveness of Early Help services.


the Board over the last year and a detailed strategy has been agreed, which is
overseen by the recently established Childrens Sexual Exploitation and
Runaways sub-group. The LSCB has received a report on children missing from
care, but has not considered any reports on children missing from home and
has not audited the effectiveness of arrangements to protect young people at
risk of CSE. Whilst LSCB safeguarding procedures are appropriate and regularly
reviewed, it has been acknowledged that procedures need to be updated in
accordance with recent changes to statutory guidance on missing children.
Board has participated in the formation of the Stronger Families teams and the
establishment of a dedicated CSE Police team, in place since April 2014, which
benefits from the inclusion of a specialist Barnados social worker. Following a
study day with the Adults Safeguarding Board, the Chair is also working closely
with partners to explore the development of a Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub
for Barnsley.
the Chair and DCS with the opportunity to meet with young people to speak
with them directly about their safeguarding concerns in Barnsley and to seek
their views on the issues the board should prioritise. It is planned that future
board meetings will also be held within schools, with the next meeting
consulting with disabled young people.


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


