Bedford Borough
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 23 January 2017  16 February 2017
Report published: 7 April 2017

Childrens services in Bedford Borough require improvement to
be good

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Good


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Bedford Borough require improvement to be good. Following
the child protection inspection in 2013, the director of childrens services (DCS) and
his senior leadership team have worked purposefully to implement systemic changes
in order to improve outcomes for children. Key services implemented or further
developed include an effective multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) and strong
early help services. As a result, many children receive helpful intervention. Services
for care leavers and children who are adopted are good. However, the DCS and his
leadership team know that, in other key parts of the service, they have more work to
do to strengthen core social work practice, which is challenged by high caseloads
and inconsistent management oversight.
Professional and political leaders have a good understanding of the strengths and
weaknesses of the service. Responding to deficits in the quality of frontline practice,
they introduced an improvement board in 2014. This has helped to ensure effective
oversight of performance and progress, strengthened by independent validation
through external reviews. The improvement plan focuses on the right areas for
development, particularly the need to reduce caseloads and to strengthen workforce
stability. Political leaders have responded robustly to the improvement plan,
committing substantial financial resources to increase the social work establishment.
A coherent workforce strategy has resulted in the establishment of a permanent
management team, including first-line managers. Despite this progress, social work
caseloads and the use of locums remain high.
The senior leadership team has set clear expectations and maintained its focus on
improving the quality of frontline practice. A comprehensive performance and quality
assurance framework is in place, with audit and oversight of practice by child
protection chairs and independent reviewing officers (IROs). However, quality
assurance activity is not yet consistently leading to better practice, due to pressures
in capacity across the workforce. Weaknesses in frontline management oversight and
supervision in some teams mean that compliance with practice standards is not
embedded. Although supervision takes place, it is not yet effective enough to ensure
consistency of practice.
Families in need of help benefit from a wide range of well-coordinated support to
prevent their needs from escalating. The MASH has enhanced partnership working.
Thresholds are applied appropriately and result in a timely and proportionate
response to childrens needs. Strategy meetings are effective, and, where
appropriate, they lead to child protection enquiries and conferences for those
children most at risk.
Assessments do not always include childrens experiences, in particular the influence
of their cultural heritage. Many fail to capture the childs voice through observation
or direct work. Weaknesses in case recording, including delays in uploading
documents, are evident across the service and limit the effectiveness of management
oversight. Many plans focus too heavily on the needs of adults and are insufficiently


specific or measurable. The quality of pre-birth assessments and plans is
inconsistent. Managers have listened to the feedback of the courts and other
partners and have taken steps to improve practice in this area, but this is yet to have
a measurable impact.
Use of the Public Law Outline (PLO) is improving. The recent appointment of a case
management officer and more focused tracking have increased oversight of practice
in this area. This is beginning to strengthen planning for children.
The local authority looks after children when this is necessary. Almost all children
looked after live in good-quality placements that meet their needs. Some care plans
lack focus, which can dilute their effectiveness and result in delays in completing
essential work. Planning notably improves once decisions are made about childrens
plans for permanence. Plans for children who return home from local authority care
to live with their families are carefully considered in order to mitigate the likelihood
of risks recurring. These children are well supported.
Work with children who have experienced or are at risk of sexual exploitation is
largely effective, but responses to children who go missing from home or care are
not robust and not enough children have return home interviews. For those who do,
information from interviews is not consistently used to inform risk assessments. The
local authority and police have very recently taken action to strengthen their
response in this area, but this is too recent to demonstrate impact.
Services for children requiring adoption are good. Prospective adopters are assessed,
trained and supported well. Support for children in transition to their adoptive
families is well planned, ensuring a positive start for these new families. Children
benefit from comprehensive support plans, but further work is needed to ensure that
later life letters provide accurate and sensitive accounts of their histories.
Care leavers receive a good service. Young people make progress in education and
training and are prepared well for eventual independent living. Young people hold
their leaving care workers in high regard. The large majority of pathway plans are of
good quality, but they are not always reviewed regularly enough or signed off
promptly by managers.
The corporate parenting panel closely scrutinises performance and outcomes for
children looked after, but its links with the Children in Care Council (CiCC) are
underdeveloped. Evidence of impact of the panel is limited. For example, the council
does not offer apprenticeships to care leavers within its own services, care leavers
have not been included in the work to reshape the council, and children looked after
are currently unaware of the authoritys promises to them as the pledge has not yet
been published.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two childrens homes, both of which were judged to
be good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspections.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was published in February 2013. The local authority was judged to be
adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was published in March 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The DCS has been in post since March 2014.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services.
 The chief executive has been in post since June 2009.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since March
Children living in this area
 Approximately 37,900 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Bedford Borough. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 17% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years old are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
in primary schools is 12% (the national average is 15%)
in secondary schools is 10% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 29% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British and Mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
in primary schools is 32% (the national average is 20%)


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


in secondary schools is 19% (the national average is 16%).
 Bedford Borough is a relatively prosperous and fast-growing borough, but has
areas of significant deprivation.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 December 2016, 1,339 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a slight increase
from 1,301 at 31 March 2016.
 At 31 December 2016, 176 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 46 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 159
children (42 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 31 December 2016, fewer than five children lived in a privately arranged
fostering placement.
 In the last two years prior to inspection, four serious incident notifications have
been submitted to Ofsted, and one serious case review has been completed.
 There are three serious case reviews ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 December 2016, 262 children are being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 69 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 255 (67 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
authority area
 none live in residential special schools
 fewer than five live with their parents
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 14 adoptions
returned to be looked after
 seven young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to
independent living
 eight young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in
houses of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that all work with children is recorded promptly on the social care
information system and used to inform planning for children.


When children go missing from home or care, ensure that they are offered a
return interview within 72 hours of returning home and that the interview is
recorded to inform ongoing planning.


Create and sustain a supervision offer to frontline staff that has a focus on
getting to good and delivers well-recorded professional support on a regular
basis.


Ensure that childrens views are fully reflected in assessments and plans.


Improve the quality of plans for children and young people. Ensure that plans
clearly set out what needs to change within specific timeframes, and are used
to monitor progress, updated following each review, and are subject to timely
scrutiny and authorisation by managers.


Ensure that children looked after and young people leaving care are fully
informed of their entitlements and are provided with greater opportunities to
influence service developments.


Ensure that effective systems are in place to enable strategic oversight of all
children who need permanence.


Ensure that later life letters provide a clear and comprehensive account of the
childs history in child-friendly language, avoiding social work jargon and
including all information about birth and adoptive families.


Ensure that children looked after receive timely health assessments.

fostered, so that assessments are robust, include all required safeguarding
checks and are properly overseen by managers.


Summary for children and young people
 Senior leaders and managers, the elected mayor and councillors have worked
hard to improve services for children and families in Bedford Borough. Although
services have got better, there is still more work to do to ensure that all children
get the support and help that they need.
 Children are kept as safe as possible because social workers act quickly to protect
them when they are at risk of harm.
 When children and their families have problems or worries, social workers, the
police, health workers and other professionals work well together to make sure
that they receive the right help.
 There are lots of different services in Bedford Borough for children and their
families. Because most children and their families receive help quickly, their
problems do not become more serious.
 Social workers ensure that children in need of support and children looked after
have plans in place to improve their lives. These plans would be better if they
reflected childrens views and had clearer targets to work towards.
 More needs to be done to make sure that when children go missing, an
independent person speaks to them when they return. This will help adults to
understand the reasons for going missing and help to prevent it happening again.
 For children who cannot live with their families, social workers find the right
permanent families for them, in which they can feel happy and safe.
 When adoption is the best plan for children, social workers work hard to make
sure that they live with the right families quickly. Children receive bright and
colourful life story books that help them to understand their early life
experiences.
 When young people leave care, they feel well supported. They have a good
choice of accommodation and receive practical support from staff to help them to
live independently.
 Not all children looked after understand the support that they can expect to
receive. Children looked after and care leavers have worked with social workers
and managers to design a new pledge, which will help children and young people
to understand what they are entitled to in the future.
 Although there is a Children in Care Council in Bedford Borough, not enough
children and young people know about it or attend. This is a missed opportunity
for them to meet new friends and to have their say about the service that they
receive.
 Managers are working hard to improve the service, but there are not yet enough
social workers. This means that social workers find it hard to do all of the things
needed, particularly to make sure that they record what they are doing. Plans are
in place to recruit more social workers so that all children get the help that they
need.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Early help services are well targeted, coordinated and effective in Bedford
Borough. This is ensuring that children and their families benefit from appropriate
support and help when they need it. When early help is not improving childrens
circumstances, step-up to statutory social work services is timely.
When statutory thresholds are met, there is a timely and effective response by
staff in the MASH. Information is shared appropriately and leads to sound
decisions and oversight by managers. As a result, children receive the right
support at the right time. The majority of partner agencies understand and apply
thresholds for statutory intervention effectively. However, the lack of screening of
low-risk incidents by the police puts inappropriate demands on the capacity of the
MASH.
Children who are at risk of harm are identified appropriately, and swift action is
taken to make sure that they are safe. Strategy meetings are thorough and make
the right decisions that lead to robust child protection enquiries and, when
necessary, initial child protection conferences. Professionals from partner
organisations attend most multi-agency meetings and contribute to assessments.
The timeliness of assessments has improved, but further work is needed to ensure
that they are carried out within timescales proportionate to childrens needs.
Most children are visited in accordance with their plans, though visiting is less
consistent to children in need. Delays in social workers recording or uploading
information to childrens records make it difficult to understand whether visits have
taken place or whether actions are complete. The quality of management
oversight, although improving, remains variable and is not always effective in
driving planning for children.
Work with children in need is not as effective as work undertaken in child
protection processes. Child in need meetings are not always held promptly and do
not always consider progress against childrens plans. This makes it difficult to
monitor impact. The quality of plans, both for children in need and for children in
need of protection, requires improvement. Plans are often too focused on adult
behaviour and do not clearly differentiate the needs of individual children. They
are not sufficiently outcome focused or used effectively to monitor progress. The
response to children who live in private fostering arrangements is not robust.
Work to protect children at risk of sexual exploitation is mostly effective. Children
benefit from support and targeted work, which helps to reduce risk and to improve
their circumstances. Children who go missing receive an inconsistent response and
not enough have a return home interview.


Inspection findings
inspection of child protection in 2013 has resulted in a substantial increase in
the volume of early help assessments completed across the partnership.
Agencies demonstrate increased confidence in supporting early help delivery,
facilitated by training, for example on the recently refreshed threshold guide.
Early help officers or family support workers attached to every school, general
practitioner (GP) practice and childrens centre, as well as access to named
child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) professionals, enable
children to benefit from specialist support before their needs escalate.
and families who need early help provision. Strong partnership arrangements,
led by the early help and intervention service, ensure that support for children
and families is effective. Early help plans feature specific, measureable targets
and are regularly reviewed and overseen by managers. When early help is not
improving childrens circumstances, transfer to statutory social work services is
timely.
Management decisions about contacts and referrals are timely and informed by
sound information gathering, but do not always include sufficiently detailed
rationale for decision-making. Good partnership working is evident, with
engagement by police, health and social care. However, a high volume of
domestic abuse notifications relating to low-risk incidents are not screened
effectively by the police before being referred to the MASH. This places
inappropriate demands on MASH staff capacity. The police domestic abuse risk
assessments (DASH), which accompany some referrals seen by inspectors,
were superficial and of little value in assisting the MASH in identifying risk.
majority of cases. Most strategy meetings are well attended and recorded.
When the threshold is met for initial child protection conferences, these are
held within appropriate timescales for the large majority of children. Children
who present concerns outside office hours receive prompt, appropriate
responses, including well-recorded strategy meetings from the panBedfordshire emergency duty team.
months. The local authority has begun to develop systems and processes in
order to ensure that assessment timescales are proportionate to childrens
individual needs. Assessments are of variable quality; they focus on need and
risks, but do not consistently take account of childrens ethnic or cultural
identities, and many lack sufficient analysis. Most demonstrate an
understanding of the impact of issues, such as domestic abuse, neglect,
substance misuse and parental mental health, but many lack focus on the
experience of children living in the household.


planning through the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB). Planning is not
always sufficiently proactive or progressed with the rigour and pace needed
before children are born, which means that some intervention can be incident
led. The local authority has taken decisive action in response to the concerns
raised. This is beginning to have a positive impact on the quality of pre-birth
planning, with better practice evident in more recent intervention for some
children.
individual needs and circumstances. However, visiting for children in need is
less consistent. Social workers talk with warmth about the children they work
with and know them well. Inspectors saw some good examples of direct work
used to gain the views of children, but this is not explicitly recorded in
assessments and plans and does not always inform the analysis of need.
(Recommendation)
difficult to understand whether actions are complete or if plans are being
progressed effectively. Inspectors raised several childrens cases with senior
managers, as it was unclear from their records whether children had been
visited by social workers. These visits had taken place but had not been
recorded onto the system quickly enough. (Recommendation)
that they are protected. Child protection plans are reviewed regularly through
conferences and core groups, although the quality of plans is not yet good
enough. Too many plans focus on adult behaviour, rather than the impact of
that behaviour on children, and they fail to differentiate the needs of individual
children in the family. They are often not outcome focused and do not
consistently have specific and measureable actions. This can result in visits to
children lacking purpose, or an insufficient focus on measuring progress in
reviews. Contingency plans are often not clear enough to enable families to
understand what will happen if progress is not made. (Recommendation)
in child in need planning are evident across the service, which is leading to
improved outcomes for some children, this is not always happening at the pace
required. This is particularly evident in those parts of the service in which
caseloads are higher.
children, including those who have experienced domestic abuse. The relay
scheme supports the early identification of children living in households where
domestic abuse is present, ensuring that services are provided before needs
escalate. The Space programme provides group support for children affected by
domestic abuse. Children have given positive feedback on the impact that this
service has had on their ability to cope with their home situations. Multi-agency


public protection arrangements and multi-agency risk assessment conferences
are effective in protecting children who have contact with individuals who are
considered to be the highest risk.
use of child protection processes and the PLO but is not yet sufficiently
consistent. At the time of the inspection, no children were the subject of a child
protection plan for more than two years, and the number of those who were
the subject of a plan for longer than 18 months has reduced significantly due to
the local authoritys focus on this area. There has been significant work by the
local authority, supported by the LSCB, to strengthen the response to children
exposed to chronic neglect. This has included a comprehensive response to
neglect of children with disabilities, following two serious case reviews. This
work is beginning to see impact, with improved assessment and planning
evident for this cohort of children.
oversight through the appointment of a case progression officer and more
focused tracking. Pre-proceedings letters to parents outline concerns and
required actions clearly. Legal planning meetings are convened when concerns
escalate but could, on occasion, be held earlier to ensure a more proactive
response to escalating concerns. This is particularly evident in respect of
planning for unborn babies, which is not always sufficiently robust. Escalation
by partners and the court has resulted in increased focus on this area of
practice.
to delays in actions being completed for individual children. However, this is not
always effective in rectifying shortfalls in practice with sufficient pace. While
escalations are individually monitored, senior managers have only recently
begun to collate these, limiting their ability to identify themes.
majority of children. Risk assessments inform ongoing planning, with complex
strategy meetings ensuring comprehensive multi-agency involvement. However,
not all risk assessments are updated with sufficient regularity or used
effectively to inform analysis. The local authority has commissioned services to
respond to the needs of children at risk of sexual exploitation, and this has led
to improved outcomes for some children. The introduction of a panBedfordshire child sexual exploitation group has given greater scrutiny and
understanding of issues and prevalence.
absent rather than missing, introducing a missing coordinator in the MASH to
review all absent and missing notifications. Effective processes are in place for
responding to new contacts regarding children who are not currently supported
by the local authority who go missing from home, and return home interviews
take place when needed. However, the response to incidents of going missing


for children already in receipt of statutory intervention is less effective. A
commissioned service provides return home interviews, but there is a lack of
persistent follow-up to encourage childrens engagement. This has resulted in a
low rate of return interviews. Inconsistencies in social work recording and
delays in uploading return interview documents mean that it is not always clear
whether return interviews have taken place. As a result, the use of intelligence
in risk assessments and plans for individual children is inconsistent. When
concerns about incidents of going missing indicate the need for protective
action, intervention is more effective, with the necessary action taken when
required. (Recommendation)
response to missing children. Guidance has been refreshed and updated
training provided to staff. Work is under way to review the contract with the
commissioned provider for return home interviews. Escalation has taken place
with strategic leads in the police. However, this is too recent to evidence
impact. (Recommendation)
welfare officers work closely with schools and other partners to return children
to school or improve attendance. Alternative provision meets the needs of 68
children well, and virtually all are on full timetables. The manager with
responsibility for children who are electively home educated maintains
comprehensive records and undertakes appropriate safeguarding checks. Fiftythree electively home-educated children are known to the local authority.
vulnerable is thorough. A specialist social worker completes very competent
assessments with this group of children and attempts to maintain contact with
those who are more vulnerable and unwilling to accept services elsewhere. The
local authority does not currently collate the outcomes of advice and help
provided, which limits its ability to understand the impact of the service.
sufficiently robust. Notification of new arrangements identified by partner
agencies has been consistently low, suggesting that knowledge and awareness
are not widely prevalent. There is no lead worker responsible for these children,
and this weakens promotion and awareness raising. Most assessments seen
provided a coherent picture of childrens needs and the carers capacity to meet
them, but important safeguarding checks are not always completed for all
children. (Recommendation)


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
A range of services support children to remain living with their birth families. When
children need to be looked after, most decisions are prompt and appropriate.
Children who return home from a period in care receive appropriate support from
social workers to ensure that they are safe and well.
The large majority of children looked after live in good placements where their
needs are met. Children are supported to spend enjoyable time with their carers.
Most children are visited regularly and enjoy positive relationships with social
workers who know them well. However, some do not have stable placements, and
a small minority experience unnecessary placement moves, particularly during their
first few months in care.
The quality of assessments and planning for children looked after is inconsistent.
Plans are not routinely updated with new information or when childrens
circumstances change. Despite recent improvements, a legacy of inconsistent
oversight has delayed plans being progressed for some children. Work to improve
timescales for the progression of childrens cases through the courts is beginning
to make a difference. Permanence planning for the majority of children is effective,
and permanent care options are considered at an early stage for almost all children
entering care. Plans for permanence are based on appropriate assessments of
need and, for most children, are progressed in a timely way. However, a very small
minority of children have waited too long for permanence to be secured for them.
The CiCC has recently been relaunched, with plans to widen participation to
include care leavers. The children in care pledge has been refreshed and is about
to be reissued. However, not enough children know enough about these important
promises.
Services for children requiring adoption are good; these children benefit from early
planning and good support. Prospective adopters are assessed, trained and
supported well. Post-adoption support is readily available. Transitions to adoptive
placements are well planned, giving children a positive start in their new homes.
Leaving and aftercare team workers build positive relationships with care leavers
and support them well to become successful and independent adults. This includes
good support to help them to find and sustain suitable accommodation, and, for an
increasingly large proportion, to secure employment, education or training. Good
pathway plans are in place to support this work, but some are not sufficiently up to
date or authorised quickly enough by managers.


Inspection findings
becoming looked after remain with their families. A range of services provides
support to help children at home and prevents them coming into care.
Thresholds are appropriate; as a result, children only come into care when it is
in their best interests to do so. For almost all of these children, decisions to look
after them are made within the right timescales to meet their needs.
them. They visit them regularly, and the majority of children are seen alone.
Direct work, although undertaken, is not used sufficiently to inform assessment
and planning, and case recording does not always clearly reflect the childs
voice. (Recommendation)
the quality of social work evidence presented in court proceedings. This issue,
coupled with protracted proceedings in respect of several larger groups of
brothers and sisters, has resulted in a decline in performance in timescales for
proceedings. Following escalation by the courts, senior managers have
strengthened oversight of proceedings work. This is beginning to result in more
effective and timely progression of court work.
their needs. Assessments completed when children first become looked after
are comprehensive. Social workers use a range of assessment tools to inform
their assessment of risk and need. However, assessments updated for the
purpose of childrens reviews do not fully consider diversity issues or the childs
voice. They also lack consideration of the impact of recent changes in childrens
circumstances, and sometimes analysis is insufficiently robust.
inspectors in respect of more recent care plans and those submitted to the
court as part of proceedings. Less effective care plans lack clear actions and
outcomes and are not sufficiently focused on timescales for delivery. Some are
not being updated quickly enough following changes in childrens lives. When
management oversight is less effective, these weaknesses are not addressed.
However, casework over the last six months indicates that managers have
become more focused on scrutinising the quality of plans and ensuring that
recording is up to date.
their reviews, to consider their thoughts, feelings and views. There has been
significant improvement in the number of children participating in their reviews,
and 98% have participated in the most recent reporting period. Review
meetings are effective. Reports are individualised and child focused, using a
format developed in partnership with the CiCC. IROs contribute to quality
assurance and oversight of childrens cases. When issues are identified,


concerns are escalated to managers, but this is not always effective in
addressing shortfalls quickly.
children during 20152016. This service provides visits to children living in
residential placements, a telephone helpline and additional legal advice for
children looked after if needed. Too few children have benefited from an
independent visitor during the last year. The local authority is in the process of
recommissioning this service, to increase the volume of independent visitors
from March 2017.
meet their needs, and they are making good progress. The local authority has
been successful in increasing the number of in-house foster carers and makes
extensive use of carers from independent fostering agencies in order to meet
the needs of all of Bedford Boroughs children looked after. Independent
fostering agency carers are engaged through a Bedfordshire-wide framework,
and there are plans for further recruitment in the current commissioning cycle.
This approach ensures that the large majority of children live close enough to
home to maintain friendships, school placements and leisure interests.
Assessments of foster carers are comprehensive, and their achievements are
celebrated. Foster carers receive effective support from their supervising social
workers.
result in a small minority of children experiencing placement moves within the
first few months of becoming looked after. The local authority has taken action
to address this issue, requiring managers to increase their focus on timely
notification when children become looked after.
are supported well and, as a result, they make good progress and their life
chances are improving. This includes children at risk of sexual exploitation and
other forms of abuse. Children report positive relationships with staff and have
access to a range of leisure activities. They have appropriate access to
education and health services, including mental health provision when required.
a range of health and mental health services, including access to a dedicated
looked after mental health service provided by CAMHS. However, further work
is needed to ensure that children receive timely health assessments when they
become looked after. Only 44% of initial health assessments and 61% of
review health assessments were carried out within the required timescales at
the time of the inspection. There has been increased focus by health and social
care managers, including the introduction of a monthly joint health-tracking
meeting, which is having a gradual impact, but progress is too slow.
(Recommendation)


considered and support provided where required. However, inspectors found
that, for a small minority of children, assessments of arrangements lacked full
consideration of contact with half-brothers and half-sisters. As a result,
opportunities are missed for some children to maintain important relationships
at a frequency that meets their needs.
permanence for most children is strong. Social workers and managers work
hard to secure childrens permanence through adoption and special
guardianship orders. When it is in childrens best interests to remain with foster
carers on a long-term basis, these are approved by the fostering panel.
Inspectors saw effective joint working between childrens social workers and
supervising fostering social workers, resulting in sound appraisal of risk and
sensitive planning for children. However, despite some good work by team
managers to drive permanence planning, a lack of join-up between the various
individual team trackers has hindered strategic oversight. (Recommendation)
of risk and effective support services enable them to return to their families and
remain there. For the few children who return to their parents care contrary to
their care plans, risks are properly assessed and efforts made to ensure a
successful outcome.
Interventions are based on robust assessments that identify risk, and services
offered respond to childrens needs. Engagement with children and their carers
has resulted in reduction of risk and in children making good progress.
social workers, but too few children receive return interviews following episodes
of going missing. When return interviews do take place, they are not always
well recorded or consistently used to inform the management of future risk.
When risks increase, planning is more effective, with multi-agency strategy
meetings held to ensure a partnership approach to minimising risk.
(Recommendation)
Specialist trained workers ensure that childrens needs and vulnerabilities are
assessed. They are placed in supportive placements and early action is taken to
clarify their immigration status. Social workers provide effective support to
ensure that their health and education needs are addressed.
to ensure rapid improvement in the capacity and capability of the virtual school
team. Good progress has been made as a result of close monitoring by the
interim executive board, established to oversee improvement of the virtual
school, and chaired by the lead member for education and early help. The large


majority of personal education plans (PEPs) are now of good quality. Managers
have successfully introduced e-PEPs for all children looked after up to the age
of 16. Appropriate training is provided for social workers and designated
teachers, which is improving the quality of plans and the impact of PEP
meetings. Virtual school team members attend all PEP meetings held for
children at key transition points at schools within and outside of Bedford
Borough. Headteachers from schools report that the virtual school team
provides good levels of support and challenge to help them to ensure that their
children looked after make the best possible progress.
Virtual school managers, the virtual school head and the chief education officer
carefully monitor the progress of the very small number of children in schools
that Ofsted judges as less than good. Working closely with social workers, they
ensure that these schools continue to meet the childrens education, placement
and broader needs. They also ensure that pupil premium is used to support
learning well, for example by providing one-to-one tuition, to give additional
support where required.
a result of the better support that they are receiving. Examination results for
Summer 2016 demonstrate that the key stage 4 attainment gap is closing, with
English and mathematics. The local authority expect the gap to close further
once the November 2016 examination results are taken into account.
reflect the need to engage both younger and older children. A new participation
team is in place, and the pledge to children looked after and care leavers has
been revised. Children who met inspectors were confident that their social
workers advocate on their behalf and ensure that they receive the support that
they need. However, as the local authority has not yet disseminated the
recently refreshed pledge, not all children are aware of the authoritys
important promises to them.
opportunities for children looked after to engage with political leaders and
decision-makers, and this restricts its impact despite an ambitious participation
strategy. (Recommendation)


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
considered at an early stage for all children who cannot be cared for by their
birth families. Plans for adoption presented to the agency decision-maker
(ADM) are timely and in some cases exceed expectations, with permanence
plans considered before the childs second looked after review. During the first
three quarters of 201617, eight children were placed for adoption and 11
adoption orders granted. An additional 11 children are provisionally matched
with prospective adopters, with only three children awaiting matches to be
identified and proactive work under way for them.
well-established team of experienced permanent social workers. The team
manager understands well the needs of children awaiting adoptive placements.
Managers maintain good oversight, with robust tracking of children awaiting
permanence.
groups of brothers and sisters who have complex needs. While this is a positive
outcome for the children concerned, it has affected the authoritys overall
performance in relation to the timeliness of adoption. Setting aside the impact
of this small cohort, most children have a decision for adoption, matching and
placement with prospective adopters within national timescales.
comprehensive. They robustly analyse childrens wishes and feelings and the
effect of adoption on children within the adoptive household and thoroughly
consider ethnicity and diversity. By working closely with neighbouring local
authorities, Bedford Borough has extended the availability of adopters for
brothers and sisters, those who have complex needs and older children.
assessment, matching and placing processes, stating that this prepared them to
become parents and understand and manage their childs behaviours on
placement.
success. As this has gained prominence, this option is actively promoted with
prospective adopters. Consequently, several children are benefiting from these
early permanence arrangements while they go through court processes.
carers and IROs to find suitable adoptive families for children through effective
family finding meetings and planning for placement. For some children,


provisional matches are made prior to the final court order, enabling children to
achieve early permanence.
finders regularly visit children and their foster carers. Assessments to inform
decisions as to whether to place brothers and sisters together for adoption are
comprehensive and thorough. These provide a comprehensive overview of
childrens needs to inform placement decisions. Children from minority ethnic
backgrounds are carefully matched with appropriate adopters. Children over the
age of five are considered for adoption and placed successfully. Children benefit
from assessed and planned contact with their birth families post adoption.
adoption plans and considers potential matches carefully. The panel and its
chair have been effective in challenging weaknesses in the quality of matching
reports and support plans. The ADM maintains regular contact with the panel
chair, who is managed by a neighbouring local authority, to ensure a focus on
any areas of concern or areas for improvement.
benefit from a wide range of services from within the local authoritys own
resources or the adoption support grant. In the last year, these have included
individual or family therapy, attendance at training conferences, targeted group
work and multi-systemic therapy. A quarterly newsletter ensures that families
are kept informed of the adoption support fund, support groups, events and
research. Birth parents access support individually or in group settings at a time
that suits their needs. The local authority assures itself of the effectiveness and
impact of this support through regular discussion with children and their
families.
life letters in the early days of their adoptive placement. However, the quality of
later life letters is too variable. Only some provide a clear and concise account
of the childs history in child-friendly language, avoiding social work jargon and
including sufficient information about birth and adoptive families.
(Recommendation)


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good
workers and a personal adviser in the team have manageable caseloads. They
work closely and effectively with the very large majority of young people to
support them on their journeys to independent adulthood. Social workers in the
team start working with young people from the age of 15, which enables
smooth transitional support for young people as they move on from being a
child looked after. It also helps to establish earlier trust and understanding
between young people and the workers who support them. Plans are in place
to increase capacity in the service through increasing the number and
proportion of personal advisers. This will reduce caseloads further and provide
more opportunities for building relationships with young people.
young people they work with well and meet with them regularly, proportionate
to young peoples needs. For some young people, this involves frequent visits
by their social worker or personal adviser, which young people find supportive.
Staff respond to contact from care leavers between planned visits. If contact is
lost, social workers are tenacious at trying to re-establish contact.
provide detailed information about young people and reflect their views well.
They record in detail the support that young people need to make good
progress towards becoming independent and self-sufficient adults. Plans include
clear targets and are regularly reviewed, which reduces drift and delay in
meeting the needs of young people. However, a small minority of plans are not
authorised in a timely way by managers, and not all are updated at a frequency
consistent with young peoples changing circumstances. (Recommendation)
accommodation and that they are well supported. Social workers are clear
about the risks that young people may face and put appropriate plans in place
to reduce the risk of harm. Young people develop good relationships with their
social workers, who also help them to understand the boundaries of acceptable
behaviour and to take responsibility for their own actions.
accommodation. The very large majority of young people live in suitable
accommodation, which meets their needs well. Bed and breakfast
accommodation is not used. Young people are aware that they can stay put in
their foster care arrangements beyond the age of 18, and a small but
increasing proportion are benefiting from this option. They are pleased that this
allows them to leave care at a time that is right for them.


people to help them to develop essential independent living skills. These include
being able to budget and to cook for themselves. Young people are confident
that support will be available for as long as they need it; there are examples
where this has extended beyond the age of 21 when needed.
children leaving care, helping them to develop the skills that they need to make
good progress towards becoming independent. Their cultural needs are
considered in planning, their health needs are prioritised and they are
supported to learn English.
care leavers, not all young people have received their recorded health histories.
Senior managers responded decisively when this shortfall became known during
the inspection, ensuring that pathways are clear and that all young people have
them. Despite this problem, the large majority were aware of their health
histories, because social workers had ensured that the health sections of
pathway plans were completed and shared with them.
who benefit from education, employment or training (EET) over the last two
years. The council has significantly improved its performance in this area, to
levels well above the last calculated national and statistical neighbour rates in
had supported them well to make good decisions about their futures. As a
result, they are in education, training or employment that meets their
immediate and longer-term goals. Twelve are in higher education. Despite this
positive progress, the local authority has not set aside apprenticeships within
the council specifically for care leavers.
helping them to take pride in themselves. Those who met inspectors were
pleased that their achievements were celebrated. This includes a well-attended
annual awards event which is supported by carers, social workers, senior
leaders, the elected mayor and councillors, which young people are positive
about. They also feel that it would be good to create case studies, which would
show that care leavers can be just as successful as other young people.
them, but they do not have them written down anywhere. Managers and social
workers have developed a children looked after and care leavers pledge,
following workshops which included care leavers. The resulting document
covers the entitlements well and provides helpful explanations, using ageappropriate language. However, the final draft is yet to be formally endorsed
and distributed, and, as a result, young people have nothing to assure them
that they are receiving all the support that they are entitled to.
(Recommendation)


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Senior leaders and the elected mayor set up an improvement board in 2014,
having recognised the need to take robust action in response to identified concerns
about the effectiveness of childrens services. This has brought additional scrutiny
and challenge, helping to ensure strategic oversight of performance and progress.
As a result, senior officers and political leaders have a good understanding of the
overall strengths and weaknesses of services to children and families in Bedford
Borough.
Significant work has been undertaken in the last two years to put in place a
comprehensive early help offer to families and to ensure a robust initial response
to concerns about children and their families through a MASH. A programme for
improvement has been pursued, but, despite progress being made, a number of
core services for children and families are not yet good enough.
The capacity of staff to respond to childrens needs is challenged by high caseloads
in some areas of service. Inconsistent frontline oversight and poor-quality
supervision for some social workers mean that progress in improving practice is
slow. Gaps in the recording of work undertaken, poor-quality plans for some
children and a lack of timeliness in response have led to some drift and delay in a
minority of childrens cases.
The local authority, together with its partners, is able to identify and improve
outcomes for children at serious risk of sexual exploitation. However, it has not yet
established a robust process to ensure that all children who go missing are spoken
to on their return and that information gathered is collated to better inform the
overall assessment of risk of individual children and associated risk across the
borough.
More needs to be done to ensure that the voice of the child is better recorded in
casework and taken into account in assessments of need and plans to achieve
better outcomes.
The local authority has been slow to engage children looked after and those
leaving care in the work of the corporate parenting panel. The panel has had
limited impact; not all children looked after are aware of the pledge to children in
care, and there are no apprenticeships available to care leavers within the local
authority. Adoption services are good, and adoption is considered, when
appropriate, for all children at the earliest opportunity. There are a range of good
support services available to all adopters.


Work with young people about to leave care and those who have already left care
is good. Young people feel well supported by leaving care staff, and many have
positive outcomes as a result.
Inspection findings
Together with the chief executive and elected mayor, they have a clear vision
for service improvement. They know what good services should look like and
how outcomes for children and families need to be improved. They know the
strengths and weaknesses of childrens services, having already identified
almost all of the deficits seen in this inspection. They are seeking to ensure
progress through a robust improvement board and have made good use of peer
reviews to provide external validation of practice as a measure of improvement.
However, significant challenges remain, and the local authority is not yet
providing good enough services for all children and families in Bedford Borough.
childrens services, the local authority has strengthened the frontline response
to children and families in need of services. It has established a robust MASH,
which ensures an effective response to the identification of risk to children. A
strong early help offer is now reaching substantially more families from a very
low base in 201415. When children come into care, outcomes for the vast
majority are positive, with plans for permanent solutions for them considered at
an early stage. Almost all children in need of alternative families are placed,
including with adopters, in a timely manner. For many children who remain in
the care of the local authority, services for them in preparation for leaving care
lead to better outcomes.
outcomes for all children in Bedford Borough. There are clear and established
links with the Health and Wellbeing Board (HWB), the clinical commissioning
group and the LSCB. Chaired by the elected mayor, the HWB is focused on
ensuring better outcomes for children and is influential in demonstrating where
to develop, maintain and invest in services to achieve the greatest impact. The
children and young peoples plan (CYPP) sets out the priorities for children and
young people and is aligned with the joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA).
Vulnerable children are a high priority, and there is a focus on early prevention
and intervention and in relation to child sexual exploitation.
well established, and regular meetings are in place. The chief executive meets
regularly with the LSCB chair, as does the DCS. Respective roles are clear and
understood.
progress against targets across a wide range of indicators. These are available
to a range of staff including at team level. This ensures that managers are


aware of underperformance, both internally and in relation to statistical
neighbours and national performance.
undertaken, focusing on all areas of childrens services on a rolling four-month
programme. The local authoritys audit tool is robust and is able to demonstrate
both compliance with service processes and practice quality. However, frontline
managers are not yet responding to audit findings quickly and fully enough,
contributing to further delay in ensuring remedial action.
identifying and escalating issues of concern and are beginning to make a
significant contribution to quality assurance processes as a result. Escalation
processes are in place, and there is evidence of use across all areas of practice.
However, responses are inconsistent and, in some cases, lead to further
escalation due to a lack of timely response.
childrens services. In particular, staff turnover has been significant in recent
years, at 38% in 201516, and 50% of current social workers are locums. This,
together with high caseloads in assessment and family support teams, has
placed significant strain on the ability of the service to ensure consistent quality
of practice.
circumstances with a workforce strategy designed to improve recruitment and
retention. This includes a career progression pathway for social work staff,
competitive salaries, a comprehensive training and development programme
and a newly qualified social worker training academy. As a result, there has
been a sizeable reduction in turnover, to 15.6% in the first six months of
leadership team, are now filled by permanent staff. The high ratio of locum
posts is in part a consequence of the authority increasing the overall social
work establishment.
caseloads and has committed substantial additional funding for a further 19
social work posts. Current high caseloads have limited social workers capacity
to ensure timeliness of recording and overall responsiveness. Work undertaken
is not always recorded and, in many cases, there is a considerable delay before
it is placed on the social care information system. This has limited the ability of
managers to oversee progress and to ensure that children and families are
receiving the right support. (Recommendation)
instances, social workers are unclear about the purpose of their interventions.
The voice of the child is not consistently well evidenced in case recording,
although there are some examples of good-quality direct work. Childrens plans


lack clarity in actions and timescales. In a minority of cases, this leads to drift
or delay, although almost all children eventually have a positive outcome. The
current structure exacerbates the number of different social workers that a
child will have and leads to pressure on family support teams, in particular,
contributing to compliance and quality of practice issues. (Recommendation)
(Cafcass) and the family court are effective. The court identified concerns
regarding weaknesses in the local authority presentation of cases, which have
resulted in a deterioration in the length of proceedings to 35 weeks for the year
to date. The local authority has sought to tackle this with the introduction of a
detailed court tracker, regular weekly meetings with heads of service to drive
planning and close monitoring by a newly appointed case progression worker.
Senior managers are responsive to the courts concerns, and Cafcass reports
more recent positive work in relation to revocations of placement orders.
supervision. Management oversight and case supervision are evident on the
majority of childrens case files. These vary in quality, with some good
examples of comprehensive case management but inconsistencies in respect of
ensuring reflection or clear actions to drive planning for children. The quality of
staff supervision is more variable, with little evidence of reflection or focus on
improvement. This means that senior managers messages about getting to
good are not having the impact intended and are not consistently being
reinforced. (Recommendation)
strengthen practice in respect of child sexual exploitation. Work has been
undertaken under the pan-Bedfordshire missing and child sexual exploitation
group to develop a local child sexual exploitation problem profile and child
sexual exploitation strategy. In 2015, the local authority commissioned a review
of its approach to tackling child sexual exploitation and more recently, the
external charity commissioned to undertake the review returned and provided a
positive report on progress. The local authority chief executive chairs a Bedford
Borough vulnerabilities subgroup, which ensures multi-agency ownership to
tackle child sexual exploitation in Bedford Borough.
training of taxi operators and drivers. Disruption work has been undertaken
with hotels, fast food outlets and licensed premises across Bedford Borough.
Information about the risks of sexual exploitation has been included in a
programme of input to local schools, which has focused on healthy relationships
and issues associated with domestic abuse.
children recognised as being at risk of sexual exploitation, the response to
children who go missing is not yet effective. The approach by police to define
many children as absent rather than missing means that the MASH has to


triage all notifications to determine risk. The local authority has not been able
to ensure that all those children who should have return home interviews have
had them and, when they have been completed, they are not consistently
recorded or uploaded to childrens electronic records. This means that not all
relevant information is available to inform the local authority and its partners
about the extent of all risks to children. (Recommendation)
weaknesses, including making a decision to re-commission the return home
interview provider, as well as making the appointment of a missing coordinator
in the MASH, but it is too soon to measure impact. The local authority senior
management team and the police, with the additional scrutiny of the LSCB
chair, have very recently agreed a range of further actions to strengthen
safeguarding for children who go missing.
commissioning but has not informed the current 20162020 children looked
after sufficiency commissioning strategy. The strategy lacks an evidential base
to support the stated priorities, and the local authority was not able to provide
an action plan for implementation. There is, however, a more robust internal
review and re-tendering process of currently commissioned services and a
willingness to end contracts when service delivery has not been sustained.
Membership is appropriate and includes foster carers. It has access to a range
of reports concerning services to children looked after, but links with the CiCC
are underdeveloped. No children sit on the panel, and representatives from the
council do not attend regularly. This limits the opportunities for the panel to
hear directly from children and does not help to promote engagement with
those children whom the local authority cares for. Evidence of impact of the
panel is limited. Insufficient corporate support has frustrated the panels efforts
to secure in-house apprenticeships for care leavers, despite the lead member
and DCS supporting this.
ensure that they receive the support that they need. However, not all children
are aware of the authoritys pledge to children looked after. This has recently
been refreshed but has not yet been disseminated. Care leavers who met
inspectors were unaware of the CiCC or the care leavers charter. The local
authority has taken some steps to engage children and young people, for
example in staff recruitment and training, but has been slow to ensure that all
children looked after have a voice and are involved in developing the service.
(Recommendation)
resolved at an informal level. Very few complaints require a formal
investigation, and there has been only one complaint that required a stage 3
independent investigation and panel adjudication in recent years. While an


annual report is provided, which includes actions arising from complaints and
lessons learned, there is no separate analysis of young peoples complaints.
This is a missed opportunity to focus on childrens issues.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good

Executive summary
Effective leadership by the independent chair has led to the development of a
strong partnership and a shared commitment to improvement. The Board
maintains a clear line of sight to frontline practice, helped by a proactive and
visible chair who engages directly with frontline staff.
The Boards system of assurance monitors and evaluates frontline practice
effectively. A comprehensive multi-agency dataset informs the business plan, but it
requires strengthening to include more robust analysis and commentary. Early help
performance information is well embedded and used well to monitor the
effectiveness of early help delivery across the partnership.
Frontline professionals have access to a range of single-agency and multi-agency
safeguarding training, which enhances their skills, knowledge and confidence. The
detailed approach to training evaluation and quality assurance evidences the
Boards continual efforts to improve course content and relevance.
There is an established multi-agency audit programme. Findings from audits are
disseminated effectively to subgroups to inform work plans. However, action plans
arising from multi-agency audits are not currently monitored, although work is in
progress to rectify this shortfall.
The LSCB has given priority to engaging children and young people more
effectively in its work, commissioning a voice of the child report to inform its
business plan and priorities. As a result, the Board has commissioned a new
theatre production (In the Net) focusing on online safety and cyber bullying.
The Board is rigorous in ensuring that lessons are identified and learned from
serious case reviews. Healthy debate is evident and learning reviews are used to
good effect when a case does not meet the serious case reviews criteria.
Practitioner briefings are produced following reviews, and the LSCB training
programme includes termly half-day briefings, which draw on learning from both
local and national serious case reviews.
The Board has given safeguarding children with disabilities a high priority in the
past 12 months, hosting a spotlight event on safeguarding children with disabilities
and providing challenge to the Childrens Services Improvement Board is resulting
in improved practice.


Recommendations
across the partnership, to inform impact evaluation.
the LSCB understands their effectiveness and impact on practice.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
Bedford Borough. The strong independent chair provides effective leadership
and a rigorous focus on safeguarding vulnerable children. This is a maturing
board with focus on challenge and impact assurance from partners.
local authority areas, by ensuring that the Board and subgroups share
resources across Bedfordshire in key areas of common concern. These include
child sexual exploitation, training and procedures. This has resulted in better
engagement and accountability across the partnership. There is a clear line of
sight from the strategic Board to frontline practice. Particular strengths are the
introduction of a frontline practitioners group and a proactive, visible chair who
engages directly with frontline staff to assure herself of practice and to fully
understand any barriers to improvement.
challenge to the Childrens Services Improvement Board, Community Safety
Partnership and Health and Wellbeing Board. Priorities align with other strategic
plans, and partners are clear that these drive plans in their own agencies. An
ambitious business plan contains clear progress measures, but is not yet
effective in consistently evidencing what difference is being made for children.
comprehensive dataset. There is evidence that this has led to improvements in
practice. For example, the decision made, in response to increased incidence of
self-harm presentations, to locate a CAMHS worker in the local accident and
emergency department is ensuring quicker access to childrens mental health
support. Analysis of performance information could better highlight areas of
weakness across the partnership, to ensure a focus on the critical areas for
development. (Recommendation)
evaluate the effectiveness of frontline practice. Assurance reporting continues
until the Board is satisfied with progress. Examples of where this has led to
improvements include work on the threshold document, to improve
understanding and the quality of referrals to the MASH, and challenge to the
Childrens Services Improvement Board, resulting in work to strengthen
capacity and the quality of work in the children with disabilities team.


greater consistency of learning and understanding across the partnership. A
wide range of training opportunities are on offer, including e-learning, which is
well embedded with increasing uptake and completion over the past year and
high satisfaction ratings from partners. The training offer clearly links to the
Boards priorities, reflecting themes from serious case reviews and audit
activity. Frontline professionals have access to a range of single-agency and
multi-agency safeguarding training. The Board has identified the need to
develop a better understanding of training needs across the partnership, to
avoid duplication and make best use of resources. A survey of partners to find
out unmet need and what staff are accessing has been completed, and analysis
of this is under way to inform the 201718 work plan.
takes the form of a three-stage process: feedback on the day, at day three and
six months post-training. Direct interviews with staff and managers held after
six months show positive and sustained impact on trainees skills, knowledge
and confidence. A clear system of quality assurance of the training provided is
in place, which is reviewed regularly to inform the training plan and to improve
content.
procedures and practice group, chaired by the assistant director (chief social
worker) in Bedford Borough, to ensure that there are effective procedures in
place. Gap analysis has informed its work plan, and the ambition is to have one
set of pan-Bedfordshire procedures.
learning and issues arising from other subgroups. All key partners contribute to
audit, despite capacity issues. To ease the burden on partners who service all
three LSCBs in Bedfordshire, there is some coordination of audit and shared
learning. Single-agency audits complement the programme of multi-agency
audits and link to performance information and findings from learning and
serious case reviews. Findings from audits feed into the executive group of the
Board that identifies themes and ensures that learning is disseminated to the
other subgroups to inform their work plans. Action plans arising from multiagency audits are not currently monitored. The Board recognises this
weakness, and new monitoring arrangements with the executive group are
being put in place. (Recommendation)
learning. Individual agencies are responsible for ensuring that their frontline
staff are up to date with key LSCB messages and know how to access policies,
guidance and training. The Board satisfies itself that this is happening through
the frontline practitioners group, asking the Have you heard? question.
Inspectors found that social workers were aware of these important messages
and know how to access policies and procedures through the LSCB.


events ensures dynamic discussions and rigorous overview of individual
agencies self-assessments, informing the multi-agency action plan monitored
by the Board.
past 12 months. Actions taken to respond to concerns about practice include a
thematic review, practitioner briefings and training, and a recent spotlight event
on safeguarding children with disabilities. The Board receives ongoing
assurance reports on the work of the children with disabilities team and
triangulates information from other sources, for example the chair of the Board
walking the floor and speaking directly to social workers, to maintain challenge
to improving the quality of services. This, coupled by challenge to the Children's
Services Improvement Board, has resulted in improved capacity, and timeliness
and quality of assessments in the children with disabilities team.
has recently secured funding to commission a consultation with children and
young people. This work provides clear feedback about childrens and young
peoples views about child sexual exploitation and their personal safety, which
the Board is using to inform the development of the business plan. There is
evidence that the activity of the Board in awareness raising of safeguarding
issues is having a positive effect on young people feeling safe and knowing
where to go to ask for help. The Board has established an ongoing relationship
with a social enterprise to support the influence of children and young people
on its business. It is planning a participation strategy to strengthen this further.
strategic responses well. A child sexual exploitation problem profile has been
used to identify a specific area in Bedford Borough and to inform disruption
strategies, targeting hotels, fast food outlets, licensed premises and private
companies in that area. These disruption activities, coupled with awareness
raising and education, have resulted in an increase in contact from a wide
range of sources in that area. There has been slower progress in relation to
child sexual exploitation training, although an ambitious training programme
commissioned for the next two years is about to commence.
of children going missing from home or care, return home interviews with
children and numbers of children missing from education. However, qualitative
information is limited. The Board has taken a particular interest in children who
are home educated and the processes around them to keep them safe. There is
a high level of ongoing scrutiny and challenge by the LSCB in relation to
missing children. The chair is proactive in holding the police and others to
account in relation to their response to missing children. However, despite
monitoring evidence of progress, return interview rates remain low.


over the past 12 months, including the development of leaflets and online
training. In cases they sampled, inspectors found that agencies responses to
concerns regarding female genital mutilation are appropriate. New procedures
for forced marriage and honour-based abuse are in place, but there is limited
understanding of the scale of these issues in Bedford Borough. The Board has
recognised this and is reviewing its dataset to include information on these
issues, in order to target awareness raising.
areas in Bedfordshire. Referrals to the serious incident review group are timely,
and outcomes and learning from serious case or learning reviews are shared
across both groups. The annual report provides an overview and includes
Bedford Borough specific information, but the analysis is underdeveloped, and
information on the previous five years data is limited. There is some analysis of
modifiable factors, but this would be strengthened by ensuring that patterns
and trends are identified locally. Work carried out by the group in response to
concerns regarding safe sleeping has led to increased awareness and consistent
advice being given across partners.
Practitioner briefings are produced following reviews; two published in the last
further support and training opportunities. The LSCB training programme
includes termly half-day briefings, which draw on learning from both local and
national serious case reviews. Social workers spoken to are aware of the key
messages from serious case reviews and thematic reviews. Inspectors saw how
this learning had influenced the social work approach to assessment and case
planning.
before sign-off and are reviewed at six and 12 months. Governance of these
plans sits with the executive group of the Board to ensure robust review, and, if
the group is not satisfied with progress, escalation of challenge is swift.
and challenges over the reporting period. Evidence of challenge and impact as
a result of this is detailed. For example, it includes improved threshold
understanding and quality of referrals to the MASH, and partners
understanding and joining up of services concerning domestic abuse.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Donna Marriott, HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Peter McEntee, HMI
Team inspectors: Anji Parker, HMI, Margaret Burke, HMI, Mandy Nightingale, HMI,
Mark Shackleton, HMI, Dawn Godfrey, HMI
Supernumerary inspector: Rachel Griffiths
Senior analytical officer: Stewart Hartshorne
Quality assurance manager: John Mitchell, SHMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


