London Borough of Bexley
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 March 2014  2 April 2014
Report published: 23 May 2014
The overall judgement is requires improvement.
There are no widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being
harmed or at risk of harm. The welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and
promoted. However, the authority is not yet delivering good protection and help
and/or care for children, young people and families.

Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is
inadequate
The LSCB is not demonstrating that it has effective arrangements in place and the
required skills to discharge its statutory duties.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
Section 1: The local authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB



Section 1: The local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority requires improvement and is not yet good because

Services for safeguarding children and young people in Bexley have improved
since they were judged to be inadequate in 2012. During this inspection no
widespread or serious failures were identified by inspectors that currently left
children being harmed or at risk of harm. However, progress has been very
slow and the quality of services is still too variable.


Until the middle of 2013 children were still not being properly helped and
safeguarded. This was mainly because many social workers and managers
had left Bexley and it has proven difficult to recruit high quality staff to
replace them.


The local authority and its partners have been working hard to improve
services, and progress began to be made from the middle of 2013, but this
progress needs to be maintained. The local authority has been able to recruit
many more permanent social workers and managers, along with many agency
workers who have worked in Bexley for a long time and help to improve the
lives of children and young people.


Children and young people, their parents and carers and people who work for
other organisations that help children told inspectors that they did not get a
good service from Bexley in 2012 and much of 2013. However, they all said
that this had begun to improve towards the end of 2013 and has continued to
get better this year.


Inspectors found that there are a lot of services in Bexley that help children
and their families when they are in need, but some are not yet working well
together. Bexley is bringing these early help services together, but this is at a
very early stage.


When children need help, the local authority and partner agencies have to
decide if they should get involved. Bexley set up a new triage system in June
it was last year, but the quality of decision-making by managers needs to
improve. Referrals to social workers by partner agencies do not always have
good information as other agencies do not always understand the thresholds
to receive social work help.


Social workers talk to other partner agencies and assess what children and
their families need to help them. Inspectors found that the quality of
assessments by social workers and the plans that they make with other
partner organisations need to be better.



Most of the time social workers and partners work together well to identify
and agree how best to protect children and young people who are at risk from
adults, although sometimes discussions do not involve all the people who
have information. Sometimes the plans to protect children are not clear
enough or help is not provided where abuse is not found but families still need
support.


Most children and young people who may be at risk of harm are well
protected in Bexley, but inspectors still came across a few cases where the
arrangements to protect children were not good. Some plans to protect
children are not clear enough or help is not provided when families need
support.


Meetings to discuss how best to protect children, called child protection
conferences, are held regularly and all the right people attend, but children
who could attend to give their views are seldom invited, so plans are not as
good as they could be. Also the views of young people and their carers are
not always sought or used to help Bexley to improve its services.


Children who cannot live with their families are looked after by Bexley. For
many children, the local authority takes too long to make permanent plans for
them. Some looked after children cannot return to their families and are able
to be adopted. Bexley has been too slow in finding adoptive parents for many
of these children.


Many children and young people who are looked after by Bexley have had
several changes of social worker, but now most children and young people
who met with inspectors said that they like and trust their current social
worker.


When children leave the care of Bexley, plans for helping them to become
independent or to find employment or training are not good enough. Although
some care leavers have apprenticeships outside of the council, few get
apprenticeships with the local authority.


The number of children and young people who are known to be privately
fostered is low. Recently Bexley has tried to make people aware that they
need to inform the authority when a child is being privately fostered, but this
has not resulted in many notifications.


Recording of their work by social workers and managers is not always up to
date or clear. A new electronic recording system has been introduced recently.
Information is still being uploaded to the new system, but while it is being
established it is not possible to be sure that the information on it is accurate.


Managers in childrens social care services do not routinely audit the work
done by social workers to understand and improve its quality.


The local authority has the following strengths

Children and young people are regularly being visited by their social worker.
They are seen alone where appropriate so that they can say what they want
to say and they are beginning to form better relationships with their worker.


Many looked after children now receive good direct work from their social
workers and feel happy and stable where they are living, either with foster
carers or in residential homes.


Care leavers have good access to accommodation, support for their physical
and emotional health and information about what they can receive, including
financial support. Most of them who spoke to inspectors said that they are
supported by and get on well with their personal advisors, but not so well with
their social workers.


Foster carers and adopters are well supported, prepared and trained to care
for the children and young people who are placed with them.


Contact between looked after children and people who matter to them is
sensitively and carefully arranged.


The local authority is working well with the courts and partners to reduce the
time it takes for courts to be able to make decisions about children and their
families.


Multi-agency meetings to discuss adults who may pose a risk to children, and
children who may be at risk from issues such as domestic violence, going
missing or child sexual exploitation are held regularly. These discussions and
the plans that are made help to protect those children and their families.


Leaders in Bexley are committed to improving the lives of children in the area
and the services that are provided to them. Substantial additional money has
been given to childrens social care services by the local authority to improve
its work.


Leaders and staff in Bexley are committed to their role as corporate parents
for looked after children and try to meet and hear the views of children and
young people to make sure that the service they provide improves their lives.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

The inspection did not find any areas for priority and immediate action.

Areas for improvement

Ensure that the thresholds for access to childrens social care services are
clear, understood and consistently applied by all relevant agencies.


Ensure that all children who meet the threshold for a single assessment by
childrens social care receive a timely assessment that is of good quality.


Ensure that all case files for children and young people have an up to date
chronology that reflects significant events in their history, and that this is used
to inform planning and risk assessment.


Work with the police to ensure that police notifications are timely and are
robustly risk assessed.


Ensure that all strategy discussions are informed by the involvement of all
relevant professionals, have a clear rationale for decisions and are well
recorded, with clear timescales for action.


Ensure that child protection conference minutes and the outline child
protection plans are distributed promptly to conference members and are
used to measure progress against the plan.


Ensure that young people have an opportunity to attend their child protection
conference where it is appropriate for them to do so and that an independent
advocate is available if they require one.


Ensure that the needs of all relevant children in a family are considered in
child protection conferences and core groups.


Systematically collate learning from complaints and representations from
children and young people, parents and carers and service users to inform
and improve service delivery and development.


Ensure that assessments and plans are consistently of a good or better
quality, with a clear focus on the needs, risks and strengths of children and
their families, and the expected outcomes.


Ensure that services for children on the edge of care are co-ordinated and
delivered effectively, and evaluate their impact on preventing some children
from coming into care.


Evaluate the impact of family group conferences in preventing or reducing the
need for childrens social care intervention with children and families.


Ensure that all looked after children and young people know the name and
contact details of their Independent Reviewing Officer and what their role is,


and have an opportunity to form a consistent and stable relationship with
them.

Ensure that Independent Reviewing Officers understand the wishes and
feelings of children and young people and provide robust challenge to all
agencies involved in their care to ensure that childrens needs are met.


Ensure that looked after children have access to timely treatment from the
Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services.


Ensure that all looked after children are supported to make good or better
progress in each key stage of their education.


Ensure that all looked after children are provided with regular and timely
dental checks, and immunisations.


Ensure that children and young people are able to form trusting and
continuous relationships with their social workers through a stable staff group,
and avoid children experiencing too many changes of worker.


Maintain an effective adoption tracker, and challenge staff where timescales
are not met and plans are not implemented.


Fully implement the adoption action plan and provide comprehensive reports
of progress or barriers for leaders and senior officers.


Maintain and enhance training for childrens social care workers alongside
adoption workers to reinforce the importance of a joined up approach to
permanency planning.


Provide a full range of options for care leavers to develop and extend their
skills to secure employment, education and training, including better support
for young people to access apprenticeships, work placements and vocational
training.


Extend the focus of the virtual school to ensure that young people over 16
years old get the best opportunities to develop and extend their education and
employment options to improve their life chances.


Improve the quality and effectiveness of pathway plans to support care
leavers to develop their independence and transition to adulthood.


Ensure that the electronic case and performance management systems in
childrens services are robustly implemented and that all staff ensure that their
records are up to date and are located within one electronic system.


Ensure that the social care workforce is sufficiently stable, experienced and
skilled to deliver high quality services to children and their families.


Ensure that the human resources support for specialist childrens services is
focused on recruiting and retaining good quality social workers and managers
and provides support for operational managers to develop and retain staff.


Improve the consistency and quality of management oversight, direction and
supervision of front line staff in all social work teams.



Ensure that a robust performance management and quality assurance
framework is implemented, including routine auditing of the quality of practice
and management.


Ensure that all childrens services data are accurate and systems are
established to check the accuracy of the new electronic database and case
recording system while it is being developed and embedded.


Implement a commissioning sufficiency strategy for looked after children to
ensure that future plans are informed by robust analysis of current and
projected needs.


Ensure that the views and experiences of children, young people and their
carers are actively sought and are used to inform service improvements.


Ensure that childrens social care services is an effective learning organisation
that considers and responds to learning, research and feedback about the
quality of provision.


Ensure that the combined roles of Director of Childrens and Adults Services
can be effectively delivered and that a robust test of assurance is undertaken
in accordance with statutory guidance.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Pietro Battista
Team inspectors: Jansy Kelly, Shirley Bailey, Linda Steele, Stephanie Murray,
Christine Williams, Pamela Blackman, Wendy Ratcliff and Fiona Parker.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 54,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Bexley. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 18.7% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 13.8% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 11% (the national average is 15.1%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 26% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Black/Black British and Asian/Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 15.9% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 11.4% (the national average is 13.6%).
Child protection in this area
 At 1 March 2014, 1,457 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from 1,827 at
 At 1 March 2014, 247 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 218 at 31 March 2013.
 At 1 March 2014, three children lived in privately arranged fostering placements.
This is a reduction from 13 at 31 March 2013.

Children looked after in this area
 At 1 March 2014, 260 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 48 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 256 (47 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2013. Of this number:


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


authority area
 A small number live in residential special schools3, all of whom live
out of the authority area
area
 A small number are placed with parents, none of whom live out of the
authority area.
 In the last 12 months:
 There have been 21 adoptions
subsequently returned to be looked after
 Eight children and young people have ceased to be looked after and
moved on to independent living
 No children and young people have ceased to be looked after and are
now living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority does not operate any childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of Bexleys safeguarding arrangements was in July 2012.
The local authority was judged to be inadequate.
 The previous inspection of Bexleys services for looked after children was in July

Other information about this area
 The Director of Education and Social Care, who is responsible for Adult Social
Care and is the Director of Childrens Services, has been in post since April 2011.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since June 2013.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days per year.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
require improvement

During this inspection no widespread or serious failures were identified by
inspectors that left children being harmed or at risk of harm. However, the
pace of change in improving the provision of help and protection to children in
Bexley has been too slow. Many of the inadequacies that were identified in
the Safeguarding and Looked After Children inspection of July 2012 have not
been addressed quickly enough. The local authority acknowledges that prior
to June 2013 the impact of improvement actions on frontline practice was not
sufficient. Improvements to practice have become more visible, particularly in
the last three months, but these have yet to be sustained.


When children are first identified as needing help in Bexley, professionals
know who to go to for advice about how to support families to prevent
concerns escalating. A wide range of innovative early help services has been
established. These services are being evaluated individually using feedback
from parents, practitioners and partners in order to measure impact. These
projects are highly valued by parents, children and professionals. For example
the Sisters Project, a programme for black women who were not born in
England, provides education, companionship, and advice about domestic
abuse, parenting and childrens health.


Early help services in Bexley are undergoing significant transition. A new
Thriving Families service combines services to children and adults with
schools, health, police and adults services to provide joined up support to
families with a range of needs up to the childrens social care threshold. One
prototype team is in place, with a clear plan to gradually expand and develop
the service. The local authority and partner agencies recognise the need to
strengthen the multi-agency early help provision. An early help strategy has
been implemented to guide the development of services.


Changes in the coordination and provision of targeted early help services are
welcomed by professionals from partner agencies, as currently some early
help services are difficult to access due to stringent thresholds and significant
demand on their services. This leads to delays in some families receiving the
help that they need, with professionals making referrals to a range of services
in the hope that one will offer help.


Significant numbers of staff across partner agencies have been trained to
undertake common assessments, but the number of assessments remains too
low and the reason for this is not understood by partners. Those families who
are being supported through the common assessment framework (CAF)
receive helpful intervention at the right level and parents engage well in
assessments and team around the family meetings. Where concerns increase
or are not resolved at the CAF level, these are appropriately stepped up and
referred to childrens services in most cases.



Except in urgent circumstances, partners complete an interagency referral
form which enables clarity of information sharing and requires issues of
consent to be addressed. Decisions about contacts and referrals are made
within the local authority childrens services triage team by qualified and
experienced workers.


The threshold for referral to childrens social care services is not consistently
applied by partner agencies. Approximately two thirds of all contacts or
requests for services to childrens social care do not progress to a referral, and
this increases work pressures within the triage team. Of 19 contacts seen in
the triage team where there was no immediate risk of harm, a third that
should have progressed to assessment were closed inappropriately, resulting
in children not receiving help at the right level or as quickly as they should.


Capacity issues within the police have resulted in delays of up to a week, and
sometimes longer, in referring children who live in households where there
has been a report of domestic abuse. This has the potential to leave children
at risk of harm.


Prompt, effective action is taken in almost all cases when referrals are
received that meet the threshold for a child protection enquiry. Of 71 child
protection cases seen by inspectors, two were identified where children were
left in situations of potential significant harm. In these cases the local
authority took prompt action to protect the children.


Inspectors saw no examples of children and families being subjected to child
protection investigations unnecessarily. Child protection investigations are
undertaken by suitably qualified social workers following information sharing
at a strategy discussion. The majority of strategy discussions are between
police and childrens social care and do not routinely involve discussions with
other key agencies, particularly health services. Records of strategy
discussions and decisions vary too much in quality. Too many lack detailed
planning and in some cases the rationale for single agency investigation was
not clear.


The local authority has adopted a single assessment framework, with
timescales proportionate to the complexity of assessment required. However,
managers do not consistently record at the beginning of the assessment how
long assessments should take and it is not clear if the time taken is
determined by the needs of the children. As a result it is not possible for
managers to identify whether there is undue delay in undertaking
assessments or meeting the needs of children and young people.


The majority of assessments demonstrate appropriate analysis of risk and
protective factors based on information available and careful observation of
children with their families. Assessments take account of the ethnicity of
children and their families, with race, culture and language appropriately
considered in the large majority of cases.


Chronologies are frequently not completed by social workers until after
assessments are concluded. They are not routinely updated when the case is


passed on to the locality teams except when court proceedings are
considered. Most assessments contain some analysis of family history and
inspectors saw some very good examples of analysis of history leading to
effective action. However, the relevance of past behaviour of children and
families is not consistently considered to inform contingency planning.

Many children have experienced frequent changes of worker, often at short
notice. This has impacted negatively on the quality of casework and
relationships between children, families and staff. Changes in worker are
exacerbated by electronic case records often not being complete or up to
date, making it difficult for new workers to fully understand what has
happened in the case, and for managers to provide effective oversight.


Despite changes of social worker, in almost all cases social workers now
undertake direct work with children and their families; they form positive
relationships with children that help them to express their wishes and feelings.
Children are routinely seen and in the majority of visits are seen alone if
appropriate, unless parents of children not subject to child protection
enquiries expressly refuse consent. Social workers observe pre-verbal children
interacting with their families and use this well to assess attachments and
general well-being of children.


Risk to children who have a disability is appropriately identified and assessed.
Children who have a disability or communication difficulties are sensitively
helped by social workers to say what they are happy about and what troubles
them. However limited specialist direct work resources within the children with
disabilities team leads to social workers relying on their own creativity to
develop meaningful ways of communication with children. Children with
disabilities who are subject to child protection plans are supported and
protected well by the children with disabilities service.


Most case recording contains evidence of managerial decision-making. It is
frequently brief and seldom explains the reasons for decisions that are made.
The quality of decision making is inconsistent and in some cases seen by
inspectors it was not appropriate or was not made at an appropriate level of
seniority. For example, a decision was made to close a case by a team
manager when parents had refused to allow children subject to a child
protection investigation to be interviewed; this meant that the children were
potentially at risk and that more senior managers had no opportunity to
oversee the decision.


Children in need are being identified appropriately. Half of the child in need
plans seen by inspectors were of good quality. Family history was analysed,
the views of the children and carers were well-articulated and the needs and
risks identified, leading to purposeful and effective action which reduced risk.
However, in the other cases, although social workers could articulate well the
childrens needs and the actions required to achieve the desired outcomes,
this was not always reflected in written plans, which were unspecific and often
without timescales. In a very small minority of child in need cases seen the
quality of social work support was poor, with long gaps between visits and an


overall lack of purpose, leading to slow progress against the plan or an
increase in concerns.

Managers recognise that the quality of assessments and plans needs to
improve and the local authority has taken steps to address this through the
provision of risk analysis training. Plans to improve this further through
managers undertaking regular case audit and routinely providing reflective
supervision have still to be put into practice.


Almost all children at immediate risk are protected through the use of
emergency powers. However, inspectors identified two cases where childrens
services should have used emergency powers during child protection inquiries
and instead the police used their powers of protection the following day as
part of the same investigation.


When decisions are made that a child protection conference is required
following an investigation, conferences are convened within appropriate
timescales. However, the amount of notice given to relevant agencies and
parents is often short, which negatively impacts on the quality of information
shared. Social work reports to conferences are of an adequate or better
quality and provide sufficient information for partners to make appropriate
judgements based on an analysis of risk. Some contain detailed chronologies
and make reference to relevant research. Conference chairs identified the use
of research in reports as unhelpful to parents as it was frequently written in
language parents find difficult to understand. The quality of reports from
partner agencies is too variable and a lack of a standard format for reports
exacerbates this.


Conferences are well chaired and structured, and are attended by most
statutory agencies. Outline child protection plans formulated at conferences
are mostly of adequate or better quality, and are improving. Recent plans
seen by inspectors demonstrated sound multi-agency analysis of risk
incorporating specific and measurable actions and timescales, including
contingency planning.


Progress of plans is considered thoroughly at review child protection
conferences, with escalation to pre-proceedings agreements under the Public
Law Outline or court proceedings when plans have not reduced risk or
concerns are increasing.


Bexley compares well to similar local authorities and the national average for
the proportion of plans coming to an end within two years; 72% of children
are subject to a plan for no more than a year. Numbers of repeat plans are
low, indicating that the reduction of risk to children is sustained over time.
However, in six out of 14 cases seen by inspectors where a recent change of
plan was now working well, or the case was being appropriately escalated due
to lack of progress, the action should have been taken sooner.


Children and young people who are old enough to attend are not routinely
invited to conferences and core groups, which take place during school hours.
As a result their views are not independently represented or in their own


words. An independent audit recently commissioned by the Local
Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) identified the inclusion of a dedicated
section of the meeting to discuss the wishes and feelings of children as an
area for development. It also found that in families where there is more than
one child, the needs of individual children are not always discussed in detail.
These issues were still evident in this inspection.

There are frequent delays in conference minutes and outline child protection
plans being made available to agencies and parents. This causes difficulties in
ensuring that agencies and parents are clear about what is expected of them
and that progress against the plan remains the focus of work with the family.


When children are subject to a child protection plan they are mostly visited
within agreed timescales. It is not always recorded by social workers when
children are seen alone and which visits are unannounced. Explicit discussion
with children about progress of plans and whether their lives are improving is
too variable. The majority of recording shows general conversation with
children about their day to day activities and interests. However, some very
good examples were seen of children clearly expressing what life is like for
them.


Effective multi-agency working across police, youth engagement services and
health services ensures that individual cases of children missing from home
are dealt with promptly, with suitable risk assessments and welfare follow up.
The youth engagement service has responded to 97 missing episodes in the
last year. Outcomes for the majority of these incidents have been positive.
The children missing from education panel proactively follows up each
individual child that has been reported missing from education. The education
inclusion service is establishing reporting arrangements for all children missing
from education in line with new statutory guidance.


The local authoritys child sexual exploitation action plan is comprehensive. It
is in line with arrangements across London and is informed by relevant
research. However, it is still in draft form and partners have been slow to put
it into practice. There is some good local intelligence based on known activity
but current trend data and analysis are underdeveloped. Some effective work
with individual children is being undertaken under current arrangements,
using appropriate screening tools to identify and respond to presenting risk.


Allegations that are made against professionals who work with children are
referred to the Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO), who makes prompt
and appropriate decisions to hold multi-agency strategy meetings. Meetings
are well attended and are effective. However, referrals to the LADO have
almost doubled in the last year, which has stretched the capacity of the
service. A comprehensive action plan was drawn up by the local authority in
October 2013, which assists the LADO to fulfil his functions more effectively,
and additional staffing is now in place. However, the quality assurance
function of the LADO remains underdeveloped.


Victims of domestic abuse in Bexley are given effective help by Womens Aid
and the Freedom Programme. Parents spoken to by inspectors said that this


support enabled them to gain greater insight into how domestic abuse has
affected their children and to make safe decisions for their children and
themselves. The crisis intervention team provides swift and intensive support
to families involved in domestic abuse, parental substance misuse and mental
ill health. It works well with partner agencies to promote the safety of victims,
families and their children.

The Out of Hours Service is sufficient to meet demand. The service responds
well to requests for urgent intervention, such as providing foster placements
for young people aged over 16 who are homeless, or supporting carers to
manage crises within their foster families to avoid placement break down.
Links with police out of hours are strong, with joint decision making and a
swift response to immediate risk within families.


Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference (MARAC) arrangements are well
established. Attendance by most agencies including adults services is good.
Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA) follow statutory
guidelines, using London thresholds, which are higher than the rest of the
country. MAPPA meetings are robustly chaired and are well attended by
appropriate agencies.


Only three children are currently known to be living in private fostering
arrangements. This is a significant decrease, from 13 in 2013. These children
are being appropriately monitored and supported by childrens services. The
local authority has recently taken steps to raise the profile of private fostering
arrangements within the area, with information being shared with partners
such as schools through leaflets and a regular safeguarding newsletter. This
has not yet resulted in an increase in notifications.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence require improvement

A range of services is available to support children and young people on the
edge of care. This includes early intervention support, mediation, the Bexley
Youth Advice service and family support workers. These services are planned
to come under the umbrella of the Thriving Families Programme. The local
authority recognises the challenge and the need for a co-ordinated approach
to ensure that early help services are delivered effectively in order to prevent
some children from coming into care.


When social workers are concerned about the welfare of children, and they
are unable to remain in the care of their family, decisions regarding their
future care needs are appropriately secured through the legal system. In the
majority of cases legal planning meetings are held and make use of historical
information to inform decision making. Good use is made of the Public Law
Outline (PLO). This means that children and families are clear about what
changes are needed, what timescales are involved, and possible
consequences should changes not be made. However, in a minority of cases,
the need to look after children with parental consent or take legal intervention
had not been considered early enough, leaving children in unsuitable
situations for too long.


Family group conferences (FGC) are well established and are used effectively
to explore extended family involvement for children subject to the PLO.
Children are spoken to alone by FGC coordinators and are encouraged to
attend meetings to ensure that their views and wishes are heard. However,
the local authority has not undertaken a formal evaluation of the effectiveness
of FGCs since 2011/12, so their impact on outcomes for children is not fully
known.


A number of panels have been established to track and monitor looked after
childrens plans and placements. The childrens social care and legal panel
now provides a more robust tracking system of care proceedings and ensures
that the individual needs of children and young people are met, including the
use of concurrent and parallel planning. The looked after childrens panel
reviews the cases of all newly looked after children to ensure management
oversight of their placements. However, the majority of children come into
care in an emergency situation and are retrospectively presented to the panel.
This means that the opportunity to match children to foster carers is limited
and as a result some children experience unnecessary placement moves.


The Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and the
local judiciary report an improvement in the quality of assessments and court
reports by social workers. Clear plans are in place to reduce timescales for
care proceedings and as a result these have reduced to 37 weeks, although
this remains significantly higher than the national target of 26 weeks. For
some children this means there is a delay in securing their permanency.
Bexley has undertaken a 12 month PLO pilot project with a neighbouring
borough. This has proven to be instrumental in reducing timescales and


improving the quality and timeliness of reports to the court. During the
inspection the local authority legal advisors reported that the pilot project has
recently reduced the length of care proceedings to 23 weeks for those cases
within the pilot.

In the majority of cases when children and young people are ready to return
home from care, the decision to do so is based on an assessment which
appropriately considers and addresses risk. However, inspectors saw a few
cases where insufficient work and assessment had been completed and
services were not sufficiently in place to support the rehabilitation plan. In one
case this resulted in a young person returning to care after a short period of
time.


Children and young people have regular contact with their family and other
relatives wherever possible. Suitable contact is also arranged with other
people who are important to them. Children and young people's safety is fully
considered when contact arrangements are made.


Too many looked after children in Bexley have experienced delays in securing
timely permanency planning arrangements. Although there has been progress
in permanency planning for children, much of this has been since January
there is still work to do in order to ensure that progress is embedded and
sustained.


The majority of children and young people looked after are placed within 20
miles of their family home and in over half of these cases this is within the
Bexley borough. Cases seen by inspectors included some young people who
lived out of the area, and who were visited by a regulatory inspector. The
young people confirmed that their placement and care plans are in place.
They receive visits and support from social workers and are well supported in
their health and educational needs. While these young people now feel well
supported, they reported that frequent changes of social worker had not
provided them with consistency of support.


Many children and young people have experienced too many changes of social
worker. Some children told inspectors they were unhappy about the frequent
change of social workers: Just another adult in my life and They did not care
about me, they just came and went. The impact of the frequency of changes
means that children have to re-tell their story and form new relationships of
trust with their social workers. Furthermore, partner agencies report that the
high turnover of staff has negatively impacted on planning for children and
young people. For example, professionals have not known who the new social
worker is and some health assessments have been delayed because parental
consent was not sought in a timely manner by the social worker.


Social workers visit children and young people regularly and see them alone,
in line with statutory requirements. Despite the number of changes in worker,
social workers spoken to during the inspection know their children well, are
proactive in representing the views of children and young people and take
time to build strong relationships with them.



The majority of looked after children have a care plan which ensures that they
are cared for appropriately. However, the quality of written plans requires
improvement. Plans are mostly satisfactory and appropriately address health
and educational needs. In most cases children are placed with their brothers
and sisters when it is in all of their best interests to be together.


In the majority of cases Independent Reviewing Officers (IROs) meet children
and young people before their review. However, a few young people told
inspectors that they did not know who their IRO was or what their role was.
For some young people this means they do not have a meaningful relationship
with their IRO; this relationship is crucial to ensure that their needs and rights
are independently represented. In most cases seen by inspectors, reviews of
care plans were adequate, with permanence appropriately discussed. Reviews
are well attended by all professionals and childrens views are represented.
However, some care plans lacked vigorous challenge to ensure that the plan is
effectively implemented. Carers report that they are involved in meetings and
that their views are taken into account. The distribution of some review
minutes has been significantly delayed and this negatively impacts on the
ability of people who were not at the meeting to know in a timely way what
has been agreed and planned.


When looked after children go missing an established triage system is used to
determine the action to be taken including whether a child protection enquiry
is necessary. Robust systems are in place to track and identify individual
looked after children who go missing and those who are at risk of sexual
exploitation. These children are regularly considered at multi-agency meetings
and suitable contingency plans are agreed. Sensitive interviews are
undertaken with looked after children when they return to their placements.


Looked after children are offered good services to promote their physical and
emotional health and wellbeing. The local authority and health professionals
have recently implemented weekly tracking of health assessments. This has
resulted in 97% of children receiving their health assessments. However,
dental checks and immunisation rates at 71% and 77% respectively are below
statistical neighbour and national rates. The local authority is working with
health partners to improve this.


Dedicated specialist Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS)
give high priority to assessing the needs of looked after children. CAMHS
professionals provide good, timely assessments and support staff and carers.
However, the provision of treatment is not as timely. A few looked after
children have been waiting a substantial amount of time for psychotherapy.
The chair of the Corporate Parenting Board appropriately challenged this and
as a result a more creative, flexible approach is being considered as to how
services can be delivered to ensure looked after children are not waiting for
treatment. However, this is not yet in place. The CAMHS team jointly delivers
the KEEP programme (Keeping Foster and Kinship Carers Supported), which
enhances the skills of foster carers in responding to childrens behavioural and
emotional difficulties. Support services for young people for their drug and
alcohol abuse are provided by CAMHS.



Children who are looked after make good progress in their education in some
key areas. However, 27% of young people currently in Key Stages 3 and 4 are
not making expected progress. The virtual school provides effective challenge
to schools to ensure that appropriate action is taken to improve individual
outcomes. All looked after children attend schools which are judged good or
better by Ofsted.


In 2013, 20% of looked after children achieved five GCSEs, including English
and mathematics. This is an increase from previous years and better than the
national rate of 16%. The virtual school accurately identified an attainment
gap for white British boys at Key Stage 4 and is addressing this. Personal
education plans are used effectively to support the educational and academic
progress of young people. The virtual school monitors the quality of plans to
ensure that they are used effectively to help young people progress
successfully. The pupil premium is used effectively to support looked after
children.


Children in care are provided with alternative education provision
throughPathways Short Stay School, New Horizons Federation. New Horizons
works effectively with local schools to ensure that any looked after children at
risk of permanent exclusion are offered suitable alternative provision to meet
their needs. No looked after child has been permanently excluded in the last
five years.


Fostering service managers have developed plans to provide sufficient
numbers and types of foster carers for looked after children. Eight foster
carers were approved last year, although nine left the service to continue to
provide care for those children under Special Guardianship Orders. Skills to
Foster pre-assessment is regularly undertaken to ensure that people
interested in becoming foster carers are clear about the commitment and skills
required. A shortage of carers for children over the age of 10 years has been
identified by the local authority and has resulted in an appropriately targeted
publicity and recruitment campaign. However, the recruitment activity is not
fully implemented and, while it is showing potential, the impact on outcomes
has still to be achieved.


The Fostering Panel meets all statutory requirements. Foster carers in Bexley
are positive about the support that the family placement team provides.
Training opportunities are targeted at meeting foster carers own individual
needs and the needs of the children that they care for.


Delegated authority to foster carers is agreed when children come into care;
this is clear, age appropriate and helps children to have as normal an
experience of childhood and family life as is possible. For example foster
carers can agree for children to take part in social and leisure activities
without having to obtain written permission from social workers or parents.


The adoption team is responsible for Special Guardianship Orders (SGOs). The
use of SGOs in Bexley in the last 12 months has significantly increased from
assessments are undertaken and children placed with family members


maintain their family links and culture. There is no policy in place regarding
allowances for children on SGOs; the local authority is aware that this needs
to be agreed.

Some looked after children are able to have their views heard to help shape
the services that are provided to them. A small number of children and young
people who are on the Children in Care Committee (CICC) contribute well to
the corporate parenting forum and have engaged in the recruitment and
training of social work staff. The CICC representatives recognise the difficulty
of getting the views of the wider looked after children population, and are
developing ways to improve how information is shared and how the views of
other children and young people are heard, for example, through developing a
new website for looked after children.


The National Youth Advocacy Service (NYAS) provides an advocacy service for
looked after children and care leavers. However, this is too limited, provided
by one part time worker. An Independent Visitors service is available to all
looked after children through spot purchasing, although take up of this service
has been negligible. The local authority is currently reviewing these services
as a result of the low take up.


The local authority does not monitor or actively seek to understand themes or
issues from complaints from looked after children; this significantly restricts its
ability to learn and to develop effective services for looked after children.
However, NYAS is offered to all looked after children who wish to make a
complaint, ensuring that they have an independent voice and support in the
process.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is requires improvement

Planning for some children has been too slow, resulting in drift, delay and in
some cases missed opportunities for permanency. Some children have waited
for many months in temporary arrangements before they move in with an
adoptive family who can meet their needs. The average time taken from
becoming looked after to moving in with an adoptive family has been
increasing over the past three years and is above the national threshold.
Some children have been waiting too long before they are matched with their
adoptive parents once the Court has approved the plan for adoption.


The local authority is now tackling delay, and permanency planning for
children is improving. A comprehensive tracker of all looked after children is in
place, overseen by senior managers in childrens services. The tracker is
updated weekly and is used to inform progress. As a result, inspectors saw
improved and timely planning for children since July 2013, with greater impact
since January 2014. For example, 30 children were waiting for adoption in
March 2013; in February 2014, 41 children were waiting to be adopted, 20 of
whom had been placed, and 21 were waiting to be matched. In March 2013


and being placed for adoption; by February 2014 only 21% of children waited
in excess of 20 months.

A small number of children have been placed with foster carers for a long
time, in some cases since 2009, with foster carers only now being assessed as
adopters for these children. While this may now enable these children to have
a permanent plan with continuity of placement, proactive decisions for
permanency with their current foster carers or alternative adopters should
have been undertaken much sooner, reducing drift in care planning and
uncertainty for those children. Delay in making permanent plans for some
children means that the opportunity for adoption is compromised or even lost
as they get older and therefore become more difficult to place.


Adoption social workers now chair permanency planning meetings and a
family finding social worker from the adoption team attends looked after
children reviews. More recently, family finding meetings have been introduced
which review and track progress of family finding for children with a plan for
adoption.


The local authority has good knowledge of the needs of the children who are
waiting to be placed for adoption and those who are coming through the care
system and requiring permanency. Some success in placing brothers and
sisters together has been achieved. Where there are large groups of brothers
and sisters with a plan for adoption, the individual needs of the children are
considered and, if necessary, difficult decisions to separate brothers and
sisters are taken to ensure that the needs of the individual children are met.
In these circumstances the contact arrangements are especially important,
and inspectors saw some good plans where contact between brothers and
sisters had been arranged.


The recruitment of prospective adopters is improving. The local target to
recruit 25 adopters in 201314 has been narrowly missed, with 22 new
adopters recruited. The service is ambitious and has set a target to recruit 50
new adopters in 201415. The local authority is confident that this will be
achieved as 30 prospective adopters are currently being assessed. Joint work
with the other local authorities in the south east consortium has resulted in
recruiting adopters from more diverse backgrounds, including same-sex
couples, enabling a wider choice of placements. Three foster carers are being
approved as fostering to adopt carers, offering a completely new resource for
children, including those children subject to concurrent plans. Adopters
spoken to confirmed that they had actively chosen Bexley because of the
welcome and information that they had received when making initial enquiries
to adopt. They said that the process of assessment is working well, with
second stage assessments being completed within six months.


Improved access to training for both adopters and social workers has been in
place in the last 12 months, including training on attachment and loss, and life
story work. Three excellent life story books were seen by inspectors.
Managers confirmed that a backlog of life story work has now been cleared as
a result of this work being outsourced to another agency. Social workers are


now trained to complete the work. Life story books and welcome books from
adopters were also seen, which have been invaluable in helping children settle
into a new adoptive family and understanding their personal background and
history.

From a previous position of no disrupted adoptive placements, there have
been two disruptions since October 2013, one in the last few weeks. The local
authority is reviewing these cases to understand what could be done better to
avoid disruptions in the future.


There is an appropriately constituted adoption panel with an experienced
panel chair, who confirmed that the local authority has successfully
implemented the new adoption guidance, including the new templates for
reports. The quality of reports has improved, along with a reduction in the
timescales for assessment and an increase in the numbers being approved.
Prospective adopter reports seen during the inspection were of good quality,
detailed and analytical; the reports enable the panel to make secure
recommendations to the Agency Decision Maker.


The adoption panel chair meets with members of the local authority and is
aware of the priorities to increase the number of children placed for adoption
in a timely way. The chair of the panel and the Agency Decision Maker
acknowledge that although progress has been made there is more to do to
ensure that timeliness and permanency plans are in place for children, and
that children are considered at an early stage when they become looked after.
This was not always evident when sampling review minutes.


Adoption support is provided by a principal social worker with a remit to
further develop the service. A second worker deals with birth records,
adoption counselling and letter box contact. Adopters reported that they have
been well supported by the adoption social worker in organising support for
their adoptive children, including therapy and entry into appropriate schools.
Adoption support plans seen by inspectors were comprehensive and clearly
identified the support to be provided, including financial support for children
and adopters.


Adopters who spoke to inspectors confirmed that they were aware of their
entitlements, including how to make a complaint. Adopters were very positive
about the adoption service, which has experienced fewer changes of staff
than in some of the locality teams. This has meant that adopters often rely on
the adoption social worker for support if the childs social worker is
unavailable or is new to the child.

The graded judgement for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
requires improvement

Many care leavers are well supported by their personal advisors. Academic
and wider success is celebrated, and young people feel proud of their
achievements, including their ability to sustain relationships, support others


and make good progress toward successful independence, including
parenthood.

One care leaver stated, My personal advisor is like the mum I never had, and
this effectively captures the views of many care leavers about the care,
guidance and support that they receive from their personal advisor. Many
however, have mixed experiences of the support that they receive from social
workers as they approach leaving care. Not all young people are allocated a
personal advisor by the time they are 18 years old. In some cases, care
leavers saw a number of personal advisors in a short time span, giving them
no opportunity to form a trusting and helpful relationship.


Pathway plans vary too much in quality. Plans generally lack focus, particularly
in relation to education and employment options, and they fail to sufficiently
identify risks to young people. Young people say that pathway plans vary in
their usefulness, for example, one young person told inspectors he was asked
to complete his pathway plan with his foster carer without suitable support or
guidance.


Care leavers have good access to services that support their health needs,
including regular medical checks and a health passport which sets out all their
health history. This provides effective guidance on future health issues,
including sexual health and the dangers of substance misuse. The looked after
children nurse is proactive and flexible in her approach to ensure that all care
leavers address their health needs. Bexley Youth Advice, a one-stop shop,
offers young people a range of accessible and helpful advice and guidance.
Care leavers have good access to counselling through the Youth Engagement
Service and the response from CAMHS is timely and supports young people to
improve their mental health.


Effective and productive partnerships with a range of supported
accommodation providers enable care leavers to have good access to
accommodation that meets their individual needs. Care leavers report that
they are living in safe and appropriate accommodation. This ranges from
'staying put' with foster carers to managing their own tenancy.


The local authority has developed an effective system to ensure that all care
leavers are offered a suitable tenancy when they reach 18 years old, if this is
appropriate for their needs. The authority makes a direct offer of a property,
taking into account any identified risk factors. The authority has reciprocal
arrangements with other boroughs to offer tenancies for those young people
who wish to be housed outside the borough. This results in the vast majority
of young people taking up their own tenancy by the time they are eighteen.
As a result, almost all care leavers are living in suitable accommodation and
are appropriately supported.


Only a small number of care leavers benefit from some effective work by the
local authority with education partners. This includes the local college, which
offers bespoke programmes tailored to individual needs and language
programmes for those young people whose first language is not English. Job
Centre Plus is now able to identify care leavers and is offering a much more


bespoke service, which recognises that many care leavers are very vulnerable
and require additional support in seeking and securing suitable long-term
employment.

The local authority and its partners have been slow to assist those care
leavers with significant barriers to learning to find suitable options for future
education, work experience and apprenticeships. The local authority has only
recently begun to consider offering regular work placements specifically for
care leavers to assist them in developing skills for employment. They have
offered between 40 and 50 apprenticeships across the authority for a number
of years, but only two care leavers have ever successfully completed one of
these apprenticeships and gone on to find suitable employment. Around 37%
of care leavers over the age of 19 are not in suitable education, training or
employment.


While educational plans are prepared for young people over the age of 16
who are preparing to leave the care system, not enough of these plans are of
sufficient quality to assist young people to improve their educational and
academic prospects. These plans lack focus, are extremely brief and do not
systematically include the views of young people. For those care leavers with
identified challenges to their learning, personal education plans fail to clearly
identify how their support needs will be effectively met. This contrasts
markedly for those children up to the age of 16, where the virtual school very
effectively monitors education plans to ensure that realistic but stretching
targets assist young people to achieve.


For those care leavers who progress into higher education, Bexley provides a
good package of support, including assistance with fees and support with
accommodation during the holidays if required. Care leavers say that they
value the financial and emotional support they receive and that it is helping
them to achieve. Bexley is currently supporting 17 care leavers in higher
education.


Care leavers are well informed about their legal entitlements and financial
support available to them. Useful information is provided by the Children in
Care Committee who endeavour to make sure all care leavers are informed
about the Bexley Pledge, setting out the 10 promises that are made by Bexley
Council to all looked after children.

Leadership, management and governance require improvement

The local authority knows its strengths and areas for development. Following
the issue of an improvement notice by the Department for Education (DfE) in
October 2012, the local authority and its partners have been working to a
comprehensive improvement plan. Timescales for this plan have been
extended beyond an initial twelve month period, to allow for the local
authority to radically change the structure and operation of childrens social
care services. This restructuring has also resulted in delay in securing and
evidencing improved social work practice with children and their families.



Demonstrable improvements in the delivery of safeguarding services began in
June 2013 and became more evident from autumn 2013. Many positive plans,
procedures and practices have been very recently implemented and are still to
demonstrate positive impact for children and their families. Little has been
embedded or sustained for any significant period. Services for looked after
children and care leavers have deteriorated since their last Ofsted inspections.
Adoption services were assessed as good in 2009 and looked after children
services were assessed as good in 2012. In the past six months these services
have also begun to gradually improve.


The pace of improvement has been too slow. Elected members, the Chief
Executive and the Director of Childrens Services recognise the need to secure
and sustain improvement. They are committed to maintaining the
Safeguarding Improvement Board and enhancing its role, and increasing the
effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board through additional
resources for performance management and monitoring.


The targeted improvement in childrens social care services has been
underpinned by a substantial additional investment of 5.2m by the local
authority. These monies have been used to enhance childrens services such
as increasing the number of social work posts, thereby reducing caseloads
from an average of 35 in July 2012 to an average of 20 in January 2014, and
creating specific posts within childrens social care services to support quality
assurance and performance management. Substantial amounts have been
used to fund the significant number of agency staff currently employed in the
service and to increase the social work and management complement.


Robust action has been taken by managers to support or move on those staff
who have struggled to meet the practice standards required.


The chair of the Safeguarding Improvement Board identified in her update to
the DfE in October 2013 that relationships between the local authority
corporate centre and childrens social care services have been strained by the
demands of the improvement programme. Since then they have been working
together more closely, for example over the recruitment of social care staff.


Local authority elected members, the Chief Executive and senior officers are
clear about their respective roles, and clear lines of accountability are in place
to ensure that they effectively discharge their individual and collective
responsibilities. The combined role of the Director of Adults Services and the
Director of Childrens Services has been subject to a limited evaluation of the
possible impact of combining these functions, called a test of assurance.
However, this has not been formally reviewed since first being agreed in
November 2010, despite the significant pressures resulting from the Ofsted
inspection findings in 2012.


Elected members and senior officers demonstrate a clear understanding and
recognition that, although services for children and young people have begun
to improve within the past few months, they still have a long way to go.
Leaders maintain an awareness of social work practice through a variety of
sources, including routine shadowing of social workers, seeking opportunities


to speak directly with young people through the Children in Care Committee
and working with colleagues from other local authorities to compare practice
standards. This knowledge is used to set high standards and expectations for
the quality of practice in childrens social care services, although members and
senior officers acknowledge that such standards are not consistently being
met.

Improvement in operational management direction and oversight of practice
in childrens social care services has been too slow. Evidence of management
oversight of practice has only begun to improve over the past six months and
it is still not consistent across the service. A number of cases were identified
through this inspection where the local authority had to take corrective action
to secure the welfare of individual children and to review operational
management decisions; in a very small number of cases children had been left
at potential risk. The findings from the local authority audit of cases for this
inspection were agreed by inspectors in the majority of cases. However, in
some cases the findings were over-optimistic.


Staff in childrens social care services consistently report a change from June
high expectation and high support. Staff articulate that the new locality team
model and line management arrangements are clear, managers are now
accessible for daily advice and guidance, staff have lower caseloads and there
is a less reactive management style that enables them to plan more effectively
for children. This was evidenced throughout the inspection.


The quality of supervision of social workers is too variable. Too many records
poorly record case direction or the rationale for decision making. A small
number of supervision files did include reflective supervision and consideration
of welfare and training needs of the staff. Many staff do not currently have
their personal development assessed or planned with their manager and the
health check completed by staff in January 2014 identifies that only 66% of
staff received timely supervision. The high turnover of staff and managers has
delayed productive supervision for some staff; in a small number of cases this
has negatively impacted on the planning and review of progress for children.


Performance monitoring and reporting do not effectively combine quantitative
information with qualitative information gained through user
feedback, analysis of complaints and direct consultations. Since March 2013 a
performance reporting framework has been in place. However, this is still
being developed alongside an ongoing process to ensure full confidence in the
data through developing reliable and accurate inputting, reporting against the
new electronic case system and completing the migration of records from the
former system. Manual systems continue to be employed to assist operational
managers in managing their services.


Routine auditing of cases by managers across childrens social care services
has not been embedded into core business, and plans to deliver this have
been too slow in development. The practice of auditing is now being
developed across all social work teams, with the first audits taking place in the


duty and assessment team in December 2013. The findings from this audit are
currently being collated and therefore the learning and impact on practice
improvement cannot be determined. The local authority has also started to
undertake a monthly review of the quality of CAFs. However, an action plan
from these reviews which identifies areas for improvement has not been
developed.

More permanent staff and agency workers of a higher calibre have been
recruited over the past nine months following a targeted recruitment
campaign in April 2013. However, agency workers still occupy 47% of roles
across the social work teams, including some key operational management
posts. This lack of stability has negatively impacted on the quality and
continuity of the social work service received by children and their families,
and has also caused difficulties in communication for some partner agencies.
The local authority is trying a variety of approaches to secure a more
permanent workforce, including direct engagement with neighbouring
authorities and recruitment agencies, and supporting five social work
assistants to gain social work qualifications.


Recruitment to permanent posts has been slow, and has been adversely
impacted by tensions between the local authority corporate centre and
childrens social care services. The DCS has negotiated the temporary
appointment of a specialist social care post to better target recruitment to the
needs of the service.


Slow recruitment to permanent posts since 2012 has also negatively impacted
on the degree to which the workforce is appropriately trained and how
learning is maintained in the organisation when staff leave. Agency staff have
access to training alongside permanent staff. Core training, such as risk
assessment, working with hostile families and courtroom skills, has continued
to be delivered to social workers over the past 12 months, and staff state that
the training is of good quality. However, due to previous experience of trained
staff and managers leaving the local authority, the authority set a target of
having at least 50% permanent staffing before delivering their on-going
training plan to managers, in order to ensure the learning is maintained within
the service.


The local authority has improved its work with strategic bodies, including the
LSCB, the Health and Wellbeing Board and the Children and Young Peoples
Partnership to ensure that safeguarding children is a clear priority for all.
Commissioning in Bexley has been enhanced through the jointly funded health
and childrens social care posts within the integrated commissioning unit (ICU)
since January 2013, and also through the complex cases panel where funding
is agreed across health, education and childrens social care for those children
with the most complex needs. Providers of the broad range of commissioned
services are effectively held to account through contract management that
includes routine feedback from providers regarding the outcomes for
individual children and findings from secret shopper visits. The ICU is
currently implementing a new outcome and incentive-based commissioning
model.



Appropriate targets are in place to secure the sufficiency and range of foster
care and adoptive placements for children and young people. However, the
commissioning sufficiency strategy in relation to looked after children does not
yet allow the local authority to be confident that they are commissioning the
correct range of placements against a robust analysis of current and projected
need.


Early help services are undergoing major reconfiguration and the local
authority and partners plan to invest significantly in the new Thriving Families
service. While all professionals spoken with during this inspection are
optimistic about this new service, the full programme is not in place nor
evaluated, and therefore the impact for children and their families cannot be
assessed.


The most recently published Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA) for
and is currently in draft. Useful information has been obtained during
consultations to inform future commissioning of services for children and
young people. For example, consultation with parents about short breaks
provision and consultation with young people from the youth council took
place as part of the development of the Thriving Families Programme.


A high level of enthusiasm and commitment is demonstrated by leaders and
senior managers to corporate parenting, with effective engagement of young
people as members of the corporate parenting forum. The forum has
effectively championed the needs of looked after children in some areas; for
example, it works well with schools to minimise exclusions, and there have
been no permanent exclusions of looked after children for the past five years.


Young people representing the Children in Care Committee (CICC) told
inspectors As a unit our voice is heard. They are routinely involved in
interviewing staff and provide induction training for new social workers to help
them to understand the experience of children looked after and care leavers.
The Lead Member, chair of the Overview and Scrutiny Committee and the DCS
engage with children and young people in order to understand their
experiences of services and life more generally through both formal meetings
and informal contacts within the looked after children homework club. The
CICC representatives acknowledge that the voice of looked after children and
care leavers is currently limited to their relatively small group. They have
begun some proactive work more recently to ensure that the wider group of
looked after children get an opportunity to voice their views and concerns
through newsletters and surveys and they are developing a new website. The
outcome from this work is still to be established.


The local authority cannot be sure that it is developing services that respond
to the needs and views of children and their families and, with the exception
of the CICC, Bexleys Childrens Parliament and the Youth Council, the voices
of children and their parents and carers are not sufficiently captured or used
to shape service development.



Senior managers in childrens social care services have a clear understanding
of the strengths and areas for development across the service, although
strategies to ensure that the local authority becomes a learning organisation
are not sufficiently embedded. Managers demonstrate a commitment to
hearing the views of workers through direct feedback in open surgeries, but
systematic learning through group case discussion and use of research has
not been embedded within teams across childrens social care services.
Disruption meetings, although helping individual young people and carers, are
not being used to inform service improvements. There is an understanding
of, and management of, complaints to the local authority as a result of a
complaint system being established in April 2013. However, the learning from
these is not being effectively considered and disseminated to enable the
service to improve.


No serious case reviews have been undertaken in the area since the last
Ofsted inspection in 2012. A number of serious incidents have been raised by
partner agencies at the LSCB serious case review sub-group which,
appropriately, did not result in the LSCB commissioning a serious case review.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The effectiveness of the LSCB is inadequate
Priority and immediate action

Ensure that the lead role of the LSCB in safeguarding is clearly established
across Bexley and that governance arrangements within the board and with
other key strategic bodies are clearly described and understood.


Ensure that the extensive LSCB work programme is rationalised and is
robustly implemented and monitored.

Areas for improvement

Ensure that the LSCB effectively undertakes monitoring and quality assurance
of multi-agency safeguarding practice.


Ensure that multi-agency audits are systematically undertaken in relation to
key local safeguarding issues identified by partners and agreed by the board
and that learning from these is actioned and carried forward into subsequent
audits.


Ensure that safeguarding data and information from all partner agencies are
robustly analysed and that trends, issues and the implications for multi-agency
safeguarding practice are fully assessed.


Ensure that all operational groups of the LSCB have clear terms of reference
and work programmes that are manageable and are co-ordinated with the
LSCB work programme.


Ensure that audits to establish whether partner agencies are appropriately
engaged in safeguarding are promptly undertaken and that the findings from
these are acted upon.


Ensure that multi-agency safeguarding training is fully reviewed to meet
current needs and that methods to evaluate the impact of this training on
improving safeguarding practice are developed and implemented.


Ensure that work to capture the voice of children, young people and service
users is carefully considered and is sensitively and systematically introduced.


Ensure that the annual report analyses the activity and the impact that the
Board and its partners have on outcomes for safeguarding children.

Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is not effective in ensuring that
partners always work together to ensure that safeguarding arrangements
reduce risk for all children identified as needing assessment, support and
intervention. Since the last Ofsted inspection of safeguarding services in


Bexley in 2012 the LSCB has not effectively undertaken its primary role to
monitor and evaluate the impact of local safeguarding arrangements.
Following the appointment of the current LSCB chair in June 2013, significant
deficits in the functioning of the LSCB have been recognised by the Board. An
ambitious programme of change and development has been established with
partner agencies to tackle the issues through newly established task and finish
groups, or re-invigorated LSCB sub groups with revised membership and
terms of reference. However, almost all of these operational groups of the
LSCB are at a very early stage of development and are not able to
demonstrate impact or that they are now effectively progressing the work of
the Board.

The LSCB chair is highly experienced and is well-respected by all partner
agencies. She has actively engaged with all partners to raise the profile of the
Board and of safeguarding issues. This has resulted in increased commitment
amongst all partners, following a period when most key partner agencies have
undergone significant structural and organisational change. Partnership
commitment is now more evident in the seniority of agency representatives on
the board and on the range of LSCB sub-groups. The LSCB chair has begun to
challenge partners to ensure that they actively engage in the work of the
LSCB.


Governance arrangements within the LSCB and with other strategic groups
are not sufficiently clear and do not effectively enable LSCB partners to assess
whether they are fulfilling their statutory responsibilities to help and protect
children. A draft LSCB governance protocol has been in development since
Board have not been made explicit; as a result there is some duplication of
roles and confusion amongst partner agencies about the respective roles and
responsibilities of these boards. Some agency representatives sit on both
boards, which promotes communication but also blurs the respective roles of
the boards. This has resulted in the LSCB not taking or being seen to take an
effective lead role in safeguarding children and young people. The LSCB chair
meets regularly with the local authority Chief Executive, the Director of
Childrens Services, the chair of the Safeguarding Improvement Board and
local authority members and is a member of the Children and Young Peoples
Strategic Partnership. All of these appropriately prioritise the need to
safeguard children, but not all have recognised the lead role of the LSCB. The
LSCB chair has recently attended the Health and Wellbeing Board, to ensure
that issues relating to safeguarding children are considered.


The LSCB does not systematically provide robust monitoring and evaluation of
the quality and effectiveness of multi-agency safeguarding work. The subgroup of the LSCB tasked with this role has recently developed core child
protection and safeguarding data across partners, based on performance
information currently collated by individual agencies. The core data are due to
be agreed by the LSCB; detailed evaluation of trends, concerns or
safeguarding issues has not been effectively undertaken. As a result, LSCB
partners are not able to robustly understand the key multi-agency


safeguarding challenges or the impact of the LSCB. Multi-agency audits are at
a very early stage of development. Only two multi-agency audits have been
undertaken by partners, both in relation to thresholds for access to childrens
services. However, there is little evidence that the learning from the first audit
was effectively used to improve the understanding and application of
thresholds by staff of partner agencies. An independent audit of child
protection conferences, recently commissioned by the LSCB, does provide a
good benchmark for future work, although the draft findings have yet to be
fully considered or acted upon by the LSCB.

The LSCB is not fully aware whether partner agencies are ensuring that
safeguarding is a priority. Section 11 audits are planned for June 2014, but
are overdue; the most recent section 11 audits were undertaken in 2011.
Promoting awareness of private fostering arrangements has not been
sufficiently addressed by the LSCB and there has been a reduction in the
number of children known to be privately fostered in the area from 13 in
March 2013 to currently three. Partner agencies report that this is an underrepresentation and believe that other private fostering arrangements have not
been notified. In recent months the LSCB has begun to raise awareness
amongst partners and the community of the need to report private fostering
arrangements; this is yet to have an impact on increasing the number of
notifications.


The LSCB is at a very early stage of establishing some oversight of the
effectiveness of early help to support children and young people. While a
range of individual services is provided locally, the early help offer in Bexley is
not yet effectively coordinated and some services are being reconfigured. The
LSCB plans to include early help developments at its next conference in June
strategy and the LSCB has not undertaken an evaluation of the sufficiency,
range or impact of these services to prevent safeguarding issues escalating or
to support children when they are no longer subject to child protection plans.


The LSCB child death overview panel effectively carries out its role. Serious
incidents are appropriately considered through the serious case review subgroup. However a lack of clarity in the commissioning of the two most recent
serious case reviews (SCRs) undertaken in the area resulted in undue delay in
the completion of the reviews and in the actions from one requiring significant
modification. The LSCB chair and new sub-committee chair have reviewed
how SCRs will be commissioned, but this has not been formalised into
protocols for the LSCB. Learning from individual management reviews has
been disseminated within partner agencies, and multi-agency learning has
been recently shared across partners at an LSCB conference, although this
conference was significantly delayed. While learning from these SCRs was
positively received by those who attended the conference, it is not clear how
the learning is being disseminated to staff across the partnership.


The LSCB training sub-group has not effectively overseen the delivery or
evaluation of the LSCB multi-agency training programme and this has been
exacerbated by a training officer not being in post for an extensive period.


Core multi-agency training has continued to be delivered by the LSCB and
does cover a broad range of safeguarding issues, which to some extent has
been developed to address local and national emerging issues, including some
learning from SCRs. However, the evaluation of multi-agency training is
underdeveloped and remains based on questionnaires from training
participants, which have not been systematically evaluated or used to inform
planning for future training.

Voluntary organisations across Bexley are appropriately engaged in the LSCB
and in some of its operational groups, and are able to access multi-agency
training provided by the LSCB. The first lay person was appointed during the
course of this inspection.


In recent months the LSCB has begun to drive improvements in the
coordination of partnership work for missing children and those at risk of child
sexual exploitation. However, the groups tasked to develop multi-agency
strategies, intelligence and trend analysis are still at an early stage, and
remain more focused on case discussion and support to individual children
and young people.


The LSCB has very recently started to consider consulting with young people
to inform the development of its work. A task and finish group has begun
exploring ways of obtaining the views of young people with partner agencies
that have experience in this area. However, at the time of this inspection the
views of young people or their carers are not routinely captured or considered
by the LSCB to help develop its work or understanding of local safeguarding
issues.


The LSCB annual report provides information about activity undertaken by the
board over the year 20122013. Although some performance data are
included within the report, this is not linked to an assessment of the
performance and effectiveness of local safeguarding services or the impact of
the Board. The LSCB, through its chair, has recently developed an extensive
activity and work programme to address the significant range of areas that
require improvement. While all of these are appropriate, they are not
systematically well-coordinated and this has resulted in delay or lack of clarity
in some work streams, for example in relation to the LSCB oversight of
safeguarding of looked after children placed out of the area. The ambitious
LSCB work programme, with almost all areas of the work of the Board
currently subject to review and redevelopment, is a significant challenge to
the stretched capacity of all partner agencies. Whilst the LSCB has a draft
improvement framework, this has not been developed across the partnership
and has not had any impact.


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


