Blackpool Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 2 July 2014  23 July 2014
Report published: 8 September 2014
The overall judgement is that childrens services require
improvement.2
The authority is not yet delivering good protection, help or care for children, young
people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires
Improvement

permanence

Requires
Improvement


Requires
Improvement


Requires
Improvement


Requires
Improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


The LSCBs strengths


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about the inspection and the review



The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Blackpool require improvement because:

There has been an insufficient focus on improving services for care leavers.
The level and quality of support that care leavers receive is inconsistent and
does not deliver good outcomes for many young people. Pathway plans are
not sufficiently outcome focused or specific and not enough young people
remain with their foster carers past their 18th birthday.


Social workers and personal advisors (PAs) do not consistently receive regular
reflective supervision to support and challenge their practice. Performance
management measures are insufficient to support managers in measuring the
effectiveness of services and their impact on care leavers.


Not all partner agencies have a thorough understanding of their responsibilities
to give children and young people the help they need at the earliest
opportunity. As a result, not all children and young people get help as soon as
they need it. Thresholds are not well understood by all agencies. Too many
referrals that do not meet the threshold for statutory intervention are made to
childrens social care.


The quality of assessment for children in need of help or protection is not yet
consistently good and there are some cases that show evidence of drift. In a
small number of cases seen, the local authority did not initiate legal planning
meetings quickly enough where risks were not reducing. The quality of
planning for looked after children is variable; in a small number of cases seen,
risk was not fully assessed and reduced swiftly. Permanence is not always
pursued with sufficient urgency, and this sometimes leads to plans for
adoption being changed.


Too many looked after children do not have an up to date health assessment.
Access to child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHs) is variable and,
as a result, some children and young people may not receive the service they
need. There is no priority given to looked after children by CAMHs. Not enough
looked after children and young people are making expected or better progress
in their learning. The local authority does not have sufficient understanding of
the use of the pupil premium to ensure that it is improving children and young
peoples attainment.


Scrutiny by senior managers and independent reviewing officers (IROs) does
not consistently drive plans and ensure progress for looked after children in a
timely way.


The corporate parenting panel is insufficiently robust in its challenge to the
local authority.


Information about children who live in families where there is parental mental
ill-health or substance abuse is not collated or analysed to ensure that services
are planned effectively. The local authority does not yet have in place an
overarching commissioning strategy, therefore commissioning is reactive and
fragmented.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Care leavers

A leaving care service improvement plan should be developed. The plan should
consider overall improvement of the service provided to care leavers, including
consideration of: personal advisors caseloads, supervision and management
oversight, strengthened arrangements for education and training for 16-18
year-olds, and preparation for independence.

demonstrate specific, accountable and timed planned actions.
Areas for Improvement

Planning for children who need protection
understand their responsibilities in respect of early help and the thresholds for
referral to childrens social care.
child focused, and take into account risk and protective factors and childrens
individual needs, including those arising from race and ethnicity.
meetings where identified risks are not diminishing or are increasing.
is parental mental ill-health, or substance or alcohol misuse, to ensure that
needs are understood and children are afforded help and protection.

Planning and support for children who are looked after
home, so that these consistently lead to clear, robust plans for children which
keep them safe.
to consistently provide timely support to children moving to permanence.
Officers (IROs) challenge lack of progress on plans, including failure to
complete personal education plans (PEPs) or health assessments, so that these
issues are addressed quickly. This includes making timely and appropriate use
of the issues resolution process.


the service they need promptly.
to make sure that it is used effectively to improve young peoples attainment.
Take steps to improve the number of children who attend a good or better
school, while continuing to closely monitor the individual needs of each child.

Adoption
consistently good.

Leadership, management and governance
practitioners.
after childrens strategy, to support co-ordinated commissioning arrangements.
performance and service provision demonstrates positive impact for children.
provides robust challenge to the local authority and champions the needs of
looked after children and care leavers.
children and care leavers should be developed, which is overseen by the
Improvement Board and regularly scrutinised by the Corporate Parenting
Board.
leaving care services.


The local authoritys strengths
and young people had been identified as being at risk of harm, speedy action
was taken to reduce risk in all cases seen.
to more children and young people receiving appropriate support at an early
stage.
Elected members, senior managers and practitioners are committed to
improving services and outcomes for children and young people.
are identified and receive a range of support appropriate to their individual
needs.
childrens independent domestic violence advisory service, which was working
with 93 children in May 2014, and group work provided by family support
workers in the Catalyst team.
monitors and tracks children who are known to the local authority but who are
not accessing education or have moved out of Blackpool.
home education (EHE), especially for the most vulnerable children.
within 26 weeks.
their friends and families. Children who are looked after attend school
regularly. No looked after child has been permanently excluded since 2010.
psychologist.
placements and had access to advocates and independent visitors.
around 35%, which is close to statistical neighbours and national averages.


and mental illness is effective. The drop-in centre is valued by care leavers and
is a good source of practical and emotional support. No young people are
placed in bed and breakfast accommodation.
adoption in 201314, an increase from 22 children in 201213.


Progress since the last inspection
identified in the inspection of 2012, which judged services to be inadequate.
The senior leadership team structure has been revised and strengthened by the
creation of the head of childrens social care and principal social worker posts.
The DCS and her new leadership team have engaged staff at all levels in the
improvement journey resulting in improved staff morale.
contacts and referrals received are dealt with promptly and robustly. Decisions
take full account of the risks identified at the point of contact, and incorporate
historical information thoroughly. This ensures that children and young people
receive the right level of support and protection at the right time. There is good
management oversight of all decisions and actions.
have had an impact on improving the quality of practice. The quality of
assessment has improved. Children in need and child protection plans are in
place, are sufficiently detailed, and are regularly monitored. Children and young
people who are subject to a child in need or child protection plan or who are
looked after are visited regularly by social workers and other staff from
childrens social care. Children are seen alone at appropriate intervals, and their
wishes, feelings and views are sought and recorded.
demonstrate commitment to improving outcomes for children and young
people. The shadow improvement board has been an effective vehicle for
engaging frontline staff in the improvement journey. The local authority now
needs to widen its focus on improvement to encompass services for looked
after children and care leavers, while ensuring that the progress made in other
areas is not diluted or derailed.
analysis (CJSNA), which is being used to influence service development and
delivery. Improvement work has rightly focused on those children requiring
help or protection, and has been successful in implementing safe structures
and processes.


Summary for children and young people
 In July 2014, Ofsted looked at Blackpools services for children and
young people who need extra support or who are looked after.
Ofsted found that these services are now better, and the local
authority has worked hard to improve things but there is more for
them to do to make them good.
 The local authority and other services are getting better at making
sure children and young people get the right help as soon as they
need it, but not everyone who works with children understands what
they need to do. This means that some children do not get the right
help quickly enough, and that social workers spend too much time
dealing with worries about children and young people who do not
need their help. If social workers think that children or young people
are at risk, they act quickly to make sure that they are safe.
 Most social workers know the children and young people they work
with well. However, sometimes plans are made for children and
young people who are looked after without social workers
understanding properly what the child or young person really needs.
Most children and young people who are looked after are able to live
with their brothers and sisters in foster homes that arent too far
from away from their friends and families. They go to school
regularly, but not all of them have plans to make sure that they are
getting enough of the right help at school.
 The local authority does not make sure that all social workers get
enough time to think about their work, or to talk to their managers
to make sure that they are doing the right things.
 Just Uz, the children in care council, has got off to a good start. They
are working hard to help the council understand what it is like to be
a looked after child and how to make services better for children and
young people. The local authority needs to make sure that Just Uz is
given enough help to recruit more members, so that it can represent
the views of all looked after children and young people.
 Although things are getting better, not enough young people who
leave care have a job or are going to college or training, and more
young people should live with their foster carers after their 18th
birthday.

 The local authority collects a lot of information about how well it is
doing, but it is not using it well enough to look at whether the
services it provides are making a difference for children and young
people.
 Social workers, senior managers and councillors all want to make

services for children and young people good, and are working hard
to do this.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area
 Approximately 28,886 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Blackpool. This is 20.3% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 30.2% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 29.1% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 25.9% (the national average is 15.1%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 5.3% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
mixed (2.7%) and Asian (2.2%).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 4.8% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 3.6% (the national average is 13.6%).
 Blackpool experiences considerable levels of disadvantage, and in 2010 ranked as
the 6th most deprived of 354 local authorities in England. 46 out of 94 wards
within Blackpool are amongst the 20% most deprived wards in the country and
there are no wards amongst the 20% most affluent. Blackpools relative position
in the national deprivation rankings has worsened over the last five years from
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 1,872 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 31 March 2014, 307 children and young people were the subject of a children
protection plan. This is a reduction from 337 at 31 March 2013.
 At 31 March 2014, 10 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from 6 at 31 March 2013.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 443 children are being looked after by the LA (a rate of 152.4
per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 483 (166.5 per 10,000 children) at

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


authority area
area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 41 adoptions
subsequently returned to be looked after
on to independent living
living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted Inspections
 The local authority operates three childrens homes. All three were judged to be
good or outstanding in their recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Blackpools arrangements for the protection of
children was in July 2012. The local authority was judged to be inadequate.
 The previous inspection of Blackpools services for looked after children was in
December 2009. The local authority was judged to be good.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since May 2012.
 The Chair of the LSCB has been in post since October 2012.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement
The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Judgement grade
Requires improvement

Summary
Children and young people who are at risk of harm are identified appropriately and
prompt action is taken to ensure that they are safe. Partners are working with the
local authority to improve early help services, but currently the thresholds are not
fully understood by all partners. As a result, not all children and young people get
the right help at the right time, and too many children and young people are
referred to social care when they do not meet the threshold for statutory
intervention. The quality of social work practice is improving but remains variable.
Although good examples of assessments were seen, others were not sufficiently
comprehensive. Social workers and services focus on working with children and their
families, although sometimes they focus more on the adults than on the children.
Risk is understood and managed, and multi-agency plans are effective in keeping
children safe.
they can access help and support through a wide range of early help services,
including childrens centres. Many examples were seen of early help for families
being effective and preventing the need for subsequent statutory services. The
early intervention strategy, the Getting It Right (GIR) framework, is designed
to support partner agencies in helping families with more complex needs, thus
reducing the likelihood that they will require support from statutory services.
This was introduced in October 2013 and although its full impact is not yet
known, there is some evidence of an improving understanding of thresholds for
early help, for example by schools. It is essential that full momentum is
maintained in implementing this strategy and a key measure of the strategys
success will be the extent to which it contributes to a reduction in referrals to
childrens social care.
of two effective front doors, the multi-agency assessment hub (MASH) and the
combined referral service. These are co-located, which facilitates effective
transfer of information and discussion. The Blackpool MASH has only recently
been disaggregated from a larger service, so it is still in development and is
currently only assessing police reports. Plans are in place to synchronise the
two referral points. Both undertake effective multi-agency informationgathering and checks, ensuring that all decisions about next steps are correctly
based on historical, as well as current, risks for the child.


signpost children and families to early help services where appropriate, or
ensure that they are stepped up to childrens social care where the combined
information suggests that this is needed.
services from childrens social care. The combined referral service has
experienced and knowledgeable staff. Callers receive prompt advice from a
qualified social worker or manager, and all decisions made by the referral
service are kept under constant review by managers. Managers authorise all
case transfers and closures, and the childrens electronic recording system
supports them well in this respect, ensuring that no child can fall through the
net and that all receive a prompt response.
completed sufficiently well. This variability in quality and detail creates extra
work, such as additional call backs to clarify information and fill in gaps. This
takes up valuable staff time in an already very busy team. The pace of new
work coming in also militates against reflection and strategic thinking time. This
has the unintended consequence of sometimes making further unnecessary
work, as a rush to get tasks completed and information gathered and
assimilated means this is not done sufficiently well on the first occasion,
requiring additional follow-up activity.
the GIR strategy. Staff in the referral, MASH and Early Help services are
working hard to educate partner agencies about thresholds and resources on
offer in the community, but it is still early days. This aspect of the local
authoritys strategy requires considerable focus in order for it to achieve its
desired goals.
emergency duty team having full access to the childrens electronic recording
system and recording their activity promptly. The system generates an alert
flag for the daytime staff, and overnight events are considered for follow-up
the next day.
creation of chronologies and information retrieval. The system is used to good
effect to capture all information, such as childrens hand-written child
protection conference information packs, which are scanned into the system.
This enhances the picture of events and captures the childs voice well.


responded to swiftly by childrens social care and the police, with frequent
contributions from other agencies. Strategy meetings are frequently held faceto-face and promptly. The approach is robust and cautious, but not
disproportionate. This is resource intensive, but it does ensure that children at
potential risk of harm do not slip through the net, and that they are responded
to at an appropriate threshold. Section 47 enquiries that follow strategy
discussions are appropriate in the vast majority of cases, supporting less
intensive responses thereafter in a significant proportion of cases. All
discussions and activities are recorded well.
histories in informing current assessments and intervention plans.
Assessments generally take account of both risk and protective factors, and
determine the appropriate next steps and level of service required by a child
and their family. Assessments and plans seen are variable in quality, but those
completed more recently are generally sufficiently detailed, with some good
examples seen where issues such as adult mental health, adult substance
misuse issues and domestic abuse are considered and addressed. Others are
still too adult-focused and overly-reliant on self-reporting from parents.
and delay was evident for some children. In a small number of recent cases,
there was evidence of delays in moving into child protection processes or to
legal planning meetings. This is acknowledged in the local authoritys own
audits of the cases tracked during this inspection. More recent plans are better,
and include specific actions and timescales. Services are mostly put in place
promptly to meet childrens and families needs, but delays occur where there
is insufficient service to meet demand, such as insufficient numbers of trained
staff to undertake specialist assessments of young people exhibiting sexually
harmful behaviour.
children and their families within childrens social care. These include family
group conferencing and the domestic abuse group work programme. However,
neither are able to demonstrate their impact; both can demonstrate their
reach, but not the positive impact that they have had on outcomes for children,
although anecdotal information is extremely positive. Performance
management and quality assurance arrangements should be extended to
include these initiatives.


workers. Children are seen and seen alone. Staff spoken to can articulate the
benefits of speaking to children on their own, and childrens views are made
explicit within case recording. Good use is made of various methods of
engaging children, including those who have communication difficulties. One
parent involved in child protection arrangements that we spoke to was effusive
in her praise for the support provided for her family, describing prompt
assessments, good services, and feeling fully involved in plans. Social workers
and other staff make good attempts to work with both resident and nonresident fathers, and their contribution is managed well even when parental
relationships are acrimonious. Childrens views on contact with fathers are also
usually considered. Children and parents are able to have an advocate to
support them at child protection conferences, although the local authority
accepts that there is more to do to promote the take-up of this service by
children and young people.
and partner agencies is variable. Some very sensitive examples were seen,
which took into account childrens differences, such as disabilities, preferred
methods of communication, and learning ability. In other instances, their
personal characteristics were overlooked. Inspectors saw a child with an
African father being categorised as white British, and no evidence of their
cultural needs being considered, or reflection on what it is like for that child
living in their community.
social workers provide written reports in advance of conferences in most cases,
which are shared with parents. These meetings are well chaired and minuted,
and draw up adequate outline protection plans. Routine quality assurance of
each conference is contributing to improving performance in partners providing
reports in advance of the conference, sharing reports in advance with parents,
and attendance by key agencies relevant to each case. Shortfalls are followed
up promptly. Some agencies continue to be poor attenders at conferences,
despite attempts made to tackle this, and this requires further improvement.
conferences revealed strengths and weaknesses in the current arrangements,
with the findings resulting in positive changes. Service managers have good
arrangements in place to re-focus current quality assurance arrangements so
that more scrutiny of quality and partnership working can begin.


groups has led to improvements, supported by training and a new core group
template. There is now generally better attendance by relevant practitioners.
Recent cases were seen where core groups were monitoring the progress of
child protection plans effectively, and amending them as appropriate.
Arrangements are in place for routine monitoring by managers of core group
practice which aims to pick up shortfalls and addressed promptly. While
progress has been made, improvements and monitoring arrangements are yet
embedded or sustained and recent examples were seen of poor attendance
and the core group template not being completed properly.
suspected or actual criminal activities, can be placed in suitable accommodation
in the community instead. Where decisions are made by police to oppose such
placements, this is closely monitored and reported to senior managers in
childrens social care. The youth offending teams improvement plan is leading
to positive improvements in both safeguarding practice and their contributions
to multi-disciplinary interventions and plans. However, issues regarding young
people in trouble are not being progressed swiftly enough on a strategic level.
For example, the information about children held in cells is collated, but is not
formally scrutinised or used at a strategic level to challenge practice.
progress is stalled or is insufficiently swift, including all children who have been
subject to a child protection plan for 12 months or more, are discussed at
solution focused meetings chaired by senior managers. This is one method
deployed to reduce drift and delay. However, cases were seen where children
are properly flagged as requiring a legal planning meeting to escalate matters,
but without any progress towards this being evident. This is a significant
weakness in the drive to achieve permanency for children who have already
experienced historical delay and drift.
fostered. The brevity and recent drafting of a report for the Blackpool
Safeguarding Children Board (BSCB) suggests that this issue has not been a
priority for Blackpool. In cases sampled, there was a lack of urgency in
completing private fostering assessments.


biggest challenges. There is a strong and varied matrix of responses available.
The childrens independent domestic violence advisory service (CIDVA) was
working with 93 children at May 2014, and is a larger service than exists in
many similar areas; the recently published national evaluation confirms its
positive benefits for children. The local authority has also secured funding to
establish a four-year early intervention project to provide support at an earlier
stage of domestic abuse, which will be externally evaluated. Other services are
available to support both adult and child victims of domestic abuse, such as the
multi-disciplinary Catalyst team, and comprehensive packages of support have
been seen. Child welfare, victim support and criminal prosecution are given
appropriate consideration in addressing issues of concern. Multi-agency risk
assessment conference (MARAC) arrangements, which focus on the most
serious cases of domestic abuse, are in place, operate well, and are attended
by relevant partner agencies.
arrangements (MAPPA), coordinating responses to the most serious offenders
in the community. Relevant managers participate at operational and strategic
levels, both within Blackpool and on a pan-Lancashire basis. Young people who
may be eligible for MAPPA oversight are screened to determine levels of risk
and appropriate next steps, and allocated workers participate in planning
where appropriate.
health, education and the voluntary sector, enables good intelligence-sharing,
planning and intervening to tackle child sexual exploitation (CSE). Effective
joint working was observed in a CSE multi-agency meeting, which carefully
balanced the demands of criminal investigatory work alongside childrens
safeguarding needs. There are plans to undertake CSE awareness-raising work
with local businesses, such as amusement arcades and taxi firms. However,
given the long-established nature of this team, and the unique characteristics
of Blackpool, it is surprising that this is not at a more advanced stage of
development.
who may go missing and who also may be at risk of CSE are identified well,
assisted by the location of the missing coordinator in the CSE Awaken team
and well-established information-sharing practices. Monthly meetings between
senior police officers and managers in the local authority maximise awareness
of high risk cases, issues, and the location of hot spots. This supports
strategic oversight of operational activity and ensures that the service is
responsive to changing demands. At the present time, it is an expectation that
return home interviews with children are completed by social workers, but
there is no overarching oversight of these to assure quality standards or to
aggregate their findings. This is a shortfall in terms of identifying themes and
trends which could usefully be fed back into the wider work in tackling CSE.


tracks children who are known to the local authority but who are not accessing
education, or who have moved out of Blackpool. Monitoring of the 'out of
school' register ensures that children gain swift access to appropriate
education. Currently one young person is missing from education.
elective home education (EHE), especially for the most vulnerable children. The
access and inclusion team provides support to encourage children to remain in
mainstream school. There was an increase in enquiries in 201314 to 67, from
were placed on the EHE register. 14 children have been re-integrated into
school and a further four are due back in school in September. Currently there
are 84 children on the register, which is an increase after a five year downward
trend, and reflects the rising trend nationally.
professionals working with children. Referrals are received by the local
authority designated officer (LADO) from a wide range of agencies, who
receive a timely response, with good tracking of the progress of investigations.
Referrals have increased from 70 to 94 between 201213 and 201314.
Examples were seen in case sampling of appropriate persons being considered
for referral to the LADO. Awareness-raising has been undertaken with sectors
such as the local mosque and Madrasah, although this has not yet led to any
referrals.


Key Judgement

Judgement Grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
The local authority needs to increase the level of attention it gives to improving the
quality of services for children and young people in its care to ensure that
consistently good outcomes are achieved.
Not all assessments are good quality, and some children and young people
experience drift and delay before becoming looked after. Most children benefit from
living in stable homes with their brothers and sisters, and very few live more than
workers and their views are usually sought, but are not always fully reflected in their
plans. Care plans are regularly reviewed, but there is insufficient challenge by
independent reviewing officers (IROs) when the plans are missing, are of poor
quality or lack PEPs or health assessments.
Too many children experience delay before suitable adoptive families are identified
for them. Improvements to the systems to recruit and assess adopters have led to a
reduction in the shortfall of adoptive families and a significant increase in the
number of potential adopters currently being assessed. Few children experience
breakdown, and support is available to children and young people, and to their
adoptive and birth families, both before and after adoption.
There has been insufficient focus on the quality of services provided to care leavers.
Pathway planning does not adequately prepare all care leavers for the transition to
adulthood. Care leavers speak positively about their relationships with personal
advisors and value the drop in centre.
Care service is working well, supporting children and young people to remain at
home. During 201314 the service worked with 88 families, and at the end of
the year 81% of the children in these families were living safely with their
parents. No cases were seen where children had become looked after
inappropriately.
within twelve months. Not all assessments prior to children or young people
returning home are sufficiently robust. Inspectors saw three cases of children
being returned home to parents following short periods of being looked after
where there was insufficient assessment of potential risk. In one of these
cases, the children returned to care within a matter of weeks after one of them
suffered a further injury.


quality of care plans is inconsistent; sometimes they are absent, and those that
are completed do not always provide a clear, contemporaneous account of
childrens needs and the plan to address these. Some examples were seen of
cases where permanence was secured quickly for children and young people.
These included securing permanence through adoption and special
guardianship. However, in other cases there was evidence of significant drift
and delay. Six children living at home with parents on full care orders had been
at home for between one and seven years. In two cases, the local authority
had not progressed the plan to discharge the care order despite this having
been discussed at a number of looked after reviews. This means that
permanence for these children had not been legally secured.
robust decisions and action in initiating legal proceedings. This included one
case considered by inspectors where a decision was made not to pursue the
public law outline (PLO) process due to previous history, and another where
viability assessments of potential carers were carried out quickly, supported by
the work of the family group conference service to identify suitable family
members.
improving. Children and young people now benefit from increasingly effective
liaison between Guardians and social workers.
personalities and needs of the children and young people they work with. Most
children are seen regularly and seen alone. However, visits are not always
sufficiently focused to ensure that the work needed is completed. As a result,
the preparation of children for placements and the help required for them to
understand their plans is not always effective. Although examples of life story
work were seen, this is not consistently provided for all those children who
could benefit from it.
was seen where a young persons complaint had resulted in a change of
practice in relation to placement moves. An advocacy service is available for
young people, including those placed out of area, and the use of this is
increasing.
exploitation are monitored effectively within the same systems used for those
who are not looked after. Examples were seen of effective work including the
placement of a young person at risk of child sexual exploitation which helped to
minimise this risk, together with the robust management of another young
persons missing from care episodes.

fostering service also monitors the incidence of bullying, and is proactively
running training for carers to ensure that they are aware of the issues and
confident to recognise and report it.
decreasing number of temporary exclusions, and there have been no
permanent exclusions since 2010. No looked after child is missing from
education. Almost all are receiving full time education. The Virtual School
carefully monitors why a child is not receiving full time education, so the
reasons are understood and the arrangements support the childs current care
plan.
pupil premium to ensure that it is improving young peoples attainment. Whilst
the attainment of looked after children showed improvement in 2013, and the
gap between looked after children and their peers is closing, 48% of children
are not making expected or better progress in their learning.
inconsistent. Those that are completed are not always of good quality, and do
not always include childrens views. Too many looked after children are not
placed in schools which are good or better. This is in the context of a high
proportion of schools in Blackpool not being good or better. When a school
receives a reduced inspection judgement, careful consideration is given to the
needs of the individual pupil to ensure that they continue to make progress,
and consider whether it is the right decision for them to stay at the school.
authoritys leisure facilities through the provision of a leisure card. Young
people spoken to said that they were well supported with leisure interests,
which are considered as part of the looked after review process.
looked after. The named nurse liaises with health visitors and school nurses to
alert them to the need for a health assessment, and undertakes assessments
for those without a health visitor or a school nurse. The named nurse liaises
with colleagues in other areas to facilitate access to services for children and
young people placed out of area. Most children have had a dental check, and
most have their immunisations up to date. The vast majority of children under
five years of age have had their developmental checks. However, the local
authoritys figures show that only 79.8% of looked after children had their
health assessments completed during 201314. This is slightly lower than the
national average of 82%.


child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHs). However, access to
CAMHs is too variable to be confident that all children will receive the help they
need, and there is no priority given to looked after children by the service. As a
result, the local authority is forced to source and fund independent packages of
support for some young people. A looked after childrens psychologist provides
valued support to social workers and carers.
carers, with family and friends foster carers, and placed for adoption. Although
placement stability has declined over the past year (from 6.9% of children
having three or more placements in the year to 9.7%), the reasons for children
moving placement are monitored and understood by the local authority. Cases
were seen of children in long-standing stable placements. No children or young
people were found to be in inappropriate placements. Most children live in
placements which are judged good or better by Ofsted, and no child or young
person is in a placement judged inadequate.
authoritys borders given its small size, only a small proportion (less than 10%)
are placed more than 20 miles away. The local authority gives careful
consideration to placing young people a long way away, and does this based
on young peoples needs. Young people placed externally continue to have
access to services such as independent visiting and advocacy.
over the past year and the number of placements overall, although the number
of children placed with local authority foster carers has declined. This is
because a high proportion of carers are now approved for three placements;
this gives the authority flexibility in placing groups of brothers and sisters, but
these carers do not otherwise take three individual children. The local
authoritys record on placing brothers and sisters together is good, with
children being kept together in most cases seen. In one case where the
decision was made to separate children, this was as a result of very careful
consideration of the needs and potential impact on each of the children
concerned.
regularly, and take childrens views into account. Young people say that they
have contact with the people who are important to them. Contact
arrangements take appropriate account of risk.


reviews happen within statutory timescales. This is above national and
statistical neighbours performance. Issues of diversity and identity are
considered and addressed in plans for young people and in the review of these
plans. Examples were seen of good practice by independent reviewing officers
(IROs) in visiting children between reviews to develop a relationship with them
and gather their views, though this does not yet occur in every case. However,
although IROs spoken to were clear about plans for children, overall IROs are
insufficiently challenging of progress on plans and do not routinely challenge
the absence of PEPs and health assessments at an appropriate level. IROs have
not consistently used the issues resolution process well, something which is
acknowledged to be an area of development in the IRO annual report, and the
local authority has already begun work to address this.
group of 20 young people who meet regularly. This work is supported
positively by an Engagement Officer, who was appointed in October 2013. The
CiCC has designed a pledge for looked after children, which was launched in
July 2014. The CiCC has also developed a revised consultation booklet to help
children to give their views at their reviews, which will be launched in
September. The Just Uz chair attends the corporate parenting panel, and puts
forward issues on behalf of children and young people. The local authority is
aware that there is more work to be done to support the good work of the
children in care council so that they can be representative of the views of all
looked after children and young people.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
children experience delay in going to live with their adoptive family. In 201314
a child entering care waited an average of 654 days before being placed for
adoption. Although this reduced from 907 days in 201314 it is still above the
national average.
to live with a family member and nine remained with their foster carers. Two
children remained with their foster carers because no suitable adoptive family
could be identified. The plan for seven children was changed as a result of the
attachments formed between the children and their foster carers, and the
change reflected the childrens wishes.


birth families and who need a permanent alternative home. Over the past 18
months, considerable work has been undertaken with staff in all the childrens
teams to reinforce the message that permanence is everybodys business. This
has resulted in more children being placed for adoption in a timely manner. 41
children were made subject to adoption orders in 201314, representing an
ranged from eight months to seven years, and included some harder to place
children, such as those with complex needs or families of brothers and sisters.
In total, 51 children were placed for adoption during 2013-14.
process, with the aim that by 20152016 the government threshold for the
average time taken between a child entering care and being placed for
adoption is met. Currently, in-year data demonstrates that the agency is
meeting these targets. It is recognised that even by meeting these targets,
Blackpool will still fall outside the national threshold based on the 3-year 2013
was from the threshold figure, and is due to the impact of previous drift in the
cases of many of the children who will be included in the 201316 figures.
fieldwork teams and the adoption team is happening in most cases. However,
in some cases there is still a lack of urgency and a tendency toward sequential
rather than parallel planning. The childs journey to permanence panel monitors
the progress of all looked after children under 10 years old, and follows up on
those children who appear to be at most risk of drift. This has had a positive
impact, with improvements in children moving to live with their adoptive
families in a more timely way.
of the adoption process. The recruitment of a sufficient pool of adopters is a
challenge within Blackpool due to its size and demography. A new recruitment
strategy has been implemented and is having a positive impact. Grant funding
is being used to increase capacity within the adoption team to develop more
tailored marketing and recruitment strategies, which has led to a significant
increase in the number of adoption applications.
seeking permanency. The work is resulting in an increase in the number of
adopters approved from a wide range of lifestyles and cultures, although the
pool of adopters does not yet fully reflect the diverse needs and numbers of
children waiting to be adopted. Given the number of families currently being
assessed, it is anticipated that there will be a significant increase in the number
of adopters approved between 201415 and 201314.


agencies in the North West has led to the exceptionally high shortfall of 405
adopters in March 2013 decreasing to a shortfall of 45 in June 2014. Despite
this decrease, it is recognised that there is still a deficit of adopters, and
managers know that more work is required to further develop the pool and
range of adoptive placements. At the end of 201314 there were only four
Blackpool families waiting to be matched with children. At that time there were
best interests and who were awaiting suitable families.
matched locally. Applications are therefore taken from people in a 50-mile
radius. A wide range of family finding strategies is used in collaboration with
key partners. An example of this is being part of a group of six local authority
adoption agencies who meet at a monthly placement group, enabling them to
pool local resources and place children with less delay. To facilitate more
speedy placements, children who have a should be placed for adoption
(SHOBPA) decision and adopters in stage 2 of the process are also discussed at
these meetings when appropriate. Blackpool is also a member of Placements
Northwest and Adopt Northwest, which allows the agency to match children
with potential families via a web-based database. Participation in adoption
activity days has also resulted in successful adoptive families being identified.
authorities, has jointly commissioned a voluntary agency to set up the North
West Concurrent Planning and Fostering to Adopt scheme. As yet it is too early
to see any impact from this initiative.
process. The new arrangements, with Bolton and Blackburn local authorities,
increase flexibility and timeliness. It is a well-structured process and receptive
to working at a pace which suits individual adopters. All initial enquiries receive
a prompt and personal response. This early responsiveness is highly regarded
by potential adopters. Adopters report that the two stage system was thorough
and challenging, and that they felt well prepared by the time they reached the
adoption panel. They found the input from adopters, adoptees and birth family
members particularly helpful. They also praised a training event held for
prospective adopters relatives, feeling that this helped prepare the whole
family. There are readily available training and support groups for adopters
post approval and post placement, which are also both welcomed and well
regarded by adopters.


attention is paid to sibling attachment. The quality of child profiles and
photographs is good in the majority of cases. The quality and timeliness of the
preparation of children for adoption, such as through life story work, is
variable. In most cases it is initiated at the start of the childs journey in care
by foster carers, through the use of memory boxes, but this does not happen
routinely. The life story books and later life letters read were sensitively written
and appropriate to the age of the child. However, there is considerable delay in
producing some of these, and this can hamper the work undertaken with
children and has led to complaints to the service.
Adoption Birth Ties project commissioned by Blackpool, offers advice,
information and support when the plan for their child is adoption. This support
is also available post adoption. The take up of this service is increasing slowly.
In 201314 six birth parents used the service.
adopters and the matching of children to families. Panels are well managed and
chaired. Panel members are suitably knowledgeable and well trained. Timely
input from legal and medical professionals is available for all panels. Quality
assurance processes, including the work undertaken by the adoption champion,
is effective in improving the quality of reports, such as prospective adopters
reports (PARs) and child permanence reports (CPRs), and is also ensuring that
the correct papers are available in a timely manner at all stages of the process.
Overall, prospective adopters records are thorough, with an improving level of
analysis, although the quality of CPRs is more variable. The adoption panel
promotes good practice and ensures its quality. The oversight of practice
between the Independent Chair of Panel, Panel Advisor and Agency Decision
Maker (ADM) could be strengthened to draw out themes.
of commissioned post-adoption support services. The increasing number of
letterbox contact and direct contact arrangements are well supported and
effectively organised. Children, their adoptive families and birth relatives are
properly informed about post-adoption support. Recent data show 40 requests
for adoption support assessments. Currently, 68 families are in receipt of postadoption support packages, 13 of which were provided through another
agency. Whilst many of these are relatively simple contacts with other agencies
over specific issues, such as schools and signposting to other services, a
number are longer term and more complex. Given the geographical distribution
of the adoption families, some post-adoption support is appropriately
commissioned to other agencies.


and are effective in supporting placements. The input from the educational
psychologist has led to improved outcomes for adopted children and played an
important part in helping families in crisis. The agency offers and manages
Post 18 mailbox as a result of listening to young people who were feeling
pressured to make decisions about direct contact with birth family members
before they were ready. Managers recognise that the rise in the number of
children adopted is increasing the workload of this service, and will continue to,
and that this will need to be addressed.

The graded judgement about the experiences and progress of care
leavers is that it requires improvement
children team, which comprises four experienced personal advisers. The
current premises feature a dedicated Drop In zone for care leavers, providing
a welcoming, well-used facility. Care leavers have easy access to personal
advisers and other partner agencies who attend the Drop In. Additionally, a
duty service is provided if a young persons allocated personal adviser is
unavailable.
positive about elements of the support they receive, particularly valuing the
twice weekly Drop In.
their financial rights and entitlements. However, when a package of support is
offered to care leavers by partner agencies and others these are often agreed
verbally, and are not sufficiently clear. Arrangements would be clearer for both
staff and care leavers if this agreement was recorded and provided in writing.
Greater use could be made of social media, such as a dedicated website and
Facebook pages, to broaden the range of methods to communicate with care
leavers, whilst also allowing young people to comment, and feedback on
services.
the needs of young people. The plans are not generally effective in setting out
prospective outcomes. They are insufficiently specific, accountable and time
bound to measure progress and address barriers when they arise. Not all
looked after young people have a Pathway Plan by the age of 16 years and 3
months.


services is effective. Transition workers and adult service social workers work
carefully with personal advisers to secure funding and access to supported
housing or residential provision for care leavers with learning difficulties or
mental ill health.
with their former foster carers. The local authority is aware that this is too low
and needs be increased. Too many care leavers are choosing to live in private,
rented flats, when they are neither practically nor emotionally equipped to
successfully sustain independent living. The authority recognises this, and has
commissioned some additional provision which will become available in August
to improve the current practice of spot purchasing. No young people live in bed
and breakfast.
their personal advisers. This may be an effective approach for some, but there
should be a broader range of approaches, possibly including group work
programmes, used to support young people in developing the skills they need
to live independently.
Plans. Young people are signposted to accessible sexual health, teenage
pregnancy and substance misuse services as required. The looked after nurse
attends some Drop In sessions. A clinical psychologist provides some
dedicated days to the over-12 looked after children team, including care
leavers, to assist personal advisers in identifying emotional and mental health
issues and supporting signposting and referrals to services.
which they can present to different health services and providers to reduce the
need to repeatedly recount their health details.
year-old care leavers who are not in education, employment or training to
are seven care leavers currently attending higher education courses and five
young people are hoping to commence degree or HND courses in September
care leavers attending university, and concerted efforts should be made to
increase the number of care leavers attending university and other forms of
higher education in future.
school have no identified training or learning to attend between the age of 16
and 18. The virtual school is not sufficiently involved in supporting personal
advisers with this cohort of young people. Poor support at this stage may
account for the low number of young people in Blackpool who, historically,
have been in education, training or employment beyond their 18th birthdays.

participation in education, employment or training (EET) and these are
beginning to demonstrate some impact. Some of these initiatives include 10
care leavers employed by the Council through apprenticeship programmes;
eight care leavers have secured opportunities after attending a recent
Motivat8 course; and 14 care leavers have been engaged in EET following
attending a Youthability Hub, a forum bringing local providers and agencies
together to provide information and signpost care leavers to available
opportunities. The support of Connexions personal advisers is regarded by
personal advisers and care leavers as effective.
care leavers, including the local Further Education College, personal advisers
need to adopt more effective use of motivational approaches and resolute
persistence to ensure that more care leavers are engaged in EET, particularly
those who are more vulnerable and disengaged.
celebrated earlier in 2014 at an event for all looked after children, attended by
senior managers and elected members. An energetic and effective participation
officer was recruited recently and is starting to engage some care leavers in the
children in care council and to promote their participation through other
avenues, partly by her regular attendance at Drop In sessions. Active efforts
are being made to assemble a group of care leavers to prepare a contribution
to National Care Leavers week in October 2014.
arrangements for personal advisors have not met the expected standard over a
recent nine-month period and have not been effective. This is the result of the
absence of a team manager, and an agency team manager has been recently
appointed. Personal advisors caseloads are high. This affects their ability to
offer consistently effective, responsive and planned interventions with care
leavers who have disengaged and those who are more chaotic and vulnerable.
measuring the effectiveness of the service and its impact on care leavers.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
The local authority understands its community and the specific challenges faced by
children and young people in Blackpool. Structures are now in place to ensure that
senior leaders and elected members have sufficient information to fulfil their roles
of scrutiny and challenge. The senior leadership team, supported by elected
members, have demonstrated positive improvement against the childrens
improvement board plan. A range of performance management data is available,
but this has not been used to improve performance in all areas. Managers and
senior managers complete audits. These are largely compliance based, but have
been used to drive improvements in some key service areas. The authority is
aware of the need to move to a more qualitative approach. The local authority and
partners, scrutinised by the Blackpool Safeguarding Children Board (BSCB) are now
focused on achieving the consistent provision of early help services. The role of the
corporate parenting panel is underdeveloped and it does not provide rigorous
challenge of the local authority. A commissioning strategy is not yet in place and
the sufficiency strategy remains in draft. Good working arrangements are in place
between the Director of Childrens Services (DCS), the Chair of the LSCB and the
Chief Executive. Staff morale within childrens social care is generally good.
Blackpool Borough Council, the Director of Childrens Services, the Blackpool
Safeguarding Children Board Chair, the Leader of the Council and the Childrens
Improvement Board. Regular and evaluative information is made available to
the Childrens Improvement Board which demonstrates that progress is being
made by the local authority and partners against the improvement plan. Most
significantly and appropriately, improvement work has focused on those
children most at risk of harm and in need of help and protection.
to drive improvement in practice. The post holder has a strong understanding
of practice weaknesses and strengths and actively challenges peer and partners
with good effect.
more consistently, and appropriate steps are being taken by the local authority
to protect the most vulnerable children. Significant and targeted work by the
local authority and partners, monitored effectively by the Blackpool
Safeguarding Children Board (BSCB), is currently focused on ensuring that
childrens needs are met through the provision of early help when concerns
first arise.

services for children. Increasingly, more attention is being given to the quality
of services offered to, and the outcomes for, looked after children. Weaknesses
are known and action plans are in place to progress required improvements in
these services. Progress in respect of these plans has not led to sufficient
impact for children. Strategic planning for care leavers is under-developed, and
services offered to them are not good enough. Young people are not assisted
sufficiently in achieving their full potential.
services. Increased financial investment by the authority has led to the funding
of an additional 15 social work posts. The previous Joint Executive Scrutiny
Panel consisted of cross party members, and actively investigated the reasons
for the local authorities past poor performance. New arrangements have
recently been made for the scrutiny panel to routinely hold officers to account
going forward. This development requires some elected members to be
brought up to speed. This has disrupted the continuity of challenge that they
are able to offer whilst elected members develop a clear understanding of
service requirements.
attendance from elected members, and some elected members have met with
young people from Just Uz, the children in care council, they do not provide
robust challenge to officers about the information presented to them. It is not
clear how they influence and engage with all elected members to champion the
needs for looked after children.
undertaken, supplemented by a childrens strategic needs assessment. These
documents provide detailed knowledge of the population of Blackpool,
including information about the prevalence of domestic abuse and children at
risk of child sexual exploitation. However, neither document provides sufficient
detail about the number of children living in households where there is parental
drug or alcohol misuse or parental mental ill-health.
supported by robust analytical commentary. The available information does
allow the local authority to examine trends and, while robust action has been
taken in some areas when dips in performance have been identified, action has
not been taken consistently. Managers at all levels routinely undertake audits
of work for which they are directly responsible. Audit work has rightly
prioritised the need to ensure compliance to required standards, and audits
increasingly provide specific comment on quality of some key areas of practice.
The findings of audits are effectively collated and used to drive improvements
in practice.


co-ordination of current commissioning activity is fragmented and reactive and
for looked after children does not effectively link to the looked after childrens
strategy. Learning from successful strategies employed by adult services is
informing the development of commissioning arrangements. The looked after
childrens sufficiency statement remains in draft, and it does not make
sufficient linkage with the current and projected looked after children
population and the available provision to identify shortfalls or to outline plans
to address these.
West Regional Framework, alongside internal monitoring, ensure that external
fostering and childrens homes placements are of good quality. Good attention
is given to ensuring that placements for looked after children are secured
within a 20-mile radius of Blackpool. As a result, only 36 of the 409 (8.8%)
looked after children are currently placed further afield.
performance and service provision. A plan to tackle these was put in place in
April 2014, but it is too early to see impact for children.
managers speak positively about working for Blackpool. The turnover of social
workers in the local authority has increased in the last twelve months, from
the authority are well known to senior managers, and no significant concerns
have been identified. Of the 96 social work posts within childrens social care,
eight vacancies are covered by agency staff. As a result, caseloads have not
increased for existing staff, who report that their caseloads are not excessive.
The local authority effectively plans recruitment to ensure that key
safeguarding posts are not left uncovered for long periods. This has not been
the case for the vacancies in the looked after children and leaving care
services, and a small number of posts have been vacant for some time.
to familiarise and support these managers with Blackpool policies and
procedures have not been robust, which has resulted in some plans for children
not being given sufficient urgency. The local authority has worked robustly to
deal with poor performance. A wide range of good quality training is available
to staff, who are enabled to attend. The impact of training is not explored well
in supervision. Compliance with the completion of annual appraisals, while
increasing, remains low and means that the workforce development plan does
not provide an analysis of the skills training needed for staff going forward.


The quality of supervision records is variable and does not routinely
demonstrate the extent of reflection on the childs circumstances and whether
the level of intervention is improving the childs outcomes. The urgency given
to the planning for some children is not sufficient. The scrutiny given by senior
managers and independent reviewing officers to ensure plans are progressed
swiftly once decisions have been made, requires improvement.
a wide range of feedback from staff, children, parents and partners to improve
services. The shadow improvement board provides an excellent arena for the
views of operational staff in the authority to have their views heard about the
reality of progress against the improvement plan. This demonstrates the real
commitment that operational staff have to improving outcomes for Blackpool
children. There is a good focus on developing evidence-based practice, and
national learning does inform local practice.
needs to be achieved across the range of services to children in Blackpool. The
priority going forward is to enhance the improvements achieved and sustain an
appropriate pace of change. The local authority will need to ensure that the
pace of, and capacity for, change is not adversely affected by the DCS and
Chair of the local safeguarding children board both leaving their posts in
September.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.

Summary of findings
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
because:
revising and developing its performance and effectiveness. Some of this work is
still very recent and BSCB recognises that there is still much to do. BSCB is not
yet fully compliant with all of its statutory duties. An annual report was
produced in 201213, but it was insufficiently rigorous in analysing the
effectiveness of the Board. Not all statutory partners attend or fully contribute
to the work of the Board, although membership and participation is improving.
Performance information is not provided by all partners to support the robust
scrutiny of service effectiveness. Thresholds for the provision of early help and
referrals to childrens social care are not understood by all partners. An
appropriate range of multi-agency training is provided, and positive impact on
practice in some areas has been identified through case audits. Challenge of
practice has been established, and there are an increasing number of examples
of effective challenge by board members as well as by the Chair. Learning from
national serious case reviews and local reviews is used to drive improvements
in practice. Serious case reviews are completed where the threshold is met to
do so. Currently, four serious case reviews are underway and systems for
disseminating learning from these have been refreshed. Collectively, the
members of BSCB will need to ensure that the progress made is maintained
and further developed when the current chair leaves her post in September.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
duties with all statutory partners undertaking their roles.
Areas for improvement
their families across the partnership.
social care are understood by all partners
promote the welfare of children and young people where
(i)

they are privately fostered

(ii)

their parents have mental health problems or misuse drugs and alcohol

(iii)

they are known to the Youth Offending Team.

the Board.
include relevant information from all partners, and ensure that evaluative
commentary is provided.
from serious case reviews.
and shared priorities, the quality of multi-disciplinary practice with children and
their families, and the impact of help, protection and care on their lives.


The LSCBs strengths
operational practice through multi-agency audits. Audits have effectively
considered practice in respect of child sexual exploitation, core groups, child
protection plans, children who go missing and the impact of parental drug and
alcohol misuse on the care of their children. Learning is collated, reported to
the Board and disseminated to agencies to improve practice. Repeat audits
take place to evaluate the impact of this learning on practice.
partners have complied with the requirement to complete the audit. These
have been scrutinised by the Performance Management and Evaluation (PMEG)
sub-group and deficits identified. BSCB panel member interviews have taken
place to hold section 11 leads to account for deficits, and an action plan is
being monitored.
undertaken; 41 schools in Blackpool were contacted and all but one completed
the audit Responses have been scrutinised for learning, which has been
reported to the Board. An action plan is in place and is effectively monitored by
the BSCB sub group.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
Chief Executive of the local authority, the Director of Childrens Services,
partnership leaders, elected members and the Childrens Improvement Board.
Recent alterations to the reporting arrangements to the childrens improvement
board mean that BSCB is able to demonstrate that it is making progress against
the childrens improvement board action plan, and effectively holding partners
to account. Very recent action has resulted in the development of sound
arrangements for the BSCB to effectively scrutinise the work of the Health and
Well-being Board. It is too early to see the impact of this for children. The
Childrens Trust has not been functioning effectively, with members not clear
about their roles and responsibilities and the focus of their activity. A review is
in progress to determine future membership, focus and the links to the BSCB.


last inspection. Commitment and engagement from attendees has resulted in
greater ownership of safeguarding issues across the partnership. Many of the
members of the strategic board also chair sub-groups. Lay members have been
recruited; one is well established and is able to demonstrate impact of her role
within the community, the other is recently recruited. The youth offending
team is not a member of the BSCB, but is directly represented by the head of
Childrens Social Care who is the senior manager with line management
responsibility for this service. Insufficient focus is given by the Board, to this
group of vulnerable young people. Cafcass has not fulfilled its statutory role to
attend the Board; other arrangements in which Cafcass were to have input on
the board were agreed, however, following challenge by BSCB, Cafcass have
agreed full membership and attendance from August 2014. The Chair is leaving
in September 2014. Arrangements are in place to recruit a successor.
processes, which have improved the BSCBs ability to carry out its statutory
functions. The Chair has successfully challenged BSCB members to
demonstrate the extent of the impact of strategic and operational practice to
safeguard children, and to work as effective partners. In recent months, there
are increasing examples where board members are providing appropriate
challenge to each other without the prompting of the Chair, which
demonstrates the growing strength of the Board.
which appropriately reflects key areas for board scrutiny based on analysis. The
ability of the partnership to identify and respond sufficiently early to neglect
experienced by children is given continued focus, and builds on the work to
date of the neglect priority sub-group.
voice of the child. It has very recently introduced childrens story boards to its
agenda to understand the direct impact of the Boards work on the experiences
of children. The Board recognises that there is more to do to ensure that the
childs experience is routinely the focus of its work.
understood and effectively implemented across the partnership. Partners have
responded to this challenge, and have increased confidence that when children
are at risk of harm referrals are made promptly to childrens social care. The
understanding of thresholds for children who require early help and do not
meet the threshold for statutory intervention, while improving, is less well
developed. Current work is appropriately focused on monitoring the
effectiveness of the partnership response to more children being offered
effective early help.


child sexual exploitation. Members are assured through a wide variety of
quality assurance information that when these issues are identified, children
receive good support. The BSCB multi-agency plan to reduce child sexual
exploitation appropriately reflects the regional pan-Lancashire plan, national
learning and action specific to Blackpool. The BSCB child sexual exploitation
priority group did not succession plan effectively, which has delayed progress
against the strategic action plans. Arrangements are now in place to take this
work forward.
reviews. Of the nine serious incident notifications made to Ofsted since August
various points in their completion. One was initially delayed due to national
capacity issues in identifying suitable experienced independent reviewers, but
others are progressing appropriately. Refreshed arrangements have been
developed to ensure that each agency is accountable to the Board to embed
learning from serious case reviews in practice.
that reflects the priorities of the Board. Attendance is robustly monitored, and
where this falls short of expectation this is swiftly highlighted to the Board,
resulting in improved attendance. The BSCB is developing a framework to
better scrutinise the impact of training on practice. The impact of some training
is measured through audits, and was particularly apparent in the work to
improve the functioning and practice of core groups across the partnership.
effectiveness.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk
of harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails
to identify where improvements can be made.


Information about the inspection and the review
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff worked with families and each other and discussed the
effectiveness of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever
possible, they talked to children, young people and their families. In addition, the
inspectors have tried to understand what the local authority knows about how well it
is performing, how well it is doing and what difference it is making for the people it
is trying to help, protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 7 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Janet Fraser
Deputy lead inspector: Sheena Doyle
Team inspectors: Michael Ferguson, Pauline Turner, Sara Goodinge, Nick Stacey,
Wendy Ratcliff


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners
of all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children
and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


