Bolton Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 14 January  5 February 2014
The overall judgement is requires improvement
There are no widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being
harmed or at risk of harm. The welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and
promoted. However, the authority is not yet delivering good protection and help for
children, young people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

Requires
improvement


Good


Good


Good


Requires
improvement

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
requires improvement
The LSCB is not yet demonstrating the characteristics of good.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents

Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness local safeguarding children board


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority requires improvement and is not yet good because

Staff from agencies who have a statutory role in investigating child protection
concerns, such as police, social workers and health services, do not always
meet together at the outset of an investigation to share information and plan
their enquiries where there are concerns about the risk of significant harm to
children. As a result, enquiries may be compromised and children could be at
further risk of harm.


When social workers undertake assessments for children who need help or
protection, the strengths and risks are not always thoroughly explored. In a
small number of cases seen by inspectors, children and young people were
reporting that they had been physically assaulted. Child protection enquiries
should have been made but had not been.


Written plans for children who need help and protection do not always specify
what needs to be done, when by, or who should do it. For example, some plans
do not state how often the social worker and other workers should visit the
child. Some plans do not explain what will happen if the parents do not comply
with the plan.


The quality of social workers records is variable, and some are poor.
Chronologies are present but these are not consistently up to date or
comprehensive. Managers and senior managers regularly check case files and
give advice if improvements or more work are needed, but the poor recording
and practice found in some 20 cases had not been addressed prior to it being
raised during the inspection.


Independent reviewing officers (IROs) who chair child protection conferences
and review plans for children have high case loads. In some cases they do not
make sure that child protection planning is good enough.


IROs are also required to monitor and review plans for looked after children.
They hold the reviews on time, but in many cases they do not have time to
monitor the progress of plans between reviews and they do not always see
children and young people as part of their reviews. In some cases there are
delays in distributing minutes. Due to capacity issues, the IRO service does not
carry out its quality assurance function of collecting information and reporting
on how services are making life better for children.


Few children attend their child protection case conferences, and advocacy
services are not available to all who do attend. This results in childrens and
young peoples views not being fully taken into account in meetings to promote
their welfare.



Looked after children and young people do not always get help with their
mental health problems as soon as they need it.


Looked after children and care leavers who met inspectors were not fully aware
of their entitlements.

the effectiveness of the independent reviewing service, the variable quality of
the social work assessments and the support to children and young people with
mental health issues, were also reported in the last Ofsted inspection in March
The local authority has the following strengths:
families.
services. All social workers met during the inspection reported that they were
proud to be working in Bolton, and could describe effective work to improve
childrens lives. The workforce strategy is good and ensures that there are well
trained staff who work permanently for the borough and have good knowledge
of the children and families they are supporting.
including supporting young people at risk and tackling offenders at an early
stage.
considered and involve senior officers. The vast majority of children and young
people live in settled placements that meet their needs. The small number who
are placed out of the area receive good support. The family placement team
provides good support to foster carers.
them regularly. Children are positive about the support offered by their social
worker or key workers and are proud about their achievements.
and carer leavers and schools across Bolton is driving improvements in pupils
attendance, achievements and their progress in class. The inclusion services
help to reduce the number of young people temporarily excluded from school
and help looked after children to access their full entitlement to education.
Support to families who home educate is good.
authority makes sure this proceeds swiftly. People who want to adopt a child
receive good advice and preparation along with a timely, careful assessment of


their suitability. Children and adopters are matched quickly and fully supported
throughout the process.
open to all adopters, and high quality assessments and support to families who
need it.
Bolton offers a good range of accommodation options, including staying with
the same foster carers after reaching 18 years of age. Many young people are
in education, training or employment, and a good number of care leavers go on
to university.
and elected members to contribute to service developments. Councillors,
particularly those responsible for childrens services, have a good understanding
of social work services from weekly briefings with senior officers and through
meeting children and young people.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Areas for improvement
strategy discussions and meetings, and local authority designated officer
(LADO) meetings.
the LADO, agreed actions, responsibilities and timescales are clearly recorded
and reviewed to ensure their completion.
account of risk and protective factors, and of the impact of the situation on
each child in a familys life experience.
of risk. They should be specific, measurable, include who is responsible for
actions, and have clear timescales for improved outcomes for children.
Contingency planning and visiting frequency should also be detailed.
rationale for the contact, whether the child was seen and alone, and the childs
views if appropriate.
practice and recording if not consistently good.
ensure that advocacy services are available for all of them.
planning regulations are met; this to include ensuring that looked after children
are seen as part of their reviews, that care plans are monitored between
reviews, and that child protection and children looked after meetings rigorously
ensure that actions across agencies are successfully completed. When practice
is seen as not good enough, ensure that this is documented and formally
reported to senior managers and the BSCB for their action.
entitlements.
health services (CAMHS) and ensure that all children, young people and carers
have timely access to support to address their emotional well-being, including
improving the use of strength and difficulties questionnaires.


information given at the point of placement, and their responsiveness to foster
carers.
aspirational targets for care leavers and the actions that the local authority,
virtual college and partners will take to maximise opportunities for care leavers
to enter the world of work successfully through this training route.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Robert Hackeson
Team inspectors: Neil Penswick, Fiona Parker, Linda Steele, Sarah Urding, Shirley
Bailey, Margaret Farrow.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 65,250 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Bolton. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 23% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 19% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 19% (the national average is 15%)
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 29% of
all children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are Asian or Asian British who account for 20% of the population.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 26% (the national average is 18%).
 in secondary schools is 20% (the national average is 14%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 4,179 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a
reduction from 4,187 at 31 March 2012.
 At 31 March 2013, 215 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is a reduction from 236 at 31 March 2012.
However, during the inspection this figure reached over 340, representing a
 At 31 March 2013, 13 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from 14 at 31 March 2012.

Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 540 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 83 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 515
(80 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2012.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 Of this number, 100 (19%) live outside the local authority area
 Five live in residential special schools3
 There are no unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 During 201213:
 there were 150 who have ceased to be looked after, which included:
and moved on to independent living.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates six childrens homes. Five were judged to be
good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Boltons safeguarding arrangements was in
March 2012. The local authority was judged to be Good.
The previous inspection of Boltons services for looked after children was in
March 2012. The local authority was judged to be Good.
The previous inspection of Boltons adoption service was in June 2009. The
local authority was judged to be Good.
The previous inspection of Boltons fostering services was in November
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since January 2007. She
has also been responsible for adult services since December 2012
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since January 2010.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
require improvement
families. The Framework for Action underpins this and provides partners with a
pathway to prioritise and determine what services are required to support,
respond to and coordinate a range of early help services to children and young
people. Agencies use the common assessment framework well to assess the
needs of children and young people. Together with families, they agree which
services should be offered through child action meetings before difficulties
become serious enough to need intervention from childrens social care.
focus on targeted intervention. Only two of the ten childrens centres inspected
to date by Ofsted are rated good, compared with 68% nationally, resulting in a
lack of consistency in the quality of the support being offered to families across
the borough.
assessment duty where consideration occurs for social work support. Urgent
cases of high risk are telephoned through for immediate action. Health and
education also receive copies of the police notifications, and this is good
practice. Parents who met inspectors reported very positively about the support
to them and how this has built their confidence in tackling issues around
domestic violence, helping them to parent better and reduce risks to their
children.
the services for children. It is contributing to a significant reduction in the
proportion of young people who exhibit offending behaviour; since January
social care services. They receive a good response from the referral and
assessment teams when they make contact to discuss concerns to help them
decide whether a formal referral is warranted. Where concerns are escalating,
support from childrens social care services is easily accessed. Inspectors saw
examples of such cases being stepped up appropriately through the weekly
Multi-Agency Resource Panel (MARP) and other cases stepped down where
outcomes for children had improved following social work intervention.
locality referral and assessment teams and the Children with Disabilities team.
However, there is a lack of consistency of response from the social care service.
In a small minority of cases seen by inspectors risks were not fully assessed,


cases were closed prematurely or children were assessed as in need when child
protection procedures should have been applied.
(PPIU) restricts their ability to participate in strategy discussions. In a small
number of cases seen by inspectors this resulted in social workers visiting
children suspected of suffering significant harm without a discussion with the
police; this lack of joint planning in advance of enquiries meant that information
was not shared and agencies were potentially working in isolation.
initiated but had not been. In addition, two of the cases had been closed
without a thorough consideration of the risks, leaving children at risk of
significant harm.
main these only involve the police and childrens social care. Other agencies,
such as health services, are not routinely involved, and their information is not
always available to inform decision making. When child protection enquiries are
initiated these are timely and undertaken by suitably qualified social workers.
an issue at the last Ofsted inspection in March 2012, and there has been
insufficient progress to ensure that they are consistently good. Overall, written
assessments are too descriptive of the children and families circumstances and
lack an exploration of life from the childs point of view. In a small minority of
cases there has been a lack of professional challenge and an over-reliance on
what parents were saying, in particular in relation to parents substance misuse
and domestic violence. Children and young people who need an assessment by
social workers are seen and, where appropriate, seen alone. Most social
workers have a good knowledge of their children and families; however, this is
not translated into an explicit consideration of the risk and capacity of the
parents to protect the child.
and maintain day-to-day oversight on cases and duty work; however,
management oversight does not always sufficiently challenge practice, for
example where assessments are not robust and are lacking in detail. Challenge
to workers and support is conducted through regular supervision, where actions
are checked to ensure that they are working and timely. Supervision records
are case and task orientated, however actions are not sufficiently prioritised or
timescales identified and the recording does not evidence that there is deep
consideration of the risks in the case and the professional judgement that is
made in this regard. Although there is an audit programme, and senior
management overview of cases, these had not identified and robustly
addressed key deficiencies seen by inspectors during this inspection, such as
the quality of assessments and variable quality of recording.


sufficiently detailed in setting specific and achievable objectives; as a
consequence, progress was not easy to measure. Some plans are unnecessarily
long, making it difficult for parents and professionals to concentrate on the key
changes needed to reduce risks. Visiting frequency and contingency planning
are not routinely included in written plans, resulting in some cases in parents
not being fully aware of the consequences if risks were not sufficiently reduced.
workers in all the teams, providing effective support for children in need of help
and protection. A good example is the one-to-one work with parents and
children to increase awareness around keeping safe where domestic abuse is a
concern. Parents and young people who spoke to inspectors were positive
about the quality of their relationships with social workers, who they report to
be available, open, honest and respectful. One young person stated that her
social worker was brilliant, always available ensuring that I understood what
was happening.
high caseloads and, as a result, are not able to monitor and improve the quality
of work. One conference attended by an inspector was insufficiently challenging
to other agencies on the lack of progress on the case. Review conferences are
not always quorate and some schools do not routinely attend when children on
roll are involved. The minutes of child protection conferences are not
consistently distributed in a timely manner. Currently only 60% are distributed
within 20 working days. Core groups and child protection conferences are
timely, and reports prepared for child protection conference by social workers
and other professionals are usually shared with families beforehand, assisting
the families understanding of concerns.
planning process through the use of child-friendly information packs and are
able to record their views prior to child protection conferences. Levels of
attendance by children and young people at conferences and core groups are
low. The local authority has been piloting an advocacy service for a very small
number of children subject to child protection plans.
children subject to child protection plans, and this had gone down from 236 in
March 2012 to 213 in March 2013. However, in the last ten months there has
been a significant increase and at the time of the inspection there were over
partner agencies on the reasons for the 63% increase in formal plans, the
impact on the services and whether alternative strategies could also provide for
the needs of these families. Alongside the increase in numbers subject to a
plan, there has been a worsening in the timeliness of initial child protection
conferences from 89% at the beginning of 20134 to 79% currently, although
this remains above the national average.


to date or comprehensive. Case recording is variable. Some good examples
were seen by inspectors, including detailed observations of childrens
presentation and development and clear evidence of the progress of the case.
In other cases, though, the recording was minimal. Management decision
making is evident in case records, but the rationale for the decisions made is
not always sufficiently detailed.
and social workers do not attend all of the meetings, reportedly due to capacity
issues within those agencies. Information is gathered from them prior to
meetings; however, in a minority of cases seen by inspectors, not all of the
necessary checks had taken place prior to decisions being taken at the meeting.
When decisions are made by the LADO not to take further action, the recording
of the rationale is not always clear.
workers and this offers good consideration of all the issues within the family.
Outreach support is also available from the adolescent unit if needed to prevent
children coming into care. The availability of electronic records and a senior
manager being on call enables informed decision making and good
communication with the day-time services.
homeless well. They immediately assess their situation and use the
commissioned mediation service to try to resolve difficulties at home, or they
provide accommodation similar to that offered to care leavers.
children and young people at risk of child sexual exploitation. Effective targeted
and preventative action is a priority. The use of a CSE indicator tool is
established and used by most agencies, however this is yet to be embedded in
schools. Preventative strategies and disruption activity are proving effective and
giving strong messages of no tolerance to perpetrators. Where levels of risk
are intensifying, as identified through intelligence or disclosure, prompt CSE
strategies are held to coordinate investigations, assessments and plans. In
cases seen by inspectors, risks had substantially reduced following interventions
by the team.
from home or care are in place, but patterns and trends are yet to be analysed.
The Missing From Home police officer is co-located in the Exit team and reviews
on a daily basis all missing from home incidents. All risks, including of CSE, are
communicated to a childrens services senior manager on a daily basis. Police
and social care meet weekly to discuss all cases open to the police and social
care, and fortnightly focus on those young people at high risk of CSE and of
going missing.


authority has developed a good joined-up approach to support pupils at risk of
missing out on school, such as children home educated, newly arrived and in
alternative provision such as the PRU. For instance, in the past two years the
work to track and check the safety and achievements of home educated
children has been completely overhauled, with effective systems and
arrangements now in place. Families who choose to home educate are
supported by visits which ensure that children are safe and appropriately
educated. In addition, a school nurse ensures that all home educated childrens
immunisations are up to date.
made as necessary and interventions in high risk domestic abuse cases benefit
from good access to independent domestic abuse advisors.
responsive service which supports placements well. Regular visits by social
workers promote stability and positive outcomes for children, in particular those
attending language and sport schools. Good attention is given to their family
circumstances, their religion and culture.
including needs arising out of disability, ethnicity, language and gender, are
considered in assessments and addressed well. This is supported by the work of
a Black and Minority Ethnic family support worker who promotes positive and
relevant social work practice to meet the cultural and language needs of
children and their families. Access to interpreters is readily available for
children, young people and their families for whom English is not their first
language.
The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence are good
and young people on the edge of care. This includes the Adolescent Support
Unit rated outstanding by Ofsted, which offers outreach, one-to-one support
and short breaks for young people; and the family group conferencing service,
run by Barnardos and contracted to work with 40 families each year. Due to
these initiatives the number of young people over the age of 11 coming into
care each year has reduced by approximately half over the past five years.
an appropriately senior level. Care planning involves an incremental process:
exploring reunification at home as a first option; followed by placement with
extended family; and then consideration of foster care or residential care.
Adoption is always considered, and for young children decisions are sufficiently
timely.


Thorough assessments explore the viability of such arrangements and whether
or not they match the needs of the children. Carers who met inspectors
reported that they were very positive about the range and effectiveness of
support available, including the network of support groups run by carers such
as an Asian carers group, a mens group and a fostering buddy scheme.
recommendations to promote the welfare of the children. Bolton is working with
the local family justice board to reduce court delays for children. Timescales for
care proceedings, reported as 35 weeks, are still higher in Bolton and in the
North West overall than the 26 week timescale now required. The Public Law
Outline procedure devised by Bolton last year, and adopted by Greater
Manchester local authorities, is due to be further evaluated in April 2014.
management panel, which includes senior officers. When the plan for a child is
to return home, effective multi-agency work and clear planning help parents
understand what they need to do to ensure that children are safe and their
needs can be met.
and visit them regularly, meeting statutory requirements. Children are seen
alone and are regularly consulted about their wishes and feelings. Social
workers and other professionals undertake good direct work with children, such
as life story work, to help them understand their identity. Children who met
inspectors were positive about the support offered by their social workers or
key workers and are proud of their achievements.
bullying and report positively about the support they receive from school and
placements. Voice4You, the childrens consultation group, has also identified
that tackling bullying is a priority for their work.
Youth Offending Team works with looked after young people who are offending
or at risk of offending and provides a range of schemes to help keep them safe
and engage in activities that will support their education or employment
opportunities. The latest available data, for 201213, shows the proportion of
looked after children cautioned or convicted was lower than similar authorities
and England averages: 4% compared with 6% nationally.
dental checks, and immunisations are up to date. Specialist training is provided
by the LAC health team to carers, staff, GPs, school nurses and adopters. There
is a dedicated pathway for looked after children in the Bolton child and
adolescent mental health team (CAMHS). However, due to capacity issues and


a significant rise in referrals, CAMHS have introduced new criteria to accept
only urgent or critical cases and respond within the national 18-week timescale
for referrals. This has resulted in delays in receiving a timely service for some of
the most vulnerable children looked after. The percentage of strength and
difficulties questionnaires completed is much lower than comparators
(53%:71%). This was a recommendation at the last Ofsted inspection and
nobody has been identified with primary responsibility for their collation.
improvements in pupils progress and achievements at both Key Stage 2 and 4
in 2012. While performance dipped in 2013 at Key Stage 4, the proportion
achieving five good GCSEs remains above that nationally. Current tracking data
show that 29% of care leavers already have a grade A-C in English or
mathematics and this group is already making better progress from their
starting points than last year, and at a faster rate than that found nationally.
their individual starting points. Detailed current tracking data for primary aged
pupils from Key Stage 1 also show that all looked after children in Year 3 are
making at least expected progress in reading and maths and 94% in writing,
which is good.
time. Information is used to identify those at risk of falling behind and
challenge and support are provided by the virtual head teachers to help
children to catch up. A team of key workers provides additional support when
needed, including booster classes and one-to-one support to help students
meet their targets. The virtual school team monitors PEPs and contacts schools
where there are concerns around the information provided.
and there have been no permanent exclusions since 2011. Urgent action is
taken when children are missing from school and the improving attendance
rates pay testament to the impact of such work; current rates are 96.8%,
above that found nationally for similar groups and this is very good. All looked
after children access their 25 hours entitlement to education. A very small
number have an alternative curriculum and this is designed to meet their
individual needs, where their achievements and attendance are checked
regularly.
that found for all children nationally. Care is taken to ensure school placement
stability; this includes support to schools and carers. As a result numbers
moving school in-year are low.
people in the area. As a means of improving further, a virtual school for looked


after children out of borough has been developed. Very few children are placed
in residential special schools away from their home communities.
for older children and siblings groups the placement matches available are
limited. Foster carers and children, though, are well supported in forming
positive relationships that allow the children to thrive with their initial carer.
Consequently when the childs plan is finalised as permanency, in many cases
the existing carers offer to continue, giving them continuity and stability. This is
carefully assessed to ensure that where the child is living has met the childs
needs to date and that the carers have the capacity to continue to do so
throughout their childhood.
people remain living with the same foster carers or in the right childrens home.
It has been ambitious in identifying where further improvements could be made
in placement stability and in the sufficiency of provision for teenagers: a
recruitment campaign is underway to increase the number of carers, and Keep
Safe training is being delivered to enable existing carers to manage teenagers
risk taking behaviour.
good quality. Children and young people who spoke to inspectors said that they
have regular contact with their family and can see their friends where they live.
Suitable contact is also arranged with significant other people in their lives, who
are not relatives but are important to them, such as former foster carers.
the local authority, close to their original home. Most of those living with carers
from independent fostering agencies or in a childrens home are in settings that
are judged good by Ofsted. The small number of children who are placed out of
the area receive good support. They live a short distance from the Bolton area,
mostly within 20 miles, and all are visited regularly by their social workers.
Good reciprocal arrangements with neighbouring authorities ensure their health
and education needs are met in a timely way. A young person spoken to in an
out of area placement as part of this inspection reported positively on the
support they received from the local authority.
active family finding is taking place for these both in-house and among
independent fostering agencies.
children and the timeliness of achieving permanency. Some aspects are
outstanding.
children and a clear strategy to deliver the majority of services in-house unless


an assessed need determines alternative provision is required. This involves the
prioritisation of the recruitment of family and friends foster carers and
promotion of special guardianship as an alternative to care, to ensure that
mainstream foster care and residential provision is used only for those children
who most need it.
the achievement of positive outcomes on health, education and training.
not set timescales and do not reflect the voice of the child sufficiently. Children
and young people who met inspectors said they do contribute to and
understand their care plans.
their care, including the engagement of some very young children and children
with disabilities. Thoughtful work had been undertaken to ensure children could
express themselves, or were fully represented in the review.
protection conferences, IROs also chair children looked after reviews. IROs are
suitably independent but caseloads are high at around 140, which restricts their
ability to carry out all aspects of the role set out in the care planning
regulations. Children looked after reviews are mainly held on time, but IROs do
not routinely meet with children prior to or between their reviews to monitor
the progress of care planning. Some children looked after had not been seen by
their IROs. Although individual examples of challenge were seen, the quality
assurance aspect of the IRO service is limited. The IRO service does not
currently evaluate its own performance sufficiently to be able to identify what
difference it is making.
range of additional support is available, for example through the support
groups run by carers themselves. Delegated powers are agreed at the start of a
placement and they are clear, age appropriate and help to normalise
experience for children and carers.
individual childrens social workers, foster carers who met with inspectors
identified the quality of information provided by childrens social workers at the
point of placement, and their availability and efficiency as poor. Examples given
of the negative impact on children included one child starting a new school four
days late because her social worker had failed to place her on the new schools
roll despite advance warning of several months.
troubling them. The advocacy service regularly visits Boltons childrens homes
to hear young peoples views about the care provided.


local authority department and they meet regularly to make sure that the
Corporate Parenting Strategy is promoting improved outcomes for looked after
children. Senior councillors, including the Childrens Champion, robustly
support the importance of these children in Bolton. Achievements are
celebrated at regular events, and senior officers and elected members have a
good knowledge of and pride in individual children and young people.
participation of looked after children has strong corporate support. Looked after
children are involved in a range of activities to help improve the local authoritys
services. For example, they have been involved in devising health
questionnaires to inform service delivery following health assessments and a
childrens guide, Are You Looked After? Voice4U is currently working on a
refreshed Pledge that will include information on looked after childrens
entitlements, but this document is not yet in place and consequently looked
after children do not have up-to-date information on their entitlements.

The graded judgment for adoption performance is good
demonstrated in the increased resources provided to the adoption service and
increased staffing levels during a time of financial austerity.
of all children who leave care are adopted. Bolton has sustained excellent
performance on this indicator.
and moving in with their adoptive family is also better than the average
nationally, and local data for April to December 2013 show a further
improvement, rising from 63% to 76%. Timescales for care proceedings require
further reduction to meet the 26 week requirement stipulated by the Family
Justice Review, and in a small minority of cases lengthy proceedings have
resulted in extensive delay for children. Recruitment, training and assessment
of prospective adopters is well coordinated, inclusive, efficient and timely. Good
reciprocal arrangements with neighbouring authorities minimise delay by
increasing frequency and availability of preparation groups for carers.
at a suitable level of seniority in the organisation and has access to high quality
advice when making decisions about whether children should be placed for
adoption.
experienced independent chair, and panel members receive regular relevant
training. Decisions are reached through thoughtful analysis and careful


consideration of children's attachment needs supplemented by meeting with
social workers and prospective adopters.
Prospective Adopters Reports (PARs) but they are generally good. Constructive
feedback from the panel to workers has improved consistency, and robust
quality assurance systems ensure any variability does not result in delay for
children.
backgrounds, ensuring a wide pool of adopters is available for Boltons children.
and the speed with which they were matched following approval. One adopter
told inspectors they make you feel at ease and help you realise there is no
such thing as a perfect parent. They want normal people who are going to love
their children.
demonstrating a high commitment to securing adoptive families for all children
who need them. Effective arrangements through the regional consortium
Adoption 22 and the local authoritys commissioning arrangements maximise
placement availability and choice for the children in need of adoption who
require a family outside the Bolton area.
to find families for them because they need to live with their brothers and
sisters, have complex needs, or are older. In the most recently published
adoption scorecard, 7% of children had their plans changed from adoption to
other forms of permanence compared to an England average of 9%,
demonstrating better than average success in finding placements for children.
Although numbers of children adopted who were aged five and over were small
they also compared favourably to national comparators.
days, showing some success. At a recent Activity day held in Bolton a child with
complex needs found her family. There has been collaboration with Mosque
leaders to assist in attracting interest from the local Muslim community.
child centred. Adopters are assisted in putting together information on their
family that is age appropriate and foster carers work well with adopters in a
flexible and supportive way, enabling children to cope with the transition more
easily.
generally good. They follow a clear format based on research evidence that
assists children to understand their history.


are provided to adopters through a good range of activities including, bi-annual
social events that are well attended, parent and toddler groups and access to a
library of resources.
needs are of a high quality. They result in families receiving timely help,
including financial support where necessary. Examples were seen of families
and schools receiving advice and training on assisting children to form positive
attachments that helped make their placements more secure.
point disruption occurs, including during introductions. These meetings
demonstrate detailed and thoughtful analysis of what went wrong that informs
future planning for individual children and families and is used for
organisational learning.
counselling service although take up is low; the adoption support service has
responded to a growing number of requests from birth parents to help them to
write letters as part of a letterbox agreement arrangement.
The graded judgment for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
good
leavers spoke convincingly about how safe they feel in their chosen
accommodation and community. They say they are well supported to
understand risks to their safety from, for example, sexual exploitation, drugs
and alcohol. Care leavers report that they have ready access in times of need to
support from their workers or from specialist agencies such as the sexual
health service Parallel and Bolton Integrated Drugs and Alcohol Service
(BDAS). The proportion needing hospital treatment is low because issues are
tackled before they become a real problem.
effectively. For example, a dedicated MARAC worker is currently supporting
three young people to help them keep safe from domestic violence.
timely health assessments that result in comprehensive, individualised health
action plans prepared by the lead professional. Care Leavers have a choice of
venues and of lead professionals to facilitate engagement, and take up is good.
immunisation history are reported to young people means that all Year 11
students receive this information before they transfer to the leaving care team.
Young people also report that they are provided with their national insurance
numbers, birth certificates and passports in a timely way.


aspirations, and outcomes of discussions and evidence of their involvement.
This is an improvement from the last inspection of the service. Care leavers say
they understand the purpose of the plan and feel their views are always
considered.
areas of strength and things that needed to be better, and have resulted in
improvements where needed. Training and support is provided to workers
when necessary through, for example, coaching of individual staff or whole
team training.
service are effective. One head teacher from a local special school spoke
eloquently about the good arrangements for his looked after pupils as they
move from the children with disability team into the young adults service.
maintain strong relationships with staff and carers is good, as is the support
during their transitions into independence. Care leavers spoken to provided
strong and powerful testament to the good support, advice and guidance
provided by their workers and carers to prepare them fully for independence.
The comment of one echoed that of all when she said, my worker is always
there for me.
increasingly, the virtual college to help young people gain employment,
education or training opportunities. These, along with programmes such as
Quest, which builds young peoples skills and confidence to prepare them for
the world of work, and the Looked After Supported Employment scheme which
provides work experience, are actively increasing the proportion of young
people entering education, employment or training. The most recent published
data available indicate that the proportion is above that found nationally and an
improvement on the previous year.
difference to the number choosing to go university. The proportion has
increased well over recent years and is above that found nationally for similar
young people. The local authority provides above and beyond the minimum
funding entitlement at 3,000 annually, and provides a range of additional
financial support such as funds for books or field studies and the cost of a
number of return journeys home. Leaving care workers visit regularly and keep
in touch through telephone calls, texts and emails. Students are able to return
to their carers or accommodation in holiday times.
authority. The corporate strategy for apprenticeships has identified care leavers
as a priority group with the intention to ring-fence some apprenticeships just


for them. This does not identify a specific number, making it difficult for the
Corporate Parenting Board to measure the strategys success in terms of the
number taking them up or moving onto full time employment.
accommodation. Young people spoken to all said they were able to influence
where they lived and decisions were taken in accordance of their wishes. A
Bolton continuing care policy preceded the governments staying put policy by
a number of years. This has ensured that young people who want to remain
with their foster carers after age 18 can do so. Currently there are 12 young
adults using this as their preferred option.
attendance at care leavers pathway plan reviews helps to ensure young people
can live in the accommodation of their choice or move from either foster carer
or supported housing to full independence when ready. Training for foster
carers is provided to help them develop their young peoples independence
skills but also to support them to manage the behaviour of older teenagers.
accommodation, every effort is made to ensure they do not become homeless.
Several examples were provided to show how workers and agencies go out of
their way to enable them to maintain safe living arrangements.
corporate parenting board outlining their commitment to meeting
responsibilities for looked after children. This is currently being revised to
ensure that the rights and entitlements for the care leavers are up to date.
looked after young people convicted, cautioned or subject to a final warning
from the police, which is good. Although seven care leavers are currently in
custody, good partnership working between the Youth Offending Service and
leaving care staff ensures that they are visited regularly, supported during their
stay and timely plans are put in place for their eventual return to the
community.


Leadership, management and governance requires improvement
children and young people. In a minority of cases the local authority had not
initiated child protection enquiries when children reported being assaulted by
family members. The local authority urgently re-opened these cases, which
they acknowledged had not been conducted appropriately under their own
procedures. Poor practice and recording in approximately 20 cases had not
been identified by managers prior to being raised by inspectors.
capacity by the Greater Manchester Police to respond in a timely manner to
child protection issues. Work was being carried out promptly by the authority to
visit children in these cases but there was a lack of joint planning and
information gathering with partner agencies to ensure that all safeguarding
issues were being robustly considered. This has not been rigorously challenged
by the local authority or the Bolton Safeguarding Children Board.
the variability in the social work practice across the borough, in particular the
quality of assessments, plans and the recording where children are being
considered for further assistance and where there are child protection concerns.
lacks the capacity to see every looked after child as part of their review or
between reviews or to carry out fully its quality assurance function, and it is not
compliant with statutory requirements. Despite some good work by individual
IROs, poor practice by agencies is not always challenged during reviews of child
protection conferences and reviews of looked after children.
identified in this inspection also featured in the Ofsted inspection of
Safeguarding and Looked after Children services in March 2012. For example,
that inspection report highlighted as areas of weaker practice the quality and
consistency of assessments, the effectiveness of the Independent Reviewing
Officer service and the low take-up of strengths and difficulties questionnaires
to support children and young people with mental health issues.
services. They have a good knowledge of some individual children and young
people, including high profile cases, those in care proceedings and those placed
outside Bolton. The Assistant Director samples case records on a daily basis and
has a rotating monthly forum in which he and members of his management
team visits different teams to review and audit individual cases with social
workers and team managers. Performance as measured by the national data
indicators is mostly good. The local authority monitors the statistics to enable
an understanding of its achievement. However, these combined efforts have


not resulted in an awareness of all the deficits within the services across the
borough or into robust action to improve them. Senior managers do not have
the systems in place to ensure that they understand and respond to messages
from the front line effectively.
member (the childrens champion), have a good understanding of social work
services, especially for looked after children, from weekly briefings and
engagement with children and young people themselves. They provide a
rigorous challenge to the corporate parenting board, which has led to the
improvements in outcomes for looked after children evidenced during this
inspection.
of Childrens Services and Assistant Director with a clear expectation that good
services should be delivered to the people of Bolton. He has also recently taken
over the supervision of the chair of BSCB, and this has resulted in a clearer
overview of the wider safeguarding issues for the borough. The Bolton
Community Strategy states that children and young people, and vulnerable
people of all ages, are the priority of the authority.
alongside the BSCB to provide strategic leadership across agencies for children
and young peoples services. There are good lines of accountability and
communications between these bodies. However, given that both have recently
been reviewed and re-established, it is too early to identify an impact on
improving services for children in the borough.
on childrens services, resulting in budgets being appropriately sustained within
safeguarding and looked after children services. The 18 childrens centres
funded by the authority had their budgets reduced in 2013 and were
reorganised to move from supporting all children to targeting the most
vulnerable in Bolton. Only two of the ten childrens centres inspected to date
are rated good, compared with 68% nationally. The local authority is
monitoring the impact of the budget reductions on the work of the childrens
centres, and plans to review the effect on services in 2015.
safeguarding separately, identifies national issues and evaluates provision.
Future planning for looked after children is much stronger, resulting in a clearer
plan for improving services and outcomes for looked after children.
children were being dealt with outside the child protection arena. However,
there has been a significant and unexpected increase in the number of children
subject to a child protection plan over the last ten months, from 213 to 340,
and this is continuing to rise. The authority has reviewed individual cases and is


satisfied that only children who need to be subject to a child protection plan are
dealt with in this manner. However neither the local authority nor the BSCB
fully understands the reasons behind the significant increase (63%) in such a
short period of time, nor has worked with partners to address the causes.
IROs have not been sufficiently addressed. Almost all posts are filled by
permanent staff. There is a good trainee scheme and the vast majority of social
workers report positively about the training programme. Some 62% of social
workers have either completed further training (PQ) or are currently on the
scheme, and this is good. The department is currently staffed over numbers
and this assists social workers in having manageable caseloads. Newly qualified
social workers are supported well. Supervision is regular and supportive of
workers, although it is not always reflective of practice. Staff morale is very
good and staff are proud to work for Bolton.
sector for vulnerable children and young people. This includes the advocacy
service, family group conferences, young carers and Bolton Lads and Girls Club.
Evaluation, though, focuses on the take up of services rather than
improvements in outcomes. There is not as yet an overarching commissioning
strategy but inspectors found good work, including the purchasing of individual
placements.
Executive Board are supported by a young peoples group, Voice4U. The
performance of services for looked after children and care leavers in Bolton is
good compared to the national performance indicators, and young people who
met inspectors were very positive about the support they receive. The
importance of the corporate parenting agenda in Bolton is emphasised by a
mural created by looked after children which is positioned in a local authority
committee room to remind elected members of their responsibilities, and also
by a high profile annual celebration of achievements.
review practice. There are few complaints. Individual learning has been
identified resulting in improvements in practice. No themes were identified by
the authority from this small and disparate set of complaints and this was
appropriate.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness local safeguarding children board
The effectiveness of the LSCB requires improvement
Areas for improvement
of the performance and effectiveness of local child protection services. It should
identify areas of weakness, the causes of those weaknesses and the action
being taken to address them as well as other proposals for action.
the authority and their board partners individually and collectively to safeguard
and promote the welfare of children, and advise them on ways to improve.
to ensure they are able to take part in all aspects of child protection work,
including strategy discussions and meetings, child protection conferences and
LADO meetings.
quality of multi-agency interventions, practice, cooperation and the application
of thresholds, to identify key lessons for multi-agency practice and decision
making.
have resulted in cancellation of sessions.
action plans and, where actions are recorded as met, ensure the evidence to
support this is included and tested.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
services to identify priorities for action in the annual report. As there is
insufficient evaluation of the effectiveness of local child protection performance,
there are no comparisons to measure patterns and trends year on year and
consider how to improve services.
strategy discussions and meetings and attendance at child protection
conferences and LADO meetings. There has not been a challenge from the
LSCB on this shortfall.
partners on the board. This follows a period without membership from
CAFCASS due to a regional decision by the organisation not to attend these
meetings. Two independent lay members are well-established and play an
active role in the business of the LSCB.


assess the effectiveness of multi-agency child protection practice and inform
the monitoring of local performance. Some effective auditing of specific key
aspects is undertaken, such as the quality of CAFs and GP reports, which has
resulted in actions for agencies to improve; further sampling periodically
assesses on-going progress. In some aspects progress has been slow, such as
improving the quality of GP reports to initial case conferences.
missing from home, care and education. Without this, monitoring and challenge
to partnership working is not robust.
and publishes these for transparency as required. There are well-established
arrangements for learning and disseminating lessons from both local and
national Serious Case Reviews. Equally, learning from management reviews
improves practice. For example, paediatricians who complete medical
examinations now provide an immediate written outcome to avoid any
miscommunication. The Board works closely with neighbouring LSCBs to
identify any themes which may be relevant for the local area, in particular
learning from child sexual exploitation operations.
have been four serious incident notifications received by Ofsted since the last
inspection in March 2012, and appropriately two of these resulted in serious
case reviews. Most actions from the reviews have been implemented. However,
there has been insufficient challenge over the timeliness of agencies actioning
recommendations, but this has been about changes to processes and has not
affected the protection of children.
well attended by all partner agencies. It regularly reviews progress on business
priorities; however, without a full evaluation of local child protection
performance the board cannot be fully assured it has identified all the key
priorities. The LSCB oversees an effective strategy and action plan to respond
to child sexual exploitation. The recently increased police capacity in the Exit
team is having an initial positive impact on disrupting perpetrators activities.
The team are at an early stage of collating joint intelligence to better
understand the local picture and report to the LSCB.
are accessible through a joint safeguarding partnership with other boroughs.
These are regularly updated through a joint commissioning arrangement and
the guidelines sub-group oversee relevant local updates.
improve the effectiveness and quality of Early Help arrangements following a
review by Lancaster University. The current Framework is well embedded and


commitment to early help is agreed with partners at a strategic level and
operationally. In the majority of cases, children and families are well supported
through early help arrangements.
objectives to train the workforce on all levels of interventions in the Framework
for Action. Evaluating the impact on practice is in the very early stages, with
some initial themes collated; for example, workers reporting more confidence
and understanding of their role. Childrens Centre staff were positive about the
training on learning from serious case reviews that they had received.
cancelled due to low take up. Only 667 delegates of an expected 916 attended
the sessions delivered. Sample audits have been undertaken to understand the
low numbers attending this training and actions have been undertaken this year
to address these issues and ensure higher attendance on courses which better
matches the on-going needs of the workforce.
raising campaigns. Some improvements in the auditing of private fostering
cases are positive, for example contacting schools and health to clarify their
awareness of the childs private fostering status. Although, audits focus on
process where any issues regarding the safety or welfare of children and young
people are identified they are actioned immediately.
Councils Chief Executive are suitably defined. The chair is supervised by the
Chief Executive and also meets regularly and separately with the Director and
Assistant Director to maintain and strengthen links.
well-established and provides a good annual report which aggregates findings
and identifies suitable priorities for wider safeguarding activity. The Sleep Safe
campaign has successfully reduced the death rate from previous figures.


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, workbased
learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and
other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


