Brent
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 14 September 2015  8 October 2015
Report published: 30 November 2015

Childrens services in Brent require improvement to be good


Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Brent require improvement to be good. Although strong and
focused leadership has led to the achievement of a number of important
improvements in the quality of services, the local authority is not yet delivering
consistently good services for children and young people. Inspectors found no
serious or widespread concerns but significant areas for development remain.
Improvements achieved since the last inspections of child protection services and
safeguarding and children looked after services in 2012 and 2011 include: improved
assessments and a stronger focus on the voice of the child; manageable caseloads,
increasing the amount of time social workers spend with children; a significantly
improved focus on assessing and meeting the health needs of children looked after;
and a strengthened adoption service.
The Brent Family Front Door effectively assesses and responds to risk for children
who may be in need, or at risk of significant harm. Some children who may benefit
from early help services experience delay in having their needs assessed and met.
Not all agencies are fully engaged in this process. When the Signs of Safety approach
is used, assessments are mostly good. Where it is not used, they lack full
information, analysis and a clear focus on childrens wishes and feelings. The local
authority has a range of assessment tools to assess risk in specific circumstances,
such as domestic violence or risk of sexual exploitation, but these are not routinely
used to inform understanding of the risk for individual children. The impact of
diversity factors such as culture, religion and language is not always well considered
in assessments where this may have a bearing on childrens needs.
Services for disabled children in Brent are effective. Good integration between
childrens and adults services ensures that disabled young people experience a wellmanaged transition to adult services. The local authoritys Ade Adepitan short breaks
centre for disabled children and young people has been judged outstanding in a
recent inspection.
Progress has been made to tackle child sexual exploitation. Extensive training and
awareness raising have taken place including the presentation of the drama
Chelseas Choice in schools. There has been training to raise awareness for over
has included the identification of local hot spots and the issuing of abduction notices
in cases of concern. The authority recognises that further work is required. Agencies
have agreed funding for a data analyst, although the post is not yet filled. A planned
contract for therapeutic support is not yet in place and work is ongoing to embed the
use of the child sexual exploitation assessment tool. Work with children and young
people who have been missing from home or care is not good enough and is not well
integrated with work to tackle child sexual exploitation.
Decisions to take children into care in Brent are appropriate. The local authority has
achieved significant and sustained improvements in the duration of care proceedings,
which have more than halved in length over the last year. This means that children


and young people can move into permanent homes with carers or return to their
families more quickly. Similar improvements have been achieved in adoption
timescales. Adoption is considered early for all children who may benefit from it.
Although the stability of placements for children looked after in Brent is improving, it
is still below the average for similar councils. There is insufficient capacity across the
range of placement options to ensure that the needs of all children and young people
are met. Initial decisions to place children out of area are not always made at the
right level of seniority.
The quality of plans is not yet consistently good. A minority of care plans and
pathway plans and a majority of personal education plans lack clarity, detail or
timescales. Actions implemented by the head of the virtual school have improved
attainment at Key Stage 1 in 201314 and at Key Stage 2 in 201415 but are yet to
improve attainment across all key stages.
While aspects of provision to care leavers are well developed, and the number
entering higher education is relatively high, too few take up high-quality
apprenticeships.
Performance management and quality assurance systems are under-developed. They
are not well joined up or used effectively to drive up performance. The local
authority scrutiny committee lacks sufficient focus on childrens social care. It has not
identified areas for development and does not drive or track service improvement.
Although there are good individual examples of the local authority listening to and
acting on the views of children and young people, for example by involving young
people in the re-commissioning of semi-independent accommodation for care
leavers, they do not systematically gather or analyse feedback from children and
young people. Information from complaints, return home interviews, advocacy and
other sources is not collated, analysed and used alongside performance and quality
assurance information to help understand how services could be improved. This is a
missed opportunity.
The local authority has worked hard over the last year to improve communication
and support to schools. Similarly, close working with the police ensures that work to
counter the risks posed to young people by radicalisation is effective and integrated
into the broader range of services for families. However, there is a lack of strategic
cohesion between agencies. The Joint Strategic Needs Analysis lacks focus on the
social care needs of children. The Health and Wellbeing Board has not provided
effective coordination and there is no current shared plan or framework that sets out
how agencies will provide services against agreed priorities or how impact will be
measured. The new Childrens Trust, although developing fast and increasingly
providing a focus for agencies to discuss services for children and young people, is
still at too early a stage to have had a significant impact on improving the targeting,
coordination and effectiveness of services for children, young people and their
families.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home. This was judged to be
outstanding at its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
October 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in October 2011. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services (DCS) has been in post since April 2014.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since June 2015.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 70,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Brent. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 29% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 16% (the national average is 16%)
 in secondary schools is 14% (the national average is 14%)
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 75% of all
children living in the area compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian/Asian British and Black African.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 68% (the national average is 19%).
 in secondary schools is 57% (the national average is 15%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2015, 1,934 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 31 March 2015, 226 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 229 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 March 2015, eight children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is the same number of children as at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection, five serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and three serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing
at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2015, 323 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 46 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 350 (50 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014. Of this number:
authority area
 five live in residential special schools,3 all of whom live out of the
authority area
 nine live with parents, of whom 22% live out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 12 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
living in houses of multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Recommendations

Improve performance management and quality assurance mechanisms so that
they are better aligned with each other, informed by feedback from children
and families and used more effectively to improve the quality of services
(paragraphs 102, 103).


Improve governance arrangements so that the local authoritys scrutiny
committee focuses more closely on childrens social care and provides robust
challenge that contributes to service improvement (paragraph 93).


Work with schools and other partners to ensure that children and their families
do not experience delays in receiving early help (paragraph 13).


Take action to improve assessments, including those using specialist tools, so
that they consistently meet the good standards seen in some, with good
analysis and an understanding of the childs identity, wishes and feelings
(paragraphs 18, 19, 23, 27, 28, 30).


Ensure that childrens plans, including personal education plans and pathway
plans, contain clear and specific actions with timescales for completion
(paragraphs 32, 37, 48, 62, 79).


Ensure that childrens assessments and plans are regularly revised to reflect
changing circumstances so that interventions are in line with current needs
(paragraphs 18, 62).


Ensure that approvals of out of borough placements for children by senior
managers are taken in line with statutory guidance and that timely and
sufficient consideration and scrutiny is given to the making of such placements
(paragraph 55).


Strengthen consideration of the culture, religion and language of children and
their families and of other factors that reflect the diverse nature of the
community in Brent. This includes ensuring that translators are available when
needed to avoid delay in assessing childrens needs (paragraphs 28, 65).


Ensure that children who go missing are offered an interview with an
independent person on their return; that information from these interviews is
analysed to inform responses for individual children and the child population of
Brent; and that this work is integrated with work to protect children at risk of
sexual exploitation (paragraphs 45,100).

attainment gap across all key stages to build on the success achieved at Key
Stage 1 in 201314 and at Key Stage 2 in 201415 (paragraph 48).


to increase care leaver progression into apprenticeships and other vocational
further education (paragraph 85).


Summary for children and young people
 The council has made improvements to services for children but is still not
meeting the needs of all children in Brent well enough. Managers in the council
understand what they are already doing well and what they need to do better.
They are working hard to improve further.
 Most children get help from social workers quickly, particularly if it is urgent. For
a few children it takes a little longer and inspectors have told the council that
they need to get help to all children quickly.
 Managers make sure that social workers in Brent have enough time to spend
talking to children and young people so they understand what they need to do to
help.
 There have been improvements in the services for children who need to be
looked after but some children and young people still have several changes in
their social worker. Inspectors found that some plans did not properly explain
what needed to happen to make things better for the children and young people
who are in care.
 The local authority does not yet make sure that all children and young people
who go missing have a return interview by someone who is independent. The
information from these interviews is not always used to make sure children and
young people receive the support they need and to make it less likely they will go
missing again.
 Managers have worked hard to develop ways to help understand risks to children
and young people, for example if they are involved with gangs or at risk of sexual
exploitation. Social workers do not always use these ways and so children and
young peoples plans are not as helpful as they could be in protecting them from
harm.
 Care leavers receive regular support but not all of them find their plans useful.
Managers know they need to do better at this. Personal advisers work hard to
make sure care leavers have suitable accommodation. Many go on to higher
education but not enough have opportunities to train through apprenticeships.
 There are not always enough council approved foster carers in Brent to help and
support children with brothers and sisters who may need to be in care together
or for older children.
 Social workers work hard to find adoptive families for children who need them
and, because of this, there are no children waiting to be adopted in Brent.
 The Local Children Safeguarding Board is made up of organisations who work
together to organise the protection of children in Brent. The Board needs to be
better at finding out which services are improving things for children. It can then
help organisations to work together in a better way and ensure that children are
protected.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Brent Family Solutions Service (BFSS) provides a wide range of coordinated early
help services. There is, however, a lack of timeliness in completing and reviewing
assessments using the Common Assessment Framework (CAF). This, coupled with a
historic reluctance from some agencies to fully engage in the process, means that
some childrens needs are not met at the first opportunity.
The Brent Family Front Door (BFFD) is a multi-agency safeguarding hub that is
effective in identifying, assessing and responding to risk. The robust prioritisation of
referrals ensures that children who are most at risk receive a timely and appropriate
response. Accordingly, children and young people are protected well. Partner
agencies understand the thresholds within the borough and this leads to appropriate
and timely referrals.
The quality and timeliness of completion of child and family assessments (CFAs) is
variable, with too many requiring improvement. Poorer assessments lack a thorough
consideration of the individual needs of all children. In such cases the quality of
plans and planning is inconsistent with some lacking clarity or timescales for the
completion of actions.
In the better assessments seen by inspectors, the Signs of Safety (SoS) approach is
having a positive impact. In such assessments the childs voice is strongly evident
and their wishes and feelings captured to inform assessments and planning. The
introduction and use of the SoS approach has led to professionals across agencies
working more effectively with children and their families.
The impact of the culture, religion and language of children and their families, or of
other characteristics that reflect the diverse nature of the community in Brent, is
often not considered well enough in assessments where this would be relevant.
The local authority has a number of assessment tools designed to assess specific
concerns, including domestic abuse and child sexual exploitation. However, the use
of these tools is not yet well embedded and social workers do not routinely use them
to inform assessments of risk.
Manageable caseloads allow social workers to spend more time with children and are
starting to support stronger relationships with children and families, leading to more
effective interventions. Good management oversight of cases, including mid-way
reviews, identifies progress against actions in most cases. This is not routinely
followed through in all subsequent case management supervision so progress is not
always effectively captured.


Inspection findings
childrens centres. An aligned services team, funded by partner agencies, cowork childrens cases providing additional support, for example an independent
domestic violence advocate (IDVA). The early help team receives referrals
through the BFFD. This results in the majority of families receiving the
appropriate level of intervention.
of lead professional, the number of CAFs undertaken by partner agencies
remains low, with schools only completing 9% of CAFs in 201415. As a result,
children do not benefit consistently from timely CAF assessments and reviews
and this means they do not always receive the services they need to meet their
needs when they need them.
but staff work with families at all levels of need. Brent improved outcomes for
all 810 of its identified families between April 2012 and May 2015,
demonstrating improved employment, reduced criminal activity, improved
educational engagement and reduced anti-social behaviour.
childrens centres, which provide a comprehensive range of services to meet
identified needs. Childrens centres family support workers receive case
supervision from the early help team using the SoS model. Established
partnerships with health deliver a good range of early help services.
sharing ensures that risk analysis is appropriate and decisions robust. Clearly
understood thresholds of need, applied by partners, lead to appropriate
referrals. Properly prioritised work ensures that children most at risk receive a
timely and appropriate response.
the governments Innovations programme. Where this approach is being used
in the BFFD, improved information gathering is leading to a better quality of
assessments and engagement with children and families. For disabled children,
referrals routed via the BFFD are managed by an effective duty rota system.
This ensures that children and their families benefit from a robust, responsive
child centred service from appropriately experienced social workers. Disabled
young people aged over 14 years, who transfer to adult services, continue to
receive robust interventions.
child protection strategy discussions. All child protection conferences lead to a
plan to address childrens identified needs, whether or not a child or young
person becomes the subject of a formal child protection plan. CFAs are


increasingly timely and most are completed within a timescale that is right for
each individual childs needs. Chronologies of significant events that have
happened in childrens lives are kept up to date and, in the main, childrens
histories are considered and used to inform assessments of risk. However,
these assessments are not routinely updated to reflect such changes and
despite the positive impact of the introduction of SoS, there remains some
variation in the quality and use of the information gathered.
wishes and feelings of children are actively explored. This informs the
assessments and is reflected in plans. Safety goals, although broad, result in
clear specific measurable actions leading to improved outcomes for children. No
CFAs seen by inspectors were inadequate. Most were good, but some lacked a
thorough consideration of the individual needs of children, particularly those
with brothers and sisters.
monopoly with teenagers and happy/sad house and worry tree for younger
children. The recently introduced Outcomes star used by workers in BFSS
effectively captures the wishes and feelings of children but is not yet being
consistently used. The use of independent advocates for children who are not
looked after is not routinely considered. Where it has been used, for example in
the cases of two pregnant teenagers, for whom it was effective in supporting
them to make their views and wishes for their unborn babies clear, it has had a
positive impact on ensuring that the voices of children and young people are
heard. The work of the disabled childrens team is creative; the voices of
children are sought and brought out using a range of non-verbal techniques.
and contribution to child protection plans is good. Participating in SoS results in
partners being more effectively engaged and demonstrating greater
responsibility and accountability for childrens progress.
mutilation (FGM) are protected. In the majority of cases, early identification of
risks leads to proactive and immediate safeguarding of young people supported
by a well-organised multi-agency response. Proactive work by the police and
the use of legal orders has effectively responded to immediate concerns and
reduced the risk of radicalisation and forced marriage by ensuring that families
remain in this country and that their activities are appropriately monitored.
Maternity services provided by the London North West Healthcare NHS Trust
include a specific clinic for women subjected to FGM. Their policy of referring to
BFFD if women fail to attend two appointments has resulted in the early
identification of risk to children.
help social workers assess the risk to children from some particular concerns,


including child sexual exploitation, gang affiliation and domestic abuse.
However, their use is inconsistent and their impact variable. Some are used as
a tick box exercise and have little impact, while others are used more fully,
resulting in effective risk reduction and support to children and young people.
In relation to domestic abuse, a comprehensive risk assessment tool and
extensive guidance are available for use with perpetrators but are rarely used.
Risks are being identified and addressed in assessments but the use of these
specialist assessment tools is not consistent and their impact is limited.
safeguarding children from the risks associated with going missing and sexual
exploitation. There are increasing numbers of appropriate referrals to the
missing and multi-agency sexual exploitation (MASE) panels both in and out of
the borough. Practice is not yet consistent for return home interviews. Where
children are receiving an early intervention service, the lack of timeliness in
completing CAFs means that their return interviews, when carried out, are not
always fully informing plans for children and therefore there is delay in
addressing risk.
officers work closely with schools, visiting weekly or bi-weekly, to monitor
attendance and support schools to implement their behaviour and attendance
strategies. The local authority provides schools and parents with a good range
of leaflets and guidance covering aspects such as elective home education,
unauthorised absence from schools, school attendance, exclusion and education
penalty notices. School attendance is closely monitored and showing a three
year improving trend from 90% in 2012/13 to 92% in 2014/15.
has appointed an IDVA and a multi-agency risk assessment conference
(MARAC) coordinator. The IDVA screens all referrals and, as a result, children
are receiving a more timely service, normally within four weeks. The MARAC
coordinator is providing consistent representation at the steering group and
provides training to social workers about the use of the risk assessment
checklist, criteria for referral and basic awareness raising. The impact of these
new initiatives is not yet evident. Multi-agency public protection arrangements
(MAPPAs) work well.
enough, particularly where neglect is an important feature. Of the 232 children
on child protection plans, neglect is the main risk for 132 (57%) of them.
Effective and consistent consideration of the impact of the toxic trio of
domestic abuse, drug, alcohol and substance abuse and parental mental ill
health in presenting need is not prominent enough in assessments.
Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 75% of all


children living in the area compared with 22% in the country as a whole. The
proportion of children and young people with English as an additional language
in primary schools is 68% (the national average is 19%) and in secondary
schools is 57% (the national average is 15%). Despite this, consideration of
how these elements of diversity may have an impact on childrens needs is not
always present in assessments where this should be considered. Social workers
spoken to by inspectors could usually explain how this was part of their thinking
and analysis but their case recording does not routinely show this.
working with 555 children in need, which is significantly lower than the 1,413
reported as at 31 March 2014. This recording of low numbers of children in
need is due to the practice of only counting the electronic case files of the
youngest, or most in need child in a family, rather than those of all the children
in the family that the local authority is working with. This practice followed a
change of electronic case recording system. This has resulted in the local
authority being unable to assure themselves that the individual needs and risks
of all brothers or sisters in a family are consistently met. Changes to the
electronic case recording system to address this problem are planned but not
yet in place.
response to risk when cases are stepped up from child in need to child
protection. However, in a minority of cases, the rationale for moving from child
in need to child protection is not clearly recorded. Without a clear identification
of the main presenting concerns it is more difficult for assessments to consider
the main risks to a child and to identify the actions most likely to make a
positive difference for them.
plans, of which 38 (16%) were second or subsequent plans. In all of the cases
seen by inspectors, decisions to make children the subject of child protection
plan were appropriate. Effective review mechanisms and oversight by the head
of service has resulted in no children or young people being subject to a child
protection plan for over two years.
appropriate for almost all children and young people. However, the robustness
of plans is not consistent, actions are not always clear, specific and given a
timescale for completion. This means that in most cases it is difficult to
evidence what progress has been made. In some cases, where there has been
a step down to early help, active co-working between social workers and BFFS
provides continuity of relationships for families.
family members to engage better with professionals and understand the
seriousness of concerns. In one example of best practice, good support and
engagement by the social worker and a specialist teenage pregnancy midwife


enabled a very young mother to express her wishes and plan for her unborn
baby to have a permanent family through adoption as soon as possible.
However, this is not a consistent picture across the service: not all children,
young people or parents benefit from such a focussed approach to
understanding their wishes and feelings. The local authority does well at
making sure it works with fathers, stepfathers, and wider family members and
not just mothers. This means that social workers do better at understanding
both the strengths and the difficulties within a family that make a difference to
how quickly and successfully a childs welfare can be improved.
The chairs of child protection case conferences report that social workers
appropriately prepare children before meetings but that attendance should be
better. Feedback from young people does not sufficiently inform the
development of practice, as a process for systematically collecting their views is
not in place.
reliability of interpreters attending conferences. This has resulted in delay
because some conferences have to be re-arranged to ensure effective
communication with children and family members.
through timely progress reviews during child protection investigations. This
identifies progress against actions but a lack of systematic follow through in
subsequent case management supervision means progress is not always
effectively captured. SoS supervision on cases clearly demonstrates effective
challenge to professional assumptions and analysis in most cases sampled. In
more recently opened cases, this is leading to stronger and more robust actions
that drive effective change.
This group is not fully established and has not yet had an impact on improving
either the timeliness or quality of assessments or awareness levels and
notification numbers. Plans are in place to undertake more awareness raising.
However, the number of known private fostering arrangements remains low.
There is drift in carrying out visits and assessments and, when childrens cases
are co-worked, poor liaison results in delay in developing plans to meet
childrens needs.
which limits awareness raising work needed with faith groups and partner
agencies. Referrals from partner agencies are consequently low. The LADO
annual report highlights necessary improvement actions. However, it does not
set clear expectations for their completion and, as a result, it is difficult to track
the progress and impact of planned actions. Strategy discussions are timely but
it is not always clear how quickly agreed actions are carried out or what impact
they have had.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Outcomes for children looked after in Brent are not yet good because services are
not consistently meeting the needs of all children.
Social workers and personal advisers do not regularly update assessments and plans
to reflect young peoples current circumstances. The wishes and feelings of children
are not always used to inform their plans, or collated and analysed strategically to
help shape services.
Changes to services for children in care who go missing and those at risk of child
sexual exploitation are not yet demonstrating sustained improvements. Children who
have been missing do not consistently get offered, or receive, a return interview
from an independent adult.
Strategies to ensure that there is a sufficient range and number of placement options
for children and young people have not yet provided enough capacity to meet the
needs of all children. Decisions to place children out of the local authority area are
approved retrospectively and this means that their care plans do not receive enough
consideration before they move into new placements.
When decisions are made to take children into care, these are appropriate. Care
proceedings, which took an average of 66 weeks between April 2014 and March
This means that children move into permanent homes with carers or return to their
families much more quickly.
A decrease in the number of temporary agency social workers and an increase in
permanent staff is a positive for the longer term stability of the workforce but in the
short term has meant that a minority of children have continued to experience
frequent changes of social worker. Life story work is not yet consistently supporting
all children to make sense of their identities; some materials provided for very young
children are more suitable for older children.
Measures aimed at improving educational attainment for children looked after are
not yet improving outcomes across all key stages.
Adoption performance is good. The local authority has given significant focus to
improving the timeliness of adoption work. As a result, at the time of the inspection,
no children were waiting to be placed with adopters where legal orders had been
made to allow this to happen.
Care leavers receive appropriate support to help them make the transition to
independence including moving into suitable accommodation. A high proportion
progress to higher education but progression to apprenticeships is too low.


Inspection findings
the vast majority of cases, decisions to look after children are timely,
appropriate and in the best interests of children. Decision makers record a clear
rationale for taking children into care and parental consent when this is
appropriate.
better than the 35 week average for similar councils. The local authority has
effective mechanisms in place to track the timeliness of work both leading up to
and during court. The appointment of a case-tracking officer to share good
practice, support and mentor social workers, and track individual cases has
supported improvements in the quality of social work evidence and received
positive feedback from the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support
Service and court partners.
the Public Law Outline (PLO), are not as robust as the processes for monitoring
work in the court arena and inspectors found variability in the quality of PLO
letters to parents. In a minority of cases, letters use complex legal language,
which may result in families not being able to understand what is being said, or
what is expected of them.
looked after, returned to live with parents, relatives or other persons with
parental responsibility. Support to these children is variable. Most of them
receive regular visits from social workers, who also provide support to their
parents but many of them do not have a plan that clearly lays out the support
they will receive or provides targets for further progress.
panel, ensures good consideration is given to connected person assessments
for children looked after being placed with members of their extended families.
Linked to this is a significant increase in the use of special guardianship orders
from 10 in 201213 to 30 in 201415. Special guardianship arrangements in
Brent are based on good quality assessments and carers benefit from thorough
support plans.
a positive relationship with them, there is evidence that they feel well
understood and are actively engaged in shaping their plans. However, a
minority of children continue to experience frequent changes of social worker.
In these situations some children become tired of repeatedly telling their story
and do not engage as well with their workers. This has also had a negative
impact on the willingness of some young people to accept the offer of an
advocate; only seven children looked after received an advocacy service


between April 2014 and March 2015. While inspectors found that most children
looked after and young people they spoke to were not aware of the formal
complaints procedures, they said that they had access to adults they trusted
with their views.
young people at risk of child sexual exploitation, published in November 2014,
in which Brent took part, there have been improvements in services to protect
children from the risks associated with going missing and child sexual
exploitation. There are increasing numbers of appropriate referrals to the
missing and MASE panels. There is evidence of appropriate training provided to
foster carers, residential workers and schools. This is part of a wider
programme of safeguarding training, which also covers, bullying, e-safety,
sexual health and diversity. Inspectors found that although an increasing
number of young people who go missing are offered return home interviews,
they are still not being offered to all young people for who they would be
relevant. Those undertaking the interviews are not always appropriately
independent individuals and the content of interviews is not routinely used to
inform safety planning for young people.
looked after in 2011 and as noted by the Care Quality Commissions Review of
health services for children looked after and safeguarding in 2014 there have
been significant improvements in health services to children looked after in
Brent. Performance on the completion of health assessments and of strength
and difficulty questionnaires (SDQs), which young people fill in to help identify
health needs and assess their wellbeing, shows significant improvement over
the last year. Six monthly health assessments for children under six years of
age, improved from 88% completion in 201314 to 100% in 201415. SDQ
completion increased from 42% in 201314 to 74% in 201415, with progress
being sustained into this current year.
the health needs of all children in Brent as well as within a 20-mile radius. This
can be extended where host authorities are unable to undertake assessments
within timescales. This thorough approach is good practice because it helps
ensure childrens health needs can be met quickly because they are assessed in
a timely manner. The secondment of a dedicated sexual health worker, offering
sexual health advice and information to young people has contributed to low
teenage pregnancy rates for children looked after. Robust quality assurance
takes place of all health assessments whether children live in or out borough.
This robust monitoring ensures that childrens health needs are identified when
they first arise and that they are effectively addressed.
improve the educational attainment of children looked after. Attainment gaps
have narrowed at Key Stage 1 over the last three years and at Key Stage 2 in


at Key Stage 4. The virtual school is targeting additional help and tracking
childrens progress, but the quality of personal education plans is too variable
and too many children are underachieving, limiting their options for future
education, employment and economic well-being. Previous problems with low
completion rates for personal education plans have been resolved. However,
while a minority are completed well, the majority require improvement.
Typically those less than good do not show childrens progress over different
years, do not have input from the child or do not include targets and actions
that are detailed, sufficiently specific and measurable for children to reach their
potential. The very large majority (87%) of children looked after attend good or
outstanding schools. For those not doing so, the virtual school closely monitors
the support provided and progression made by those children.
two in reading (71%), writing (71%) and mathematics (71%) improved in
proportion of children looked after at Key Stage 2 achieving at least Level 4 in
reading (100%), writing (100%) and mathematics (100%) is very positive and
represents a significant improvement on the 46%, 23% and 54% achieved in
these subjects, respectively, in 201314. Those achieving five GCSEs grades A*
to C, including English and mathematics, in 201415 is low at only 5%.
through local and commissioned services. At the time of the inspection, 47
children were in alternative provision with all children offered at least 25 hours
education per week. In 2015, GCSE outcomes were low with only one pupil (out
of 14 Year 11 pupils sitting GCSEs) in commissioned alternative provision
achieving five GCSEs grades A* to C. While opportunities to achieve vocational
qualifications are in place, progression to employment, education and training
was also low, at 32% for 201314. The provisional September 2015 guarantee
figure of employment, education and training of 84% is a positive sign but at
present only represents the guaranteed offer rather than what has actually
been achieved for young people.
panel, a multi-agency panel, frequently monitor those children who are risk
assessed as high priority, sharing information and coordinating strategies. The
educational welfare officer for elective home education, who also provides
guidance to families considering this approach and annual updating visits.
improvements in placement stability in Brent. In 201314, 17% of children had
three or more placements during the year and by 201415, this had reduced to
children and young people the opportunity to form positive relationships with
their carers.


ensure that Brent has enough foster carers with the right skills to meet the
needs of all of its children looked after. There was a net loss of nine carers in
prioritising sufficiency and proactively target foster carer recruitment. The
current number of potential foster carers under assessment is showing an
improvement and the duration of assessments is closely monitored to ensure
timely approvals but this has not yet been translated into more approved foster
carers.
independent fostering agencies, as part of the West London Alliance, a
consortia arrangement with other London local authorities. These placements
are of a good standard. The reasons foster carers leave the fostering service
are not yet collated and analysed to inform the fostering strategy. The majority
of semi-independent accommodation for care leavers is individually purchased
and ongoing work to formalise commissioning of a framework through the West
London Alliance is not yet in place.
by a senior manager. This practice does not give sufficient scrutiny to these
arrangements and is not meeting care planning guidance and regulations in
ensuring the needs of children are met. In a minority of cases, children placed
out of the authority do not have appropriate educational placements identified
for them at the time of placement.
achieved good ratings. Where re-inspections judged them to be below good,
case recording showed that thorough risk assessments are done to decide if it
is in a childs best interests to stay put or to move to another placement.
Decisions made in permanence planning meetings and reviews are underpinned
by research and thorough assessments of childrens needs. These meetings
consider adoption for older children when this is appropriate. Family finding for
older children also considers the use of long-term foster care, including the use
of externally commissioned placements. Inspectors found timely formal
matching and good use of connected persons assessments.
requiring some additional information or further analysis to fully support good
decision making by panel. The panel adviser and panel chair provide robust
quality assurance and challenge. Improvements since the recent appointment
of the fostering development coordinator have seen a refocusing on the training
agenda, to ensure a skilled workforce to meet the needs of children and help
build stability. Recent improvements are well thought through but are not yet
ensuring that all foster carers are encouraged by supervising social workers to
engage fully in developing their skills and taking up available training. Foster


carers are very positive about one recent introduction, social pedagogy training;
they say that it helps them to develop strategies for managing difficult
behaviours and so reduces the chances of placements breaking down and
children or young people having to move to new carers. Foster carers say that
they feel well supported by the fostering service and inspectors found annual
foster carer reviews to be of a high standard.
with their family and friends. These arrangements are risk assessed and
undertaken at the local family centre or in the community and are monitored
regularly.
commissioned from an independent provider, has continued to support children
and has provided them with some stability during a period where there has
been a significant turnover in social workers. Ninety-three per cent of children
attended or contributed to their reviews in 201415. However, in a minority of
cases, recording of reviews and decisions lacked sufficient clarity or relevant
timescales for completion. This makes it difficult for young people to
understand or engage with plans for their future and for social workers and
IROs to track if progress is being achieved.
organisation for the IRO service and the local authority IRO team manager, is
acknowledged by the local authority to have focused primarily on a small range
of quantitative measures such as timescales and not enough on the quality and
impact on children of the IROs work. A well-attended, regular quarterly
meeting looks at themes and joint training. However, some local authority
performance data, such as current placement stability figures, are not shared
with the IRO service and so cannot inform this consideration. Inspectors saw
evidence of appropriate use of the dispute resolution process with 65
escalations recorded in 201415. Themes at that time included frequent
changes of social worker, a lack of rigour in management oversight in ensuring
case progression, and social workers not fulfilling some statutory duties such as
regular visits.
of the work done; statutory visits, case supervisions and updated plans are not
consistently recorded. Such omissions were often the result of changes in social
worker. Where inspectors saw SoS templates used, case recording much more
clearly shows actions to be undertaken, their outcomes and the voices of
children and young people themselves.
senior managers and the corporate parenting committee to discuss things that
the young people want to raise with the committee. This has resulted in a
number of positive actions relating to specific issues, such as young peoples
involvement in a re-tender for semi-independent accommodation for care


leavers and their involvement in developing consultation leaflets. However,
Brent does not systematically gather feedback from the children looked after
population to inform service development, nor does it have a communication
strategy, such as a you said we did update to show children and young people
the difference their voices can make.
with free tickets to most events at Wembley stadium and appropriate financial
support for educational trips and leisure activities as part of their individual
plans.
matches that of the borough and almost all children and young people are well
matched with foster carers in this respect. Social workers case recording shows
appropriate consideration given to identifying childrens diversity needs in a
majority of cases. However, in a minority of cases where a translator was
needed, problems with their availability have resulted in delayed or cancelled
meetings for children and their families. This in turn leads to delay in childrens
needs being assessed and met.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
recorded to explain decisions where adoption is not the most appropriate plan
to meet childrens needs. These decisions are supported by research findings
and often informed by consultation with Child and Adolescent Mental Health
Services (CAMHS) and professionals who know children well.
placements service, ensuring that key staff are aware of all children who may
require adoption. Parallel planning is well established. This allows for early
family finding and ensures that adoptive placements are identified quickly for
children who need them. Currently, there are no children with a placement
order waiting to be placed with adopters and family finding has identified
potential families for two children pending court decisions.
Placement Order, the case responsibility transfers from care planning teams to
the adoption and post permanence support team. Although this increases the
number of social workers a child experiences it does ensure that urgency and
focus is given to family finding and securing an adoption placement for
children. Regular scrutiny is given to the cases of children where the plan for
adoption has not been achieved. This has contributed to the timely and
appropriate rescinding of adoption decisions after family finding has not found a
suitable match. The decisions for three children have been rescinded in the 12


months prior to inspection. Parallel planning has successfully identified
alternative long term permanent arrangements for these children.
continuing in 201516. From the time a child enters care to moving to an
adoptive placement the Brent three-year average for 201215 is 544 days.
While not meeting the government threshold of 487 days this performance is
better than the England average of 628 days and the Brent 201114 average of
authority to place a child with adopters until the child is placed, the time
children wait in Brent has reduced from 306 days in 201114 to 197 days in
days but does not yet meet the government threshold of 121 days.
majority provide comprehensive information about the child, their identified
needs, birth family history and clearly articulate why the child is unable to
remain with their parents or within their family. When new information in
relation to the childs development or parental health is identified, the childs
permanence report is updated up until the point when a suitable match is
identified for the child. This allows prospective adopters to have the most up to
date information available about the child.
recruitment and assessment arrangements. Regional partnership working has
increased the regularity of the mandatory preparation training for adopters,
enabling adopter recruitment to conclude more quickly. Adopter assessments
are of good quality, identifying the strengths and vulnerabilities of adopters,
which assists in the matching of children with adopters. The local authority is
currently targeting its recruitment of adopters to increase the pool of adopters
who are able to offer placements to older children, those with complex needs
and those which enable brothers and sisters to remain together. The local
authority does consider and encourage fostering to adopt and concurrent
adoption arrangements. However, the number of adopters who choose this
option remains very low.
national picture. In addition, many of these children are very young. As a
result, for many children a choice of adopters is available. Careful matching
with prospective adopters takes place at selection meetings. These meetings
rigorously consider which prospective adopters would best meet individual
childrens needs. Decisions made at these meetings are well recorded and
clearly articulate the reasons why specific adopters are chosen. The right
balance is given to securing the best placement that will meet the holistic needs
of the child and seeking an exact ethnicity match. When no in-house adopters
are available to meet the needs of children this is identified at an early stage.
Family finding is then extended to the regional consortium and, when
necessary, national family finding takes place.


with children. These adopters have been recruited in the last two years and
their profiles reflect a national drive in adopter recruitment. For a small number
of these adopters, their circumstances have changed which makes them
temporarily unavailable. The large majority have narrow requirements which
are limiting the children with which they can be matched. All these adopters
have had timely referral to the national adoption register and profiles shared
within the regional consortium. Good efforts are made to continue to family find
for these adopters both locally and nationally. The next steps support group has
been established to ensure continued support to these adopters while family
finding continues.
sufficiently wide range of members who are knowledgeable about adoption and
permanence. This includes adopted adults, adopters and consistent elected
member attendance. Panel administration is effective. The agency adviser
provides robust quality assurance on the papers presented to panel, identifying
deficits early, so that these can be rectified before panel and avoid delay. Panel
members carefully consider all applications, making sound recommendations to
the agency decision maker. They also provide feedback to the agency on the
quality of each report, the verbal presentation of social workers and the
timeliness of assessments. This contributes to improving practice. Decisions by
the agency decision maker are timely and carefully considered.
care with careful consideration given to the transition arrangements. Foster
carers are an integral part of these arrangements and help prepare children
well for the move to their new family. Many children moving to adopters in
Brent are very young. While life story books are provided, they do not assist
direct work between adopters and the child in the early days of placement as
they are not age appropriate. Good quality later life letters are provided to
help children when they are older to understand the plans that have been made
for them. Inspectors found Wish You Well contact between children and their
birth families sensitively managed, and direct and indirect letterbox contact
arrangements supported.
experience of adoption. During 201415, 47 families were provided with
adoption support. This included services to birth parents and adopted adults as
well as children and their adopters. Almost all adoption support plans
appropriately identify childrens needs, including the support needed in the
short, medium and long term and how these will be met. The service offer
ongoing support and adopters speak positively about adoption fun days and
regular communications from the team. Detailed and analytical adoption
support assessments underpin applications to the Adoption Support Fund which
is increasingly used by adopters to access specialised therapeutic support for
children.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care
leavers is that it requires improvement
advisers and themselves is frequent and that they feel well supported. The
proportion of care leavers that personal advisers are not in touch with is low at
those in need of mental health support, personal advisers work closely with
partners to ensure a smooth transition to adult services. Where appropriate the
existing social worker will remain the key contact with the young person when
they leave care to provide continuity of support. Personal advisers strongly
encourage young people to stay in care until their 18th birthday and
consequently the proportion doing so improved from 57% in 201314 to 61%
in 201415, although this is still lower than the average for similar councils or
for England, of 67%.
with drug and alcohol misuse problems. Dedicated nurses for children looked
after provide advice for young people with sexual health concerns. A strong
relationship between the youth offending team and the family adolescent
support team ensures a proactive response to meeting the educational needs
and providing intensive support for young people being released from custody.
Safeguarding needs are considered when young people are arranging
accommodation. For example, one young person took up a tenancy outside the
borough due to previous involvement with gangs.
authority managers as an area for further improvement. In the best cases,
plans clearly reflect the views and needs of the individual young person and are
written in the first person to give greater ownership. However, in a quarter of
cases considered by inspectors, the reviews of pathway plans were not
undertaken within appropriate timeframes. This variation in quality and
timeliness was reflected in the views of young people when they talked to
inspectors about how helpful they found their plans.
the development of a Preparation for Independence booklet and checklist in
consultation with care leavers. The booklet is designed to develop young
peoples skills and knowledge for independent living and provide support and
guidance in the preparation of pathway plans. One social worker
enthusiastically talked through how she uses it with young people on an
ongoing basis and how the information supports the preparation of pathway
plans. She said it supports active engagement with the young person because it
encourages dialogue and an increased ownership of the pathway plan as a
result. However, the booklet and checklist are not yet being systematically used


with all young people and there are no plans to catch up with any recent care
leavers who have not had this booklet.
over the age of 17 and care leavers, who are supported to move into a range of
accommodation appropriate to their needs. Care leavers receive a 2000
moving on allowance. The proportion of 1921 year-old-care leavers in suitable
accommodation increased from 70% in 201314 to 80% in 201415 and at the
time of the inspection all care leaver were judged to be in suitable
accommodation by the local authority. The appropriateness of multiple
occupancy dwellings is now checked as part of the commissioning process and
the quality of semi-independent accommodation has much improved in last 12
months.
for young people, and incidents of its use have only occurred in rare and
exceptional circumstances. Tenancy breakdown rates for care leavers are very
low with only two in the last 12 months. The proportion of care leavers who
choose staying put arrangements with foster carers is also improving. In 201314 only 37% of young people who turned 18 remained in foster care. In 201415 this had improved to 52%. When a 16- or 17-year-old young person
presents themselves as homeless, swift action is taken to ensure that
appropriate accommodation is found. Housing staff and social workers work
well together and when it is in a young persons interest for them to become a
looked after child, these decisions are made swiftly.
after are recognised at an annual celebration evening and young people are
proud of their achievements. Care leavers also have good opportunities to
become role models for other care leavers or for those entering the care
system. The Brent pledge and care leavers charter sets out the Brent local
authority promises for children in care and care leavers. However, care leavers
met during the inspection had little understanding of the pledge or its relevance
for them. The CIA group includes care leavers and it has been effective in
instigating improvements. For example, concerns raised by care leavers about
the quality of semi-independent housing led to their subsequent involvement in
the commissioning process for new providers.
curriculum vitae, and preparing for interviews. The proportion of care leavers in
higher education is excellent. In 201314, the percentage in higher education
was 30% against an 18% average in similar councils and a 6% England
average. Brent is currently supporting 35 care leavers in higher education.
However, low and declining GCSE achievement is resulting in the number
progressing to higher education reducing. A university panel provides a detailed
analysis of care leavers in university, closely monitoring progress and
achievement, and identifying any additional support required.


education and of those on apprenticeships is not sufficiently well developed.
Although the local authority has six ring-fenced apprenticeships for care
leavers, current local authority figures show that progression into
apprenticeships, at 4%, is low. Although this low figure is not out of line with
other councils, the local authority has taken the positive step of identifying this
as a service priority. Hard to reach young people are supported by a dedicated
mentor commissioned through the virtual school but although better than the
national average, around one-quarter of care leavers are not in education,
employment or training.
through their health information and also completes exit health assessments, as
young people leave care, to consider wider health aspects with them. Care
leavers receive an appropriate health passport which has been recently revised.
Discharge letters for disabled children are written by the designated doctor to
the childs general practitioner at the point of transition to adult services. This is
good practice because it ensures that relevant information is available to
professionals to help meet the needs of the young person.
that provided to children looked after and young people and contains some
specific services, over and above mainstream CAMHS provision. There are not,
however, any care leaver-specific services for those over 18, which means that
the particular needs of these care leavers may not be as swiftly recognised or
met as for those under 18 years of age.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
The local authority, with strong leadership provided by the director of childrens
services and the chief executive, has been successful in making a number of
important improvements in the quality of services children receive and the outcomes
they achieve. The SoS approach has made a significant difference to how well social
workers work with children. The health needs of children looked after are much
better considered and met than they were a year ago. Care proceedings and
adoption are much timelier. The local authority has also been successful in ensuring
that it has a more stable workforce and is less reliant on temporary agency staff.
Social workers have manageable caseloads that afford them the time necessary to
see children regularly.
However, overall the local authority is not yet providing a good service for children
and young people because some developments are too new to have made a positive
difference and others are not yet in place. Some planned improvements to services
for children at risk of child sexual exploitation, such as the appointment of a data
analyst and the commissioning of a contracted service to provide therapeutic
support, are not yet in place and the specialist risk assessment tool is not yet
sufficiently informing work with young people. Work with children and young people
who are missing from home or care is not good enough and is not well integrated
with work to tackle child sexual exploitation.
As a corporate parent and in its wider work with children, the local authority does
not systematically collect and analyse feedback from children and young people to
help it understand the difference it is making to influence and improve service
delivery. The number of placement changes experienced by children and young
people looked after, although reducing, is higher than the average for similar local
authorities. The local authority has not yet managed to ensure that it has enough
foster carers with the right skills and that they are consistently well enough matched
with children and young people.
Performance management and quality assurance systems are under-developed. They
are not well joined up or used effectively to drive up performance. The local
authority scrutiny committee lacks sufficient focus on the safeguarding and social
care needs of children and young people. It is not possible to see how it has
identified any areas of poor practice or supported any service improvements for
children and young people in this area of service provision.
The majority of social workers receive regular supervision and management
oversight of their work. When informed by the SoS approach there is sharper
analysis and a strong focus on the wishes and feelings of children. However, gaps in
the supervision and case direction received by a minority of social workers has led to
delays in progressing work to improve outcomes for some children.


Inspection findings
and energetic in driving improvements in key areas of the local authoritys
work. A child or young person in Brent is more likely than a year ago to receive
effective help if they are at risk of child sexual exploitation and more likely to
have the chance of building a good relationship with a single social worker who
does not change during the time they and their family are receiving help from
the department. A child or young person in the care of the local authority is
also more likely to report good wellbeing and to have their health needs
effectively met. Improvements such as these are making a positive difference
for children.
services provided to children and young people in Brent requires improvement
to be good. This is because the pace and impact of these changes is not
consistent across the full range of services provided by the local authority.
Some changes are already making a positive difference to children, while others
are yet to have an impact or have not yet commenced.
embedded in all practice, is a significant development. Where social workers
and other professionals use this approach, assessments of childrens needs
contain fuller information, better analysis and a stronger focus on childrens
wishes and feelings. This leads to plans and the services that meet childrens
needs.
improve their ability to access and use information and data. This new system
is not yet fully operational and the current system contains flaws. This means
that the local authority cannot assure themselves that the individual needs of all
children in need are being consistently identified and met. Data produced about
the number of children in need who the local authority is working with present
as a significant under-reporting of the actual number.
post, has taken an active role in monitoring the work of childrens services, and
instigated effective action to address identified problems. In addition to regular
meetings with the director of childrens services, she has met bi-monthly with
the director, the leader and deputy leader of the council, lead member for
children and the independent chair of the LSCB. As a result of this meeting an
additional 500,000 of funding was directed to support the recruitment of
additional social workers. This has led to reduced caseloads. It also provided
funding to ensure the roll-out across Brent schools of the drama production
Chelseas Choice, to provide information and guidance to young people about
child sexual exploitation.


and early years needs of children but has given too little consideration to the
welfare and safeguarding needs of children. When these needs have been
looked at, for example in the committees consideration of the annual report of
the LSCB, there has been little urgency in addressing identified deficits and it is
not possible to see what impact the committee has had.
with health agencies to achieve significant improvements in meeting the health
needs of children looked after. Significant and sustained reductions in the
length of care proceedings along with other improvements in the pace of work,
such as more timely adoptions, mean that most children in Brent who need a
permanent home that is not with their parents achieve this in a timely manner.
However, the local authoritys fostering strategy is not yet meeting its target to
ensure that it has sufficient carers with the right skills to meet the needs of
children looked after, particularly those who are older or who have brothers and
sisters who also need to be looked after. Although the placement stability of
children looked after is improving, it is still less good than that in similar local
authorities and the overall stock of foster carers is reducing.
young people and taking action as a result, such as inviting young people
contributing to the content of a new leaflet for young people leaving care.
However, more work is required to ensure that the views of children and young
people are routinely sought and acted on. The take-up of advocacy for children
attending looked after reviews is low and this is not a service normally available
for those attending child protection case conferences. The wishes and feelings
of children expressed to advocates in complaints or in return home interviews
are not aggregated and analysed to identify key themes that could inform
service planning.
agencies work together to provide services for children. The joint strategic
needs assessment (JSNA) lacks a strong enough focus on the social care needs
of children. The Health and Wellbeing Board has suffered from poor attendance
over the last year and has been described as having, lost its way. There is no
current shared plan that sets out how agencies will provide services or against
which agencies can measure the collective difference they are making for
children. The Health and Wellbeing Board held a workshop event in June this
year to bring greater clarity and drive to its work and the leader of the council
has recently taken over as the chair of the board. These are positive
developments but are too new to have had an impact. Similarly, the new Brent
Childrens Trust, although developing fast and increasingly providing a real
focus for agencies to discuss and plan services, is also at too early a stage to
have had a significant impact. For example, discussions at the trust about
establishing shared commissioning arrangements across agencies are detailed
and thorough but are yet to be put into practice.


improved communication and joint working between childrens services and
schools in Brent. Schools are positive about the advice and the direct support
they receive in a number of areas and the positive difference it has made,
including, children missing education, concerns they may have about possible
female genital mutilation, gang affiliation, radicalisation and work with
unaccompanied asylum seeking children. This improved relationship has not yet
translated into schools being more ready to take on the role of leadprofessional in CAFs. The local authority is aware of this and is working with
schools to provide training and a clearer, briefer CAF form to help address this
situation. However, schools currently take on the lead professional role in a
relatively low 9% of CAFs.
exploitation. Extensive awareness training has been undertaken. This has not
only included relevant childcare professionals and young people themselves but
also over 100 licensed drivers and visits to all local hotels. Good joint working
with the police has had a positive impact including the identification of hotspots and the issuing of abduction notices in cases of concern where this is
appropriate (16 issued in 2015 between April and the start of the inspection).
Some analysis of trends and themes has been undertaken but this needs to be
in greater detail to inform future service planning. An additional data analyst
position has been agreed but is not yet in place to support work in this area.
in relation to child sexual exploitation Inspectors found the tool was
inconsistently used to assess risk and inform planning. This reduces the
potential of timely interventions with some young people. A Safer London
young persons advocate has been appointed to add capacity to the support
provided to young people but plans to move away from spot-purchased
therapeutic support for victims to a more focused and responsive contracted
provision have not yet been realised. Although there has been good joint
working with the police, this has not been consistent across all agencies, for
example staff from genito-urinary medicine (GUM) clinics are yet to attend
MASE panel meetings.
from return home interviews for children and young people who have been
missing. The content of interviews is not collected and analysed to identify
themes that could inform service planning in the future. The identification of
the pull factors that lead young people to go missing is a particular gap in the
analysis of this information when it is considered alongside information about
those who may be at risk of child sexual exploitation.
young people may be at as a result of radicalisation. This area of work is
mature, well-coordinated, and integrated into the broader offer of services for
children. This ensures that childrens wider welfare needs are considered


alongside their specific needs arising from radicalisation. Particular examples of
good practice in Brent include projects specifically to support parents and
organisations managing supplementary schools.
assess the impact and improve the quality of services for children is underdeveloped. The range of data considered is largely appropriate but is not
adapted as new priority areas are identified. For example once the local
authoritys own return home audit identified an under-use of return home
interviews, this was not added to the data set to monitor if performance
improved. Analysis of quantitative performance data is not enhanced by
qualitative information from audits, feedback from children and families or the
views of staff. This limits the local authoritys ability to form a rounded analysis
that would best support managers in understanding the reasons for any poor
performance and identifying possible solutions.
improvement. For example, the local authoritys audit of child protection case
conferences concluded that more Family Group Conferences should be
undertaken at nearly the same point in time as the decision was made to
terminate the existing service. Case audits are of a reasonable quality but do
not give rise to specific recommendations to improve work with individual
children. They are not collectively analysed for learning that could inform
training or service design. This means that the local authority is not getting the
best value from the auditing work it is undertaking.
such a post holds back their ability to embed good practice and limits senior
managers capacity to fully understand the quality and impact of front-line
practice.
social workers receive regular supervision and management oversight. Where
this is informed by the SoS approach, the quality of case discussions is
generally good and contains a sharp focus on the wishes and feelings of
children. However, inspectors found evidence of significant gaps in the
supervision, case direction and oversight received by a minority of social
workers. Where this occurs, it has led to delays in progressing work and
improving outcomes for some children. Where this has been the case, it has
largely been in teams that have experienced greater or more recent turnover of
staff, including managers.
package. Through the introduction of the SoS approach and the provision of
mobile technology such as tablets, social workers are given both theoretical and
practical tools to help them do their job. A broad range of appropriately focused
training is available both directly from the local authority and via the West
London Alliance, a consortia arrangement with other local authorities through


which external providers are commissioned to provide training. Newly qualified
social workers who are in their assessed first year of employment (ASYE)
describe the value of the training and support they receive and this is helping
many of them decide to remain in Brent.
and specific funding for additional staffing has enabled the local authority to
reduce staff turnover. For this reason there is an increased percentage of staff
who are full time and the borough has reduced its reliance on agency social
workers. At the time of the inspection, agency staff made up 33% of staff
rather than the 40% they represented in September 2014. Although turnover is
still a problem in some social work teams, increased staffing levels mean that
social workers in Brent have manageable caseloads. This not only means that
social workers are more likely to be able to see children often enough to build
relationships of trust with them but has also supported recruitment and
retention of social workers.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement

Executive summary
The LSCB requires improvement because:
The board meets all of its statutory functions and through its coordination of
partnership working has an influence on frontline practice. However, the lack of
sufficient rigour with which it has carried out its monitoring function has hampered
its ability to understand the overall effectiveness of safeguarding services. This
includes an inability to fully understand the positive influence that the board is
having through its audits and programme of work.
The boards linkage with other strategic bodies has been weak but is improving.
There is a recent improvement in the relationship between the LSCB and the Health
and Wellbeing Board, but the LSCB has too little influence over the priorities of the
Health and Wellbeing Board. The board is beginning to clarify its role in relation to
the newly formed Childrens Trust. There is, as yet, no formal link with the Family
Justice Board. Although links with the third sector are made through the active
Community Reference Group (CRG), there is currently no voluntary sector
representative on the board, which is a gap.
The data-set which the board uses to monitor the performance of agencies is being
refined. It does not currently support the board in effectively monitoring all
safeguarding activity across the borough. The board is aware of the limitations of the
data-set and is beginning to ensure that the story behind the data is captured, as
well as presenting data from a wider variety of sources. This work is in its infancy so
has not yet had an impact.
While the board has undertaken some awareness raising activity in relation to private
fostering, the number of private fostering arrangements known about remains low.


Recommendations

safeguarding services, ensuring that this includes data relating to areas of
practice in need of improvement that are not currently monitored, such as:
return home interviews for children missing from home or care; children and
young peoples attendance at child protection case conferences; and private
fostering.
to influence the planning and commissioning of safeguarding services across
the borough and that progress against recommendations is tracked.
the Family Justice Board.
ensure that partner organisations report private fostering arrangements
appropriately.
agencies are discharging their statutory duties to safeguard and promote the
welfare of children.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
been in post since June 2015. He has undertaken a thorough self-assessment
of the boards current functioning which has identified areas for improvement.
The outgoing chair left the board in February 2015. During the intervening four
months, the board was led by the deputy chair and while most activity
continued, there was a delay in some areas of work pending the arrival of the
new chair.
Wellbeing Board have only recently been established. There has been no link
made with the Family Justice Board. This means that the board has not
discharged the role of critical friend to other agencies as effectively as it would
if these links were better established.
organisations. They are committed and clearly give a high priority to
safeguarding, undertaking joint work to forward the boards priorities.
Currently, there is no formal voluntary sector representation, which is a gap,


although voluntary and faith sectors are effectively engaged through the active
and influential CRG.
work is a strength. The CRG, is chaired by the lay members and acts as a
conduit reporting to the board on the views of the community and informing
the community about the activities of the board while raising awareness of
safeguarding. The work undertaken by the CRG to promote safeguarding has
had a clear impact on community engagement, for example in the identification
of a potential hotspot for child sexual exploitation. CRG meetings have been
held in community and faith locations across the borough. The CRG has been
active in ensuring that the voice of the child, and community, is represented at
board meetings with young people actively involved.
and transparent analysis of safeguarding across the borough. It identifies local
priorities and these are well reflected in the business plan. Priorities link to subgroup activities, to the commissioning of audits and also to the planning of
training. Coordinated work relating to the priorities has led to an improvement
in frontline practice, for example, the work around children missing education
has led to improved tracking of children and supported a reduction in the
number of children missing education. There has also been activity to improve
frontline practice regarding female genital mutilation and radicalisation and this
is reflected in the improving quality of work seen by inspectors in these areas.
practitioners. The audits are linked to the priorities of the board or to
challenges presented to the board. A programme of audits is planned for the
current year which is mid-way through. Audits are of variable quality, although
the majority appropriately identify areas for improvement and lead to activity
which has a positive influence on practice.
childrens social care and has lacked a broad range of data from across
agencies that would give a fuller picture of the difference agencies are making
for children and better highlight areas in need of improvement. Organisations
are beginning to offer a narrative to accompany the data to provide a more
qualitative analysis and an understanding of the story behind the data. This
work has only recently begun so it is too early to assess how effectively this will
assist the board to monitor the effectiveness of safeguarding practice. This lack
of rigour in the way the board monitors and scrutinises agencies performance,
tracks the completion of any recommendations it makes and assesses the
difference this has made to the impact agencies achieve means that the board
cannot be fully clear about the influence it exerts or the difference this makes
for children and young people in Brent. For example, an audit into paediatric
child protection assessments resulted in improved working arrangements
between health and childrens services, more clarity about the referral process,
and assessments being undertaken more appropriately. However, data have


not been collected in a way which allows the board to assess the rate of
improvement in this area.
understand what is happening at the front line, given the limitations of the data
set. Frequent presentations, for example from early help, have enabled them to
keep up to date and, in some cases, information presented to the board has
allowed them to identify gaps and areas for improvement. For example, the
identification of an issue involving young people in custody led to an audit,
followed by improvement work. There was a resultant improvement in
identifying young people as vulnerable and referring them to the Brent Family
Front Door (BFFD). However, because of the way the board receives data, they
are unaware of the percentage rise in referrals to the BFFD as a result of this
activity.
resulted from the quality of the data has meant that the board has had limited
influence on the planning and commissioning of services. While there has been
some influence, for example in the commissioning of specialist mental health
services for children with disabilities and those who are looked after, this has
happened in an ad-hoc and reactive manner. This means that the board cannot
influence the direction of improvement in a systematic way which relates to
priorities and identified gaps.
inspection in 2014. Although further improvement is needed, particularly with
regard to the risks to children missing from home or care, there is a sharper
strategic focus, with better coordinated activity to pull together information,
data and intelligence that is being used to build up a picture of activity across
the Borough. Work with the Clinical Commissioning Group, Police and the Safer
Brent Partnership has improved understanding and there is investment from
board partners to resource future work, including the appointment of a
dedicated child sexual exploitation analyst.
training provided by the board. Training is responsive to changing needs and
trainers quickly incorporate lessons from serious case reviews (SCRs), audits
and other learning into current training programmes. Learning Pool is an
electronic system which has enabled access to training for a range of
professionals including those from the voluntary sector. Gaps in registration and
attendance are followed up. Learning Pool enables access to free online as well
as face-to-face training. Some evaluation of training takes place but assessment
of ongoing impact is in its infancy.
effectively to promote learning from SCRs and to ensure that front line staff are
aware of key messages. Social workers spoken to are aware of SCRs
undertaken by the board and the implications for practice. The vast majority of


actions have been completed from the action plan arising from the most recent
SCR.
group of trained professionals who are available to undertake home visits
following a death. Cases are reviewed in a timely way, and good information
sharing means that decisions can quickly be reached about the preventability of
deaths. Trends are analysed and deaths are broken down into relevant
categories such as, age, gender and postcode. A review of all deaths led to
active awareness raising about safe sleeping. An issue around vitamin D
deficiency was identified and linked to national health priorities, with training
and awareness raising undertaken as a result.
localised if necessary and reviewed regularly. These are all accessible via the
LSCB website. However, a section 11 audit is currently overdue which means
that the board cannot have an up-to-date understanding of how rigorously and
effectively these are applied. A recent section 157 audit with schools was
prioritised over a full section 11 audit and this has proved useful in ensuring
that appropriate work is undertaken to improve safeguarding in schools.
is regularly updated to reflect changes in priorities, for example female genital
mutilation and the Prevent duty. Thresholds are understood and applied
consistently across the borough.
although there has been some awareness-raising activity this has not led to an
increase in identification or referral.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Dominic Stevens
Deputy lead inspector: Anji Parker
Team inspectors: Marcie Taylor, Tara Geere, Pauline Turner, Michael White, Anne
Waterman, Brenda McLaughlin
Senior data analyst: Clare Atkinson
Quality assurance manager: Sean Tarpey


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


