Bristol City Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 30 September  22 October 2014
Report published: 5 December 2014
The overall judgement is that childrens services require
improvement
The authority is not yet delivering good protection and help and care for children,
young people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Inadequate


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Bristol require improvement because:
Outcomes for care leavers are poor
 Fifty per cent of care leavers are not in education, employment or training.
 The local authority is not in touch with 25% of its care leavers so cannot be sure
that these young people are safe.
 Pathway plans are poor and do not set out clear actions to achieve good
outcomes for care leavers.

Educational outcomes for looked after children require improvement
 Too many looked after children do not achieve well in school. Persistent absence
is high and the quality of personal education plans requires improvement.

The quality of social work practice is not consistently good
 Insufficient priority is given to children in need. Some of these children do not
have a plan, and a significant number who do have a plan, do not have their plan
reviewed.
 The quality of assessments, plans and case recording is not yet of a good enough
standard. Recording does not always reflect the good direct work undertaken by
social workers with children and families.
 Social work visits to some children subject to a protection plan do not take place
often enough.

Leadership, management and governance require improvement
 The corporate parenting plan is not up to date and provides limited focus and
drive to improve services for looked after children and care leavers.
 There is no overarching strategic plan to tackle child sexual exploitation (CSE).
Although a wide range of help and support is available, services are not well
coordinated and practice is inconsistent. Missing children do not all receive
appropriate return interviews.
 High caseloads limit workers ability to build meaningful relationships with
children and young people, fully assess their needs and plan effectively.
 There are insufficient skilled foster carers to provide choice and meet the demand
for places for older children and family groups.
 Performance management information is not of a good enough quality.
 In cases where poor practice was evident, there was insufficient management
oversight or Independent Reviewing Officer (IRO) challenge.
 Supervision files do not consistently contain evidence of reflective discussion.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Outcomes for care leavers

Ensure that each care leaver has a pathway plan that contains an up-to-date
assessment of individual needs and a clear plan with specific and measurable
objectives that are understood and agreed by the young person.


Take action to re-establish contact with care leavers who are not in touch with
the service and take steps to ensure they are all safe. Ensure that each care
leaver has the opportunity to maintain a meaningful relationship with a leaving
care worker and, for those young people with whom the local authority had lost
touch, the reasons are fully recorded, collated, analysed and reviewed.

Educational outcomes for looked after children

Ensure that the attainment gap between care leavers and all children locally
closes at a quicker pace; hold schools to account for the achievement of these
young people.


Ensure that all personal education plans are timely and completed to a high
standard, including clear time lines and measurable success criteria.


Evaluate the impact of the pupil premium funding on the achievement of looked
after children, and adjust where necessary to achieve optimum outcomes.


Improve the attendance of looked after children and reduce fixed term
exclusions.

The quality of social work practice

Ensure that all children in need have a good quality assessment and a clear
plan that is regularly reviewed.


Ensure that all missing children, whether from home or care, are offered a
return interview carried out by an appropriately independent person.

Leadership, management and governance


Publish and implement an updated corporate parenting plan to drive
improvement in the quality and coordination of services to address the current
poor outcomes for looked after children and care leavers.

Areas for improvement

The quality of social work practice
the city and provide training, coaching and supervision to achieve consistency
of practice.
children and the themes from interviews are used to inform strategic planning
in conjunction with the police.
other meetings to ensure that childrens needs are understood and met.

Leadership, management and governance
impact of services to tackle CSE and to support children who go missing from
home or care. Ensure that staff are aware of the revised missing from home or
care policy when it is published.
priorities to replace the 201114 Children and Young Peoples Plan.
include all relevant priorities, including care leavers in education, training and
employment, care leavers missing, children at risk of sexual exploitation and
the number and quality of child in need plans and pathway plans.
time to build meaningful relationships with children and their families and
accurately assess need.
and meet the demand for family homes for older children and family groups.
improve primary school attendance, and seek new ways to improve attendance
for all children.
to comply with the requirements of the IRO handbook to monitor the
effectiveness of social work practice in meeting childrens needs.


The local authoritys strengths
Childrens centres and schools play an active role in delivering services for
children under ten.
turned around families involved with the service.
Strategy meetings lead to swift action. Initial child protection conferences are
held promptly and child protection conferences are well attended by agencies.
Advocacy for children is used well throughout the child protection process.
to better engagement with children and parents.
practice.
communities of Bristol is well developed. This includes targeted work to tackle
female genital mutilation (FGM).
care proceedings.
they feel listened to and have good relationships with them. Care plans are
regularly reviewed and permanency for children is considered early in the
planning process.
this is in their best interests and children in Bristol are adopted quicker than the
national average.
leadership through the Children First reshaping of services.
comprehensive package of training and support is offered for new social
workers. Training in the Signs of Safety tools and methodology is offered to
social work staff and those in other agencies who deliver the early help offer.


Progress since the last inspection
after children was in May 2010. The local authority was judged to be good for
both services.
adequately addressed. In particular this includes the need to improve the
quality of assessments, children in need plans and case recording; insufficient
placement choice for older children and for brothers and sisters to be together;
and the need to review social worker capacity to meet service demands and
ensure that social workers have manageable caseloads.
pathway plans are poor and too many are not in education, employment and
training.
outstanding. The local authority has kept pace with the changes in adoption
and is maintaining a good standard overall in this area, but the quality of child
permanency reports is not consistently good.
understanding of the weaknesses, and work is underway to reorganise services
under its Children First programme.
thresholds for access to services, senior management capacity in childrens
services and some additional social work posts. The local authority has
introduced rolling three-year budgets to support planning, and has created a
Children and Families Board, which is helping to shape strategic inter-agency
service planning focused on children.
present as homeless includes a range of provision to ensure that young people
receive a prompt service. There are currently no young people aged under 18
known to childrens social care who are living in bed and breakfast
accommodation.


Summary for children and young people
 Inspectors found that many services in Bristol need to improve, though some are
helping children and young people well.
 Care leavers need more help to get jobs, attend further education or access
training. The people who support care leavers are not in touch with enough of
them and do not know if they are all safe. Some care leavers told us that they did
not know about pathway plans. These are plans that care leavers should be
closely involved with, that should help to make clear what action will be taken to
help to prepare them for independence and adulthood.
 Too many looked after children do not get enough support to help them do well
at school.
 Social workers need to make better plans with children and families and keep
clearer records of the work they do. This would help them to know whether
things are improving for children and their families.
 Some social workers have too much work to do which means that they do not
always have the time to help children well enough.
 The local authority needs to develop clear plans to help improve services for
looked after children and vulnerable young people, such as those at risk of sexual
exploitation and those who go missing from home or care.
 Early help services, such as childrens centres, family intervention teams and
youth services, are helping children and families to manage their lives better.
 When there are concerns about the protection of children and young people,
agencies such as the police, health and social care work together quickly to
protect children.
 Social workers and others, such as health visitors, work well with children and
parents and ask the right sort of questions to understand what early help services
they need.
 Looked after children feel listened to, and in many cases, plans are made to help
them to move quickly to a permanent home.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 90,500 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Bristol. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 25% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 22% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 22% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 34% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Somali and Mixed White/Black Caribbean.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 20% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 15% (the national average is 15%).
 Bristols population is increasing, particularly in the younger age groups. The
number of children aged four and under rose by 36% between 2003 and 2013.
Child protection in this area
 At 30 September 2014, 3,500 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 30 September 2014, 466 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 392 at 31 March 2013.
 At 30 September 2014, 13 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a decrease from 17 as at 31 March 2013.
 Since the last inspection, 12 serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and five serious case reviews have been completed or were on going at
the time of the inspection.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Children looked after in this area
 At 30 September 2014, 696 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 77 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 719 (82 per
authority area
authority area
authority area. The majority of those who live out of the area live in
adjacent local authorities.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 46 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
 five young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in houses
of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates seven childrens homes (including two providing
short breaks). Five were judged to be good or outstanding in their most recent
Ofsted inspection.
 In June 2013, Ofsted carried out a focused inspection of Bristols schools as part
of a programme of inspections in local authorities with a low proportion of good
and outstanding schools. Fifteen schools were inspected. Ten of the schools
improved their overall effectiveness grade from the previous inspection, one to
outstanding and nine to good. One remained good while four were judged still
not to be providing the quality of education expected. In the South West region,
Bristol had the greatest increase in the proportion of good or outstanding primary
schools in 2012/13.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Other information about this area
 The City Director, who acts as the Chief Executive Officer, has been in post since
May 2013.
 The Strategic Director for People has been in post since January 2014. The post
includes the roles and responsibilities of the Director of Childrens Services.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since September 2014.
 Vista, Bristol's Social Work Practice, has been operational since April 2012. The
practice works with up to 140 looked after children for whom the plan is to
remain in care.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Early help services for children, young people and families are well targeted and
coordinated so that they receive the help and support they need at the right time.
Childrens centres and schools play a strong part in delivering such services for
younger children, and the youth service provides good, targeted interventions. The
Troubled Families service has been successful in engaging and turning around those
families with whom it works.
Thresholds for access to social care services are understood and applied by most
partners, but the police do not risk assess the incident reports they send to the First
Response Team.
Children in need services are insufficiently targeted and coordinated. Not all children
who are assessed as in need of support have a plan in place and, for those who do
their plans are not reviewed regularly enough.
Although there are examples of good practice with children going missing and an
increased level of awareness of child sexual exploitation, more needs to be done to
consolidate this area of work.
The quality of social work assessments, child protection plans and case recording is
not consistently good enough.
Social workers with high caseloads do not have time to achieve the required
standards consistently. There are many examples of social work interventions leading
to improved outcomes for children, but more needs to be done to consolidate
practice in order to improve consistency.
Due to service demand pressures, social workers and their managers do not always
complete tasks or complete them to a good enough standard. This has reduced the
quality of service experienced by a small minority of children and families.
The majority of social work and management decisions effectively protect, safeguard
and promote the well-being of children.
consistently well assessed and reviewed. Some children in need do not have a
plan and a significant number do not have their plan reviewed. Some children
in need for whom there are concerns about sexual exploitation do not have
assessments, or their assessments have not been updated in line with risk.
Some of these plans have not been reviewed in a timely way.


responses are insufficiently coordinated and practice is not consistent. Not all
professionals are alert to the warning signs of CSE and social workers do not
always use a specific screening tool for children and young people at risk.
Despite this, there is improved identification of CSE and the number of known
cases has increased from 53 (March 2014) to 70 (October 2014). Social workers
work hard to establish and maintain relationships with young people who are
known to be at risk of CSE and understand that persistence is needed in these
cases. A wide range of voluntary sector, local authority and partnership services
is available to victims of CSE, and these are having a positive impact in
reducing risk to children and young people.
reduced, from 62 in September 2013 to 28 in September 2014. Information on
missing children is collated but not effectively evaluated, so the reasons for
these changes are not fully understood by the authority. The missing from
home policy is not up to date and there is insufficient integration of data,
policies and procedures for children missing or at risk of CSE. Some social
workers are unaware of the difference between police safe and well interviews
and return interviews. Not all young people who are subject to a child in need
or child protection plan and go missing, receive a return home interview by an
independent person and, for those who do, this information is not consistently
entered into case records.
good enough. Recent practice is much improved and there are many examples
of good assessments and record keeping by social workers. However, other
workers, particularly those with high caseloads, struggle to do all of their work
on time and to the right standard. Assessments and case records do not always
reflect the good direct work with children and families undertaken by social
workers. Chronologies and statutory visits are not always sufficiently detailed to
inform assessments and plans and the voice of the child is not sufficiently
strong in assessments or recording.
clearly what action must be taken, by when and by whom. The frequency of
social work visits to see children stipulated in child protection plans is not
always proportionate to the risk resulting in some children not being seen often
enough. Core groups are held regularly, they are well attended and there are
many examples of effective multi-agency work to safely reduce risk for children.
However, some social workers lack the skills to chair these meetings effectively,
so opportunities are missed to engage parents and carers effectively in the
planning and review process.


supporting children and families. These involve three geographically based early
help coordinators and multi-professional family intervention teams, alongside a
commissioned open access youth service with a good range and quality of
additional targeted provision. Work with families under the Troubled Families
initiative is also delivered by this range of services, all of which use Bristols
new Single Assessment Framework as a common spine for assessment and
service delivery. These services help to make a positive impact on childrens
lives. There are many examples of children and families receiving the early help
they need and this is ensuring that risks reduce. Some parents and asylum
seekers who met with inspectors said the quality of the service they receive is
amazing.
the First Response Team (FRT). This team provides a single point of access to
both early help and statutory services. The threshold document launched in
February 2014 is now well understood by partner agencies and is leading to a
more consistent understanding. With the exception of the very high number of
contacts received from the police, concerns are referred appropriately by
partner agencies, which provide sufficient detail to support social workers to
make decisions. Although the police are planning action to prioritise contacts,
the FRT continues to struggle with the high volume of such work, which has led
to delays for some children in receiving the help they need. The threshold for
access to services for children at risk of harm, neglect or abuse is understood
by social workers and managers and correctly applied in most cases. In a small
number of referrals seen, workers in Duty and Assessment Teams were overoptimistic about the ability of early help services to address the presenting
needs, and the decision not to progress through social work services was soon
followed by a repeat referral.
prioritised so that children who need protection are safeguarded. Strategy
meetings involve the relevant agencies and lead to swift action. Performance on
the timeliness of initial child protection conferences has significantly improved
from a low base and is now better than similar local authorities, with 80%
completed within 15 days of the strategy meeting decision. The proportion of
child protection review conferences completed within timescales has improved
from a low base to 94%.
recently introduced Signs of Safety social work practice model is beginning to
improve engagement with children and parents. Social workers see children
regularly so that they know and understand the needs of children and families
well. Advocacy is used well throughout the child protection process to ensure
that the views of children and parents are heard and understood.


authority ensures continuity between the daytime childrens social care and outof-hours services. Some delays have occurred when strategy meetings are
required out-of-hours, when Police Protection Unit officers are not available
between 5.30pm and 8.00am; there are plans to tackle this issue.
present as homeless includes a range of provision to ensure that young people
receive a prompt service. There are currently no young people aged under 18
known to childrens social care who are living in bed and breakfast
accommodation.
passionate about their role, and know the local communities and their cases
well. There are many examples of social work interventions leading to improved
outcomes for children. Parents routinely receive copies of all meeting minutes,
assessments and plans to support effective work. Most parents who met with
inspectors expressed their satisfaction with the work of their social worker,
even when they had to hear difficult messages.
in cases seen by inspectors where disguised compliance was an issue, this was
effectively identified and acted upon as part of the assessment and planning
process.
combination of poverty and child deprivation. Domestic abuse is the most
commonly recorded risk factor in children in need and child protection cases.
From April to June 2014, 777 open social work cases had domestic abuse as a
significant risk factor. Work with families where there is domestic abuse, is
closely aligned to other interventions in, for example, drug and alcohol misuse
and mental ill health. Of the cases involving domestic abuse, 485 also involved
substance misuse and 437 alcohol misuse, while in 510 cases, parents were
identified as having some level of mental health need. Multi-agency risk
assessment conferences (MARAC) ensure that high-risk domestic abuse cases
are managed well and services effectively engage families. For example, during
the year, 114 child victims of domestic abuse have received a direct service to
support their emotional well-being from Next Link Domestic Abuse Services
commissioned by the local authority and the Safer Bristol partnership.
communities of Bristol is well developed. This includes targeted work to tackle
female genital mutilation (FGM), including support for victims and unborn
babies. Services for children with a disability are well planned and there are
many examples of the needs of children with disabilities being met well, for
example, through the use of advocates who have the skills to communicate
with even the most severely disabled children so that their voices are heard.
Good multi-agency support is provided to this vulnerable group of children.


at a school or receiving suitable alternative education; this number is reducing.
However, an additional 75 pupils miss out on education through not receiving
either full time or suitable education. The local authority has improved
procedures to monitor and track the attendance of pupils, which has led to
improved primary school attendance, but the overall attendance of children and
young people remains too low. Increasing emphasis is now placed on the
training and development of staff to support the development of pupils
awareness of keeping safe through the personal, social and health education
(PSHE) curriculum. Further work is planned to highlight issues on radicalism
and safeguarding children.
against professionals. There is a clear process for managing child protection
investigations by the local authority designated officer (LADO). Responsive
arrangements are in place for the LADO to raise awareness of the role and
provide training to a range of agencies, including work with the fostering team,
faith groups and schools.
promote awareness are comprehensive. Training and awareness raising have
taken place in social work teams and schools. Sampling of cases in the FRT
confirmed that social work practice is alert to the needs of privately fostered
children, although the local authority acknowledges that visits to see these
children are not always undertaken within the statutory timescale.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Care leavers are not supported well and pathway plans are poor. Too many care
leavers are not in education, training or employment and some do not know what
they are entitled to when they leave care and move into independence.
Approximately 25% of care leavers do not receive a service from the local authority,
and it is not known whether these young people are safe.
The educational achievement of looked after children requires improvement
particularly at Key Stage 1 and Key Stage 4. Persistent absence is high and the
quality of personal education plans is not good enough.
The quality of written assessments requires improvement. Too many care plans are
not up to date and lack detailed information. Chronologies are not consistently used
and childrens wishes and feelings are not always recorded. There is insufficient
management oversight or challenge by IROs where assessments and plans are weak.
There is a lack of clarity among staff about the return interview process for children
missing from care and return interviews are not always carried out appropriately.
Better joint working is needed between the police and childrens social care.
Early help services support more young children to remain at home with their
families. Thresholds are understood and applied consistently and children do not
become looked after unnecessarily. However, the number of older children who do
become looked after is increasing.
Implementation of the Public Law Outline process has helped to improve the
timeliness of care proceedings and plans for children to achieve permanency are
made quickly. Care plans are reviewed regularly and permanency for children is
considered early in the planning process. The local authority is successful in promptly
arranging adoption for children when this is in their best interest.
There has been an increase in the number of foster carers recruited but the pool of
carers does not fully match the profile and needs of children. Foster carers feel
supported and well prepared to foster children.
The children in care council meet regularly and have done some good work to
improve experiences and services for children in care and represent their views to
elected members and managers. This group does not currently include children living
in childrens homes or care leavers, and so their voice is not as well heard.


of children in care. Currently 693 children are looked after, a reduction from a
high point of 719 in March 2013. The main reason for the reduction is the
increased number of children leaving care during 201314, compared with
stay at home with their families, but are having much less impact on reducing
the number of older children who become looked after.
year since 2009. Young people aged 16 and 17 now represent over a quarter of
all children in care. Action to ensure that this group are well supported is not
evident and a small number of older children have drifted back home, without
purposeful preparation work to support them and their families.
children do not become looked after unnecessarily. The access to resources
panel ensures that alternative support arrangements have been explored
before any agreement to a child becoming looked after is made.
discharge the care order, but have then remained in this situation for a number
of years. This has not been challenged sufficiently by managers or by IROs,
which has meant that some children are subject to legal orders for too long.
average duration of care proceedings to within 25 weeks against a national
average of 31 weeks. Inspectors saw examples of good parallel planning which
means that children and young people are experiencing less delay in achieving
permanency. Relationships with partners in the family justice arena are positive,
with the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass)
describing the care proceedings work by the authority as realistic, detailed and
well planned.
enough and some are poor. The majority of written assessments seen by
inspectors do not contain enough detail about the children. Some are not up to
date and lack important information, such as changes of placement and contact
arrangements with parents. Care plans are completed routinely but are not
always specific or detailed enough. Not all plans record childrens views and
wishes or how they have been involved in the process. Inspectors did see
evidence of some plans that were thorough and clearly identified needs,
including those which considered religion, culture and heritage, but this is not
the case for all children.


an appropriately independent person. Sometimes a return interview is with a
member of staff from the residential home, which is inappropriate, as the
young person may have run away because of something happening at the
home. Information from return interviews is not routinely used to plan for the
young persons future safety. In September 2014, there were 28 reports of
looked after children going missing.
sexual exploitation, multi-agency risk meetings are held. Information sharing
protocols work well, but responses to children at risk are not informed by a
shared strategic protocol, and inspectors saw responses and thresholds applied
by the police that were different to those applied by childrens social care.
social workers could talk with knowledge about the children they support and
could demonstrate that they had spent time with them to understand their
wishes and feelings. However, this was not always reflected in case records and
plans, which means that information about how childrens needs will be met
may be lost if workers change. In some cases, chronologies are used to capture
important events in childrens lives and this is a priority for those cases in court
proceedings. Chronologies are used less frequently for children who are not
subject to court proceedings, which means that their past experiences are not
fully taken into account.
prepared before the review. Children and parents said that they understood
their plans and knew what was supposed to happen. There were examples
seen in plans that childrens cultural and religious needs were being considered
thoroughly and that children with disabilities were being supported well in their
placements and at school. Care reviews are well attended by professionals and
reports are sent in advance of the meeting.
ensure that the plans made at reviews are being implemented on time. IROs do
challenge social workers on their practice, but this is mostly on an informal
basis, and not always recorded. As a result, it is difficult to see how these
situations have been monitored and how often challenges are acted upon. The
IRO manager is aware of this issue and has presented a plan to the corporate
parenting panel and the LSCB outlining how IRO involvement and influence on
childrens progress will be captured in future.
families. Examples seen included basing contact around a family meal, play
sessions at childrens centres, contact supervised by family members and
weekend contact. Telephone, text and face time are used in between face to
face sessions to promote contact.


know what to do if they did not. They know how to complain and were able to
give examples of things that had changed because they had raised them with
their social worker, such as seeing more of friends. They like their social
workers and feel listened to; they have good relationships with them and spend
time with them alone. Children said they had opportunities to develop interests,
hobbies and friendships outside school. They can bring friends home and spend
time at friends houses.
most do not make enough progress over time and results fluctuate from yearto-year. At least half of the children in early years achieve age-related
expectations in the early learning goals. At Key Stage 1, although the most
recent published attainment performance is in line with looked after children
nationally, it has not been sustained in 2014, particularly in writing and reading.
At Key Stage 2, despite two thirds of the 2014 cohort having a statement of
special educational needs or being supported by a school action plan, they
achieved well, with a small minority achieving the higher levels. Attainment at
this Key Stage is in line with looked after children nationally.
similar authorities. Targeted strategies to improve outcomes show some good
impact. For example, seven out of ten young people who received tuition in
English and mathematics achieved GCSE grade C or above in these subjects.
Nevertheless, the 2014 unvalidated results show a decline, with only 14%
obtaining five or more GCSE grades A*-C including English and mathematics.
The attainment gap is still too wide because most looked after children are not
making more than the expected rate of progress from Key Stage 2 to Key Stage
similar results to those in Bristol.
majority of children in care are in good or better schools. Attendance is kept
under close scrutiny, but persistent absence at 14% is too high; this is highest
in secondary schools and amongst those from White ethnic backgrounds. The
number of days lost through fixed term exclusions has fallen, but fixed term
exclusions remain high and some groups are over represented, in particular
boys, those with challenging behaviour and those from minority ethnic groups.
There have been no permanent exclusions for five years. Those pupils missing
education are targeted closely to improve their attendance. While the
educational provision offered includes 25 hours each week, most have low
attendance.


include clear timescales, and the success criteria are not measurable and do not
dovetail well with academic targets. Although a new electronic system is used
to monitor the plans, compliance is not good. In 2014, 82% of PEPs were
completed; this is well below the local authoritys 96% target. Consequently,
schools are not rigorously supporting the ambitious targets outlined in their
vision for better outcomes. Very little attention is given to evaluating the impact
of the use of pupil premium.
reviews. In most cases, practice ensures that children achieve permanency
without delay. Inspectors saw a small number of cases where plans lacked
detail or did not explain the contingency arrangements. Value for money
meetings, which are mainly business-focused, are held for all external
placements and contribute to reducing drift by making sure that plans about
the duration of short-term placements are clear and that children are moved to
a permanent home as soon as possible.
told inspectors that they felt well prepared for the role. They said that their
social workers were supportive, efficient and reliable, and responded quickly if
asked for help. Some foster carers were unsure of how pupil premium money
could be used for activities such as music lessons.
care recruitment has kept pace with the increasing demand. There are now 273
foster carers providing 470 places. A higher proportion of children are placed in
foster care than the national average, but despite an improving picture this
does not meet the demand for family homes for older children or family groups.
Overall, 83% of children in care are fostered. Of these, 62% are placed with inhouse foster carers and 38% are placed with carers from independent fostering
agencies. These placements are closely monitored both for the quality of care
given to children and value for money. There are some in-house foster carers
who have had vacancies for several months and the sufficiency issue is not
about the number of foster carers but the range, choice and skills of carers
available.
there has been an increase in the number of unplanned placement disruptions
for older children, which means that more are experiencing moves in crises
where they and their carers are not well prepared. This in turn means that the
new placements are at risk of breaking down. The local authority has
commissioned a range of services to help support foster carers and prevent
placement break down. These services, such as the child and adolescent mental
health services (CAMHS) drop-in, are seen as very helpful by foster carers in
helping to prevent breakdown and in managing childrens behaviour.


miles of home, which means that it is easier for children to maintain friendships
and contact with their families. These placements are closely monitored and
reviewed to ensure that the needs of the children are being fully met. The two
young people placed at a distance from Bristol who were visited by inspectors
were in homes rated good or outstanding; they were well looked after by their
carers and were making good progress.
proportion of those who received an annual health assessment during 201314
was above the England average at 91%. Improvements have been made to
make sure that children have up-to-date dental checks and immunisations,
including those children who live outside the Bristol area. Their health needs
and treatment are monitored at weekly meetings held by the specialist looked
after children nurse. A wide and innovative range of services support and
promote looked after childrens mental health and well-being, including
individual and group work and an extended CAMHS programme which provides
a seamless service through to adulthood.
of some 25 young people. The group has undertaken a variety of activities,
such as sharing their ideas on keeping contact with brothers and sisters and
working with IROs to make reviews more interesting for young people. The
children in care council also has representatives on the BSCB shadow Board so
their experience shapes the BSCB strategy. Children living with foster families
are well represented on the children in care council but children living in
childrens homes are not. There is a missed opportunity to involve children in
residential homes in this key forum.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
considered at the earliest possible stage. The adoption service captures
information on children where adoption may be the plan and ensures that their
progress is closely tracked so that there is no unnecessary delay. The local
authoritys performance, measured against the 2010 to 2013 adoption
scorecard, is good, and shows children in Bristol move quickly into their
permanent families. The average number of days between a child entering care
and being placed with their adoptive family is 559. This is 88 days quicker than
the England average and 79 days quicker than the authoritys statistical
neighbours. Once the court has agreed that a child can be placed for adoption,
a family is found within an average of 194 days, which is better than the
England average of 210 days.


Bristol, at 13%, was equal to the England average but lower than statistical
neighbours. In 201314, 50 children were adopted, which is more than double
the number of adoptions in 201213 and represents good progress.
range of alternative permanence options are available for children who cannot
remain with their birth parents, such as special guardianship orders (SGO). In
this has increased to 46 in 201314.
adopters were without a match. Good work is undertaken to engage and
commission adoption agencies for harder to place children. Bristol is part of the
South West Adoption Consortium, which provides matches for children and
adopters outside Bristol. The service participates in regular exchange days and
uses adoption publications, Be my parent, Adoption Today and the national
adoption register.
with developmental uncertainty and has been successful in placing children with
families. Family finding for children with complex needs often takes longer and
this commitment to finding a permanent family inevitably affects scorecard
performance.
both prospective adopters and foster carers, using a wide range of media,
advertising and attendance at community events to raise the profile of children
needing adoption. Recruiting sufficient adopters remains a challenge, but recent
campaigns have led to an increase in prospective adopters contacting the
adoption service.
additional adoption social workers. The regional consortia have been used to
good effect to provide adopter preparation training in order to free up
additional adoption social worker time for assessment and post-placement
support. The grant has also been used to purchase additional medical adviser
time and to fund a Court Manager post to focus on reducing PLO timescales.
This has contributed to bringing timescales for care proceedings down from 61
weeks in the first quarter of 201213 to 25 weeks in the first quarter in 2014
panel, which is a missed opportunity. This would enhance the panels quality
assurance role and provide an oversight on the quality and consistency of the
books.


and is well administered. Panel membership reflects the diversity of Bristols
population. Legal and medical advice is clear, and prospective adopters are able
to meet with the medical adviser to discuss health matters. Agency Decision
Maker decisions are timely and, from evidence in Adoption Panel minutes, there
is appropriate challenge from panel members.
and they contain clear analysis and detail. The quality of child permanency
reports is more variable, although panel members report that the quality is
improving. One panel member reported that it is  like the child is in the
room. The panel provides direct quality assurance feedback to social workers
and this is recorded in detail in panel minutes.
national developments and local issues, but the panel chair does not provide an
annual report on adoption activity and information is not collated and analysed.
This is a missed opportunity for the adoption service to reflect on its own
service from the viewpoint of the independent panel.
social workers. One recent event was on learning from disruption of
placements.
with a childrens charity and has one fostering to adopt placement. All
prospective adopters are asked if they are willing to become approved as foster
to adopt carers.
positively about the quality and range of support available, which is responsive
to their requests for advice or support. One adopter spoke of appreciating the
therapeutic parenting group and the supportive network of other adopters that
had developed from the course. Quarterly newsletters are sent out to all
adopters and there is an annual fun day for adopters and their children. Events
run throughout the year and include two events for teenagers. Each year there
are two themed support events for adopters. One recently focused on single
adopters and another is being arranged for same sex couple adopters.
experienced team of adoption social workers. One adopter reported that the
workers have a good knowledge of the families so she does not need to repeat
her story if she contacts the service for support.
was followed up with a very detailed and thorough analysis and the learning
disseminated via discussion in team meetings.


due for review. The statement of purpose is informative and explains the
process of adoption clearly. It lists the range of services and includes services
for people who are considering adoption or who have been affected by
adoption.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is inadequate
poor. Most pathway plans are ineffective, lack analysis and do not set out clear
actions that will drive forward good outcomes for care leavers. There was little
evidence of management oversight in the pathway plans seen. This means that
young people are not helped to understand their changing needs and make
secure plans for their future. Some young people who spoke to inspectors did
not know about their entitlements to help and support, for example, access to
funding for setting up a home or access to advocacy services to help them have
a voice and be heard.
there is no robust system to monitor the impact that the service has on
outcomes for young people. Caseloads in the specialist Care and After team are
high, which means that workers do not have sufficient time to spend with
young people or support them to become independent adults.
training is too high, at 50%, and there is a lack of coordinated action at
strategic and practice levels with partner agencies to address the causes of this.
However, the local authority provides good support to 24 care leavers at
university, and Learning Partnership West is having some success in engaging
young people in training and employment opportunities, but this is a new
project, which has yet to demonstrate improved outcomes.
looked after, and most of them are eligible for care leaver services. The Care
and After team is responsible for some 350 care leavers, the others remaining
in Vista (the social work practice) and other teams. The children with disability
team are supporting a small number of young people to make the transition to
adult social care.
that comprehensive risk assessments have been undertaken. This means that
the local authority does not know how many care leavers are at risk from drug
or alcohol misuse, for example, and therefore does not know what support they
may require to address these needs.


quarter of its care leavers. This means that the local authority cannot be sure
that these young people are safe. Young people are encouraged to keep in
touch with their support workers once they have left care through the provision
of a drop-in service, a web site and a free phone number to help them to
access a range of support services. Staff also try to keep in touch using social
media, texts and phone calls. Notwithstanding these initiatives, arrangements
to keep in touch with care leavers are ineffective as too many are not seen or
well supported.
they are in touch with live in suitable accommodation. However, some young
people told inspectors that they were unhappy with their accommodation and
did not feel it was in a safe area. Some said that their accommodation had
restricted their ability to study. Not all were able to choose who they shared
accommodation with. Five young people who have ceased to be looked after
are currently known to be living in houses of multiple occupation.
people. In partnership with housing providers, the local authority has arranged
individual supported housing packages for a small group of vulnerable young
people
to live with their foster carers after the age of 18, and a small number of such
placements have converted to supported lodging schemes.
not consistently available and there is no health passport scheme. Young
people are reminded to register with a doctor and dentist but are not provided
with a copy of their health records. This means they may be unaware of
important details of their health history when seeking treatment. Some personal
advisers know young people well and can describe the work they have done
with them to promote well-being and to access health services, but this is not
well reflected on case files. There are some good examples of work to promote
the mental health of young people leaving care, such as the extended CAMHS
service, which young people over 18 can access.
This is a missed opportunity to hear their voice. There is a regular care leaver
forum, which provides some opportunity for engagement.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
The local authority has a good understanding of the main issues for children and
their families in Bristol and of the strengths and weaknesses in the services it
provides. The new Strategic Director for People and his senior team have provided
strong leadership through the Children First reshaping of services programme. Some
significant progress has been made, for example, in implementing a good range of
early help services, which is having a positive impact for some children and families.
Governance arrangements are secure between the City Director, the Strategic
Director for People and elected members.
The local authority has worked well with other agencies to re-shape services, with a
strong focus on children. It is an influential partner in helping the Bristol
Safeguarding Children Board to develop a culture of professional challenge and in
raising awareness and securing additional funding for services for children at risk of
CSE. Training for staff in the Signs of Safety approach is beginning to show some
positive results, with better working relationships with families, and children clearly
being listened to.
However, some key strategic plans are out of date or not yet available. The Children
and Young Peoples Plan 201114 has not been updated in line with the
development of local need and the re-shaping of services. There is no overarching
strategic plan covering CSE or children who go missing from home or care. This
means that services and practice are not well coordinated or effective between
agencies.
The corporate parenting plan does not provide the focus and drive needed to
improve services for looked after children and care leavers.
Improvements are needed in relation to the number of care leavers accessing
education, training and employment and the availability of suitable foster placements
for older children. The local authority is not in contact with many care leavers and it
does not know if they are safe.
At present high caseloads in some teams limit social workers ability to build
meaningful relationships with children, fully assess their needs and plan effectively to
improve their outcomes. This is a continuing concern, which was raised by inspectors
at the time of the last Ofsted inspection in 2010.
Improvements to the virtual school that monitors the education of looked after
children are recent and are yet to have an impact on improving educational
attainment.


Strategic Director for People, has ensured that there is sufficient management
capacity and clear lines of accountability; they know what the key strengths
and weaknesses are in the services they lead. However, while significant
progress has been made against some priorities, such as early help to families,
insufficient progress has been made against known significant weaknesses.
the proportion of care leavers in education, training and employment is
unacceptably low at 50%. The local authority has not done enough with
sufficient urgency to improve this situation. During the course of the inspection,
a composite plan of existing actions to address poor outcomes for care leavers
was collated by the local authority. However, as a set of disparate actions, they
do not comprise a strong joined up plan and lack focus.
leadership in reshaping services for children and young people. This includes
the introduction of the First Response Team (FRT) to handle all initial contacts
with childrens services, and is about to move social work staff into smaller
social work units. This is intended to result in fewer changes of social worker
for children. Influential leadership by the City Director and Strategic Director for
People is also evident in supporting a growing culture of professional challenge
within the Bristol Safeguarding Children Board (BSCB).
elected Mayor and the Assistant Mayor (who is the lead member for children),
have ensured that there is a structure in place, both within the local authority
and with partner agencies, to support improvement. This includes adding extra
senior management capacity in childrens services, introducing rolling threeyear budgets to support planning, and the creation of a Children and Families
Board (C&FB) to shape strategic inter-agency service planning and keep it
sharply focused on children. Extra multi-agency funding secured for the
Barnardos Against Sexual Exploitation Team (BASE) exemplifies how Bristol
City Council has worked hard to focus planning for children across agencies and
has secured improvements in some important areas.
scrutiny through the regular meetings of the peoples directorate scrutiny
commission. Minutes show elected members ask appropriately detailed
questions of officers, for example on the educational attainment of Looked after
children. The lead member has used her role on the scrutiny commission to
challenge the peoples directorate about how it is responding to CSE in the light
of the Jay report and to maintain a sharp focus on this area.


local need and demographics and is aligned with the priorities of the C&FB.
However, the current Children and Young Peoples Plan 201114 has not been
updated, and there is no multi-agency strategic plan to shape the delivery of
services and to act as a yardstick against which success can be measured.
early help offer for families in Bristol. The success of the Governments
Troubled Families Initiative has resulted in Bristol being chosen as an early
implementer of a new, extended, five-year programme.
make fast enough progress in closing the educational attainment gap between
them and all children. With 13 out of 14 personal education plans seen by
inspectors judged as requiring improvement, support for these children is not
good enough. Improvements have been made to the structure and focus of the
virtual school, including the appointment of a new head teacher, but this has
not yet made sufficient difference for children.
needs and has helped make sure that recruitment and commissioning
arrangements provide a sufficient range of suitable placements for most
children and young people. The local authority places a high proportion of its
looked after children with its own foster carers and within 20 miles of their
families. There is good consideration of matching children with carers of a
similar ethnicity and culture. However, there are insufficient skilled foster carers
to provide choice and meet the demand for places for older children and family
groups. The local authority faces a challenge in meeting the demand for foster
homes from the growing number of looked after teenagers.
risk of child sexual exploitation (CSE), or of going missing from their family
homes or care is limited and lacks analysis. Although Barnardos and the police
undertake data analysis, this is not routinely shared with either the local
authority or the LSCB. Information from return interviews with children who
have been missing is not used to inform planning to keep individual children
and young people safe, nor is it collated and analysed to identify key themes
that could help with strategic planning to tackle these problems. Work in this
area by childrens services and the police is not well joined up. There is no
over-arching strategy on CSE and children going missing to help shape activity,
assess impact and develop services. The partnership has shown determination
to disrupt CSE activity and pursue prosecutions. There are examples of good
practice locally which have resulted in disruption of activity and lessening of
risk. Prosecutions have been successful. There are also initiatives to divert
young people from gang association including Bright outlook. However, there
has been no systematic evaluation of this activity.


provide data on all of the key priorities, including care leavers in education,
training or employment, improving the poor quality of pathway plans and
improving the quality, number and review frequency of child in need plans.
about the quality of services to consider, alongside data about numbers and
timeliness. This has been used to good effect to improve performance in some
important areas; for example, in reducing the number of children who need to
remain on child protection plans for more than two years, and in significantly
improving the timeliness of initial child protection case conferences, which is
now better than the average for similar local authorities.
carers, which shows an improvement over the course of this year in how well
they feel social workers work with them. Although there is some evidence of
the learning from complaints being used to improve services, the delay in
producing the 201314 complaints annual report, which remains unpublished,
necessarily limits this. The speed with which complaints are dealt with has
declined and currently 45% of stage one complaints are not dealt with within
the statutory timescale.
about services. Young people from the children in care council regularly attend
the corporate parenting board and are actively engaged in interviews and
shaping service specifications as part of the recent re-commissioning of foster
placements. In March this year, the youth parliament and young inspectors
attended a session on the re-shaping of the youth links service and will be
invited to attend a follow-up session in March 2015. However, the local
authority has not used feedback from children in reviewing the quality and
impact of services. The opportunity is missed to use feedback from the
independent chairs of child protection conferences or the advocacy service to
understand how well children are involved and listened to.
consistently complete social work tasks and build stable and meaningful
relationships with young people. In a small number of cases, newly qualified
social workers have been working with too many children and with situations
that are too complicated for their level of experience. Social workers report that
managers are readily available for guidance and support and case direction is
evident on file in most cases. However, supervision files show very little
evidence of reflective discussion and insufficient evidence of targeted discussion
in relation to professional development.


workers. It is developing the workforce, with a comprehensive package of
training and support for new social workers and training in the Signs of Safety
tools and methodology for social work staff and those in other agencies who
deliver the early help offer. This new approach is a strength, which is beginning
to have a positive impact on how professionals work with families and listen to
the voices of children. A recent successful bid to the Department for Educations
Innovations Fund will provide extra funding to extend the use of this
innovative approach.
supported by the Principal Social Worker. This worker provides support to new
social workers through focused training in key areas such as the new 0-25
integrated service for disabled children and young adults. She also provides
feedback to senior managers from front line staff and sits on the local Family
Justice Board. This helps to ensure that improvements achieved in the
timeliness and quality of work with children who are the subject of care
proceedings are maintained, by linking strategic ambition to front line practice.
whom the plan is to remain in care to a social work practice called Vista.
Children receiving a service from this practice benefit from having social
workers who typically have smaller caseloads than those directly employed by
the local authority. This helps give social workers more time to forge
meaningful relationships with young people, which in turn supports clearer
assessment and planning. The quality of practice received by these young
people is of a similar standard to that of the local authority, and there is little
evidence to show that the Vista service adds value in improving outcomes for
care leavers. The local authority is currently reviewing its commissioning
arrangements in this area.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.

Summary of findings
The LSCB requires improvement because:
Business planning
 The Board is not yet able to consistently influence and support good safeguarding
outcomes for children across the partnership. It is not sufficiently informed about
safeguarding practice.
 While there are examples of effective multi-agency arrangements, the business
plan is not specific enough or focused and this means that some work is not
coordinated effectively across the partnership.

Performance information
 The performance report card does not include sufficient evaluation of partnership
performance to enable effective scrutiny or the monitoring and analysis of trends.

Quality and evaluation
 Although the LSCB is informed about the safeguarding activity of partners, it does
not sufficiently scrutinise partners performance to measure the impact of the
Boards work and inform future priorities.
 The LSCB does not yet evaluate the impact of training on practice to enable it to
identify impact or improvements in outcomes for children.

Policies and procedures
 The Board does not have a detailed understanding of the quality of multi-agency
practice with children at risk of CSE or those children who go missing. There is no
multi-agency strategy for children at risk of sexual exploitation. The children
missing from home and care policy has not been updated to reflect changes in
guidance.
 Although a domestic abuse protocol has now been developed, there is not yet a
shared understanding of risk in such cases between the police and childrens
social care.
 The LSCB does not routinely review local policies and procedures nor evaluate
their impact on practice.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Areas for improvement

Business planning
outcome-focused and measurable. This should incorporate findings from the
Boards self-assessment and Section 11 audit.
support for the delivery of safeguarding activity across the partnership.

Performance information
performance information and use comparative quarterly data to enable effective
monitoring and analysis of trends.
home and care, in particular whether appropriate return home interviews have
been undertaken.

Quality and evaluation
evaluation of multi-agency safeguarding activity and uses this effectively to
inform future planning priorities.
duplication of work and to measure the impact of safeguarding activity on front
line practice over time.
size is used to make an evaluation of the impact of learning on front line
practice.
process for evaluating impact. In particular, review the adult mental health
policy.
draft form) and include within it how the views and experiences of children and
families are to be captured.
programme and develop measures to evaluate the impact of training on
practice.


Policies and Procedures
exploitation.
and absent definitions and provide clear expectations for conducting safe and
well checks and appropriate return interviews; this should link to the multiagency CSE strategy.
ensure a shared understanding of risk between police, childrens social care and
other partners.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
peoples directorate leadership team are helping to strengthen the effectiveness
of the BSCB. This has been achieved through setting appropriate priorities and
building a culture of professional challenge between strategic partners at the
highest level. This group is attended by the chair of the BSCB, with good
representation from other strategic Boards such as the Health and Well-being
Board and the Children and Families Board. However, the BSCB does not
sufficiently influence these Boards to ensure a robust focus on safeguarding.
as interim chair in addition to her full time role, the experienced, newly
appointed chair is reviewing priorities in preparation for the next business cycle.
Board membership has been reviewed to ensure the most appropriate level of
attendance and influence by partners. Good consideration is given to the
engagement of faith groups, through regular meetings and a multi-faith action
plan to raise awareness of safeguarding responsibilities within these groups.
make a positive contribution to the Board through community discussion
groups. The business manager has challenged the poor attendance of
education partners at Board meetings and this has led to better attendance and
significantly improved the contribution of schools to Board activity. For
example, educational representatives have contributed to the development of a
domestic violence protocol and work with the Children and Young Peoples
Shadow Board.
is effectively prioritised by the BSCB. Young people, as members of the shadow
Board, actively influence the delivery of services at a strategic level and feed
their views directly to the Board and subgroups. The Board acts on
recommendations made by the Shadow Board to provide training about bullying
for school staff, peer mentoring in schools to raise awareness of support for
incidents of self-harm and the strengthening of related policies. There has also


been a review of the participation of children in recruitment processes in a
Bristol NHS Trust.
but there is no single overarching plan to support its delivery. Actions are
attributed to the various sub-groups of the Board but they are not outcomefocused or measureable. The Board has completed a self-assessment of its
effectiveness that identifies the areas for improvement, but the evaluation of
this has not been incorporated into business planning, which limits its impact.
programme of safeguarding activity and to strengthen the Boards function, but
there have been some delays in the implementation of tasks set out in the
business plan. Delays include the implementation of the domestic violence
information sharing protocol in schools, and updating the missing from home
and missing from care guidance.
ensure that the business plan is achievable. Positive action has recently been
taken to improve the business functioning of the Board, with agreement
reached for a restructure and additional resources. These include additional
working days for the chair to support improvement, closer monitoring of subgroup activity by the executive Board, and a review of the membership and
terms of reference of the sub-groups to ensure broader partner engagement
and a shared understanding of the delivery of safeguarding priorities.
Board in order to strengthen scrutiny and accountability in this important area.
The Board is also planning to review the financial contributions of partners to
ensure a more equal contribution by all agencies and to strengthen the Boards
independence.
the threshold for need, risk and access to services. This document is now well
understood by partner agencies and has led to a more consistent application.
Partners report that the launch of the threshold document was a dramatic
turning point, improving relationships with childrens social care and helping
professionals to understand how to access appropriate levels of service.
genital mutilation (FGM) working groups in relation to raising awareness, the
development of multi-agency protocols and the provision of training. Work to
raise awareness and prevent FGM under the Bristol Model is highly effective in
engaging with the community and particularly young people, with initiatives
such as the FGM game used in schools, training undertaken with the East
African community locally and an international conference on FGM, which 300
delegates attended. The Board has helped to coordinate multi-agency support
for the innovative Community Rose Clinic for victims of FGM, which is


commissioned by Bristol Clinical Commissioning Group and opened in the city in
safeguarding performance. The report card encompasses a broad range of
multi-agency data, but does not incorporate comparative data from previous
quarters or provide sufficient depth of information about, for example, CSE,
children missing from home or care, domestic abuse, or caseloads. This reduces
the effectiveness of monitoring, analysis and the impact on front line practice.
Challenge by the Board is beginning to be seen. For example, the Board
established that improvements were required in the quality of data provided by
the police. As a result of the Boards challenge the police are now in the process
of reviewing and strengthening the data they provide to the Board.
partner agencies to facilitate the monitoring of safeguarding activity. However,
the Board does not make good use of this information to plan the delivery of
high quality services. For example, the Board receives verbal information from
the police on CSE, but no regular written reports analysing CSE activity. The
absence of coordinated information and evaluation limits both strategic and
action planning.
effectiveness of the Board, and it does not sufficiently inform future priorities.
The Annual report 201314, although still in draft form, is an improvement but
it is too focused on childrens social care data, rather than an independent
evaluation of the effectiveness of partners work to safeguard children.
revised draft presents a clear framework for outlining how learning from serious
case reviews, audits, case reviews and the work of the Child Death Overview
Panel will be monitored and evaluated for impact. In its current form, the
framework does not describe how the views of children, young people and their
families will be captured.
for all staff and partners and this is well attended. Action-learning sets,
briefings and area network meetings take place regularly. Learning from serious
case reviews and from the schools safeguarding audit has been used well to
inform multi-agency training. This includes training on disguised compliance,
advanced domestic abuse and safer recruitment. Signs of Safety training is
also provided for all agencies to consolidate this approach. However, the
current training strategy is not informed by an evaluation of single agency
needs. The Board plans to implement an evaluation of the impact of training on
improving practice but does not yet rigorously evaluate the impact of training.
Work is underway to achieve this.


of thresholds for missing from home and care, self-harm, and non-engaging
families are not robust. In some audits, only two cases have been reviewed and
school representatives have not been involved, which reduces multi-agency
learning. The Principal Social Worker is developing a multi-agency audit tool to
improve consistency and quality. Single- and multi-agency audits are not
effectively coordinated, which causes duplication of effort and limits the
opportunities for learning. The most recent audit on CSE is much improved in
quality and is appropriately focused around the See me, hear me framework.
It draws up themes for improvement and a clear plan of multi-agency action.
This includes developing a multi-agency CSE strategy and reconvening highlevel multi-agency meetings about children at risk of CSE.
multi-agency child protection procedures through the South West Consortium
but policies developed at a local level by the Safeguarding Business Unit are not
subject to routine review, which means that some are several years out of date,
for example, the adult mental health policy. The Executive Board has prioritised
policies and procedures for review during this business cycle, but the impact of
policies and procedures on front line practice is not yet systematically
evaluated.
the Boards priorities and a shared responsibility for safeguarding, and this
extends across the partnership. However, there has only been one Section 11
audit to measure the effectiveness of safeguarding in agencies since the
Boards inception, and findings arising from this very recent evaluation, in
October 2014, have not yet been implemented. The safeguarding schools audit
is well established and evaluative, and it shows improvement in safeguarding in
schools since last year particularly in relation to safer recruitment and a raised
awareness of the LADO role.
case reviews through briefings, team meetings, and a well-attended multiagency conference held in July 2014. Recommendations made by the National
Panel are taken into account. Action plans are monitored effectively, with good
use of a template to record exceptions arising out of the delivery of multi- and
single-agency action plans. The Board has adopted the Social Care Institute for
Excellence (SCIE) methodology, which speeds up learning and engagement of
front line practitioners. Learning from serious case reviews and multi-agency
training has led to improvements in front line practice. For example, training
delivered to practitioners in adult services has raised their awareness of service
users and patients with responsibility for children.
are well embedded. The West of England Child Death Overview Panel
appropriately focuses on local as well as regional issues and demonstrates
effective monitoring and evaluation, including an audit of the rapid response


process. Learning from child deaths is used to inform the development of
services, for example, supervised methadone consumption and the welfare of
children who are educated at home. There are clear processes for reporting to
the BSCB, including a protocol for cases that are, or may be, subject to a
serious case review.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and two
additional inspectors from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Robert Hackeson
Deputy lead inspector: Dominic Stevens
Team inspectors: Gary Lamb, Carmen Rodney, Susan Myers, Sarah Urding, Chris
Luke (Seconded Inspector), Dominic Porter-Moore (Contracted Inspector)
Quality assurance manager: Marie McGuinness


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects local authority services for looked after children and child
protection, and reviews the effectiveness of local safeguarding children boards.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


