Bury Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
And
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection dates: 22 February 2016  17 March 2016
Report published: 16 May 2016

Childrens services in Bury require improvement to be good

Good

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Children and young people in Bury are effectively supported and safeguarded by
good joint working between childrens social care services and partner agencies
including the police, adult services and healthcare providers. This is particularly true
for children and young people who need early help and safeguarding services.
However, services for children and young people who are looked after and for care
leavers require further work to ensure good outcomes for all children and young
people. Managers understand well the areas of weakness in their service and are
taking effective steps to address these, but at the time of the inspection shortfalls
were seen in the quality of care and outcomes for children and young people looked
after and for care leavers.
Early help services and statutory safeguarding services are good. Early help
assessments and interventions are often successful in improving childrens and
young peoples outcomes and avoiding the need for statutory intervention. Partner
agencies identify and refer children and young people promptly. The management of
risk for children and young people in receipt of statutory safeguarding services is
good, with assessments and plans effectively reducing risk, and prompt action taken
if improvements are not being achieved. For those children and young people who
need to be looked after, the local authority initiates legal proceedings in a timely
manner, ensuring that the children and young people are not left in harmful or
neglectful situations.
A wide range of effective multi-disciplinary services, including a specialist social work
team, support children and young people who have disabilities and their families.
Education, health and care (EHC) plans are very good quality, but social work
assessments and plans for children and young people who have disabilities require
improvement. Too many children and young people do not have an up-to-date plan
that supports their care or takes their developing needs into account.
Reporting and accountability arrangements between the childrens trust and other
strategic boards are clear. Member oversight is predominantly through the corporate
parenting board (CPB) and the councils relevant Overview and Scrutiny Committee.
These groups carefully consider detailed information and follow up areas of concern.
Although the CPB is properly constituted and active, significant challenges remain. In
particular, too many young people aged between 16 and 18, and the majority of 19
to 21-year-olds, are not in education, employment or training (NEET). Current
scrutiny is not robust enough to support the work to improve outcomes for children.
The achievements of children and young people looked after at key stage 2 and key
stage 4 also require improvement. Recent efforts have ensured that all eligible
children, young people and care leavers have personal education and pathway plans,
but greater focus on the quality of the plans is required as they are not yet
measurable and sufficiently ambitious to drive up achievements.
Children and young people looked after have good care from those who look after
them, but the quality of social work support requires improvement. Too many
children and young people looked after have assessments that require updating, and
their changing circumstances do not always inform their plans. Staff who were
spoken to understand the needs of their children and young people well, but this is


not always reflected in the written file. The files also lack useful chronologies, so that
it is difficult to see quickly what the key events in a childs or young persons life
have been and how these inform current and future planning for them.
A good range of permanency options is available for children and young people
looked after, and most live with alternative families in or near Bury. Young people
can stay with their foster carers after they have reached 18 years of age. A large
proportion of young people under the age of 18, including some 16-year-olds, move
into semi-independent accommodation. This is a very young age at which to begin
living on their own. Far fewer are in this type of accommodation after the age of 18.
This profile requires further investigation to ensure that all young people over the
age of 16 are in placements that will provide them with sufficient nurturing and
resilience for later life.
Caseloads of independent reviewing officers (IROs) are high, with their duty to chair
child protection conferences taking priority over the scrutiny of the progress of
children and young people looked after in between formal reviews. This means that
they are not able to provide enough additional independent oversight and challenge
to help to identify and address the shortfalls in the plans of children and young
people looked after identified above.
The senior leadership team, supported by elected members, has worked hard to
achieve a permanent well-trained workforce. There is good support for newly
qualified social workers, accessible and relevant training for all staff, manageable
caseloads, additional funding to increase the number of social workers and effective
management oversight. Loyalty from the workforce to the local authority is strong,
and staff express pride in working for Bury. Senior managers are highly visible,
frequently walking the floor and engaging in-depth with social work practice. Bury is
a learning organisation, exemplified by leaders making changes as a result of
feedback from inspectors, even in minor areas. Despite the stable workforce, too
many children and young people, even quite young children, have had several
changes of social workers, and this requires attention.
Managers at all levels in childrens social care receive regular, accurate performance
information, which is shared with elected members and relevant strategic bodies. It
is used well to ensure compliance, particularly in safeguarding services. Performance
against specific targets, such as timeliness of health assessments for children looked
after, is also monitored, but the regular performance report is overly focused on
safeguarding performance and lacks the same level of detail for children and young
people looked after, care leavers and private fostering. It is these areas that require
the greatest improvement and need to be considered as frequently and in as much
detail as areas that are performing well, such as adoption which is strong.
Managers know the strengths and weaknesses of childrens social care very well.
Inspectors did not find key areas that require improvement that were not already
known to leaders. Explanations were clear for the delay in improving some services,
and leaders strive to achieve improvements by other means if their original strategy
is not as effective as they would like. This, coupled with a track record of continuous
service improvement, bodes well for achieving good overall effectiveness in the
future.


Contents
The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority does not operate any childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding and services for
children and young people looked after was in May 2012. The local authority was
judged to be satisfactory for both.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys adoption service was in October

Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since January 2011.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since June 2009 and is retiring in March
 The LSCB is not shared with other local authorities, but there is a pan-Greater
Manchester Safeguarding Partnership, which has harmonised multi-agency
safeguarding procedures across all ten LSCBs in Greater Manchester.
Children and young people living in this area
 Approximately 43,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Bury. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 16.4% of the local authoritys children and young people are living
in poverty.
 The proportion of children and young people entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 14.9% (the national proportion is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 15.3% (the national proportion is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 17.6% of all
children and young people living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country
as a whole.
 The largest combined minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the
area are Asian/Asian British. The single most populous 0 to 17 years minority
ethnic group is Pakistani.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 The 2011 census indicates that 5.6% of the population of Bury record their
religion as Jewish compared with the England proportion of 0.5%.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 17.5% (the national proportion is 19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 14.6% (the national proportion is 15.0%).

Child protection in this area
 At 22 February 2016, 1,584 children and young people had been identified
through assessment as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service.
This is an increase from 1,475 at 31 March 2015.
 At 22 February 2016, 275 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 200 at 31 March 2015.
 At 22 February 2016, one child lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from four at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, six serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted, and three serious case reviews (SCRs) have been completed. None was
ongoing at the time of the inspection.

Children and young people looked after in this area
 At 22 February 2016, 300 children and young people were being looked after by
the local authority (a rate of 71 per 10,000 children and young people). This is an
increase from 293 (69 per 10,000 children and young people) at 31 March 2015.
Of this number:
authority area
 four live in residential special schools3, all of whom live outside the
authority area
area


These are residential special schools that look after children and young people for 295 days or fewer
per year.


 Four children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 19 adoptions
orders
to be looked after
 eight children and young people ceased to be looked after and moved on
to independent living
 seven children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Improve social work practice and management oversight of children and young
people looked after to ensure that assessments are up to date, and that plans
are specific and achievable and include timescales and contingencies.


The CPB should effectively challenge weaker outcomes for children and young
people looked after and care leavers, setting ambitious targets to ensure that
outcomes for children and young people improve.


Ensure that all children and young people looked after and care leavers are
supported to sustain education, employment or training (EET). This should be
assisted by post-16 personal education plans (PEPs) and pathway plans being
clear, relevant and prioritising important issues.


Review the suitability and outcomes for 16 to 18-year-olds who are living in
semi-independent and supported accommodation and ensure that best use is
made of this provision.


Ensure that children and young people who have disabilities and their families
receive a timely and responsive service that fully meets their needs and is
supported by thorough and up-to-date assessments and plans.


IROs should improve their scrutiny of the progress made by children and young
people looked after and care leavers to check that progress against plans is
proceeding as it should, and for concerns to be raised, escalated and recorded
if plans are not progressing well.


Continue to support all children and young people looked after to achieve their
full academic potential, in particular those children at key stage 2 and young
people at key stage 4 where results require improvement.


Ensure that performance management information includes data and evaluative
commentary on the progress of children and young people looked after and
care leavers, so that managers are aware of progress in all aspects of social
care services.


Make every effort to minimise the number of different social workers that
children and young people have, so that they can establish trusting
relationships over time with their workers.

so that current practice takes full account of the child or young persons history.
children, young people and their carers.


Summary for children and young people
 Senior managers and councillors in Bury have worked hard to make sure that
when children, young people and their families need help they get this quickly
and it usually helps to stop problems getting worse, improves family life, and
results in children and young people doing better.
 When children and young people are not being looked after properly by their
parents, this is spotted quickly. Staff, including social workers, see children and
young people on their own to find out what they think and what they want to
happen. Some children and young people are helped by having a child-in-need
plan or a child protection plan. When this happens, the main people who can
help, such as teachers, school nurses, health visitors, social workers and
sometimes other people, like police officers, meet with family members to make
the changes that are needed. Everyone is good at working together, being
respectful to families but not forgetting to keep the child or young person at the
front of their minds while dealing with the problems of the parents.
 If the child-in-need or child protection plans dont work or dont make changes
quickly enough, social workers step things up and let parents know that they are
thinking of asking the court to place a legal order on the child or young person.
This is so that the social workers can have more say in how the child or young
person is being cared for. It is important that this happens, as otherwise children
and young people could be left in homes where they are not safe or are
neglected for too long.
 Children and young people who cannot live with their parents are helped to find
other people to look after them who they will be happy and feel secure with.
These might be other family members such as aunts and uncles. Sometimes they
are foster carers or adopters. Social workers and their bosses take a lot of care to
make sure that every child and young person is in the place that will suit them
best. This means that very few children and young people ever have to move
because it has not worked out for them. Children and young people can stay in
touch with family members when they want to, and there is good support for
this.
 Children and young people in care can join the Children in Care Council and have
a lot of say in what the council does for children and young people looked after.
This affects things like making sure that care leavers have enough money to set
up home and helping to interview new social workers for jobs in Bury.
 Managers and the council need to improve some services for children and young
people. This includes being better at supporting children and young people who
have disabilities, making sure that children and young people in care have up-todate plans and assessments, and helping more children and young people in care
and care leavers to have a school or college place or some kind of training,
apprenticeship or work that they like and want to do. The council needs to have
high ambitions for all children and young people looked after and care leavers,
and to give them good support to achieve their goals.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Access to a wide range of effective help and support services for children, young
people and their families results in risks being minimised and childrens and young
peoples welfare improving. The outcomes for children and young people in need of
help and protection are also improving for the vast majority of children and young
people. The interface between early help and child protection services is clearly
understood by partner agencies. The multi-agency early help panel ensures that
children, young people and families receive support at the right level for their needs.
Risk for all children and young people is well understood by partner agencies,
including adult services. Responsive and swift action from staff ensures that children
and young people at immediate risk of harm are safe. A wide range of partners is
consulted when safeguarding concerns are suspected or known. Working together
well, these partners ensure the immediate protection of children and young people
who need this. When risks escalate or new risks emerge, social workers and partners
respond promptly and appropriately, adjusting the level of intervention accordingly.
Timely assessments make effective use of historical information. Childrens and
young peoples wishes and feelings are well recorded, and children and young people
can have an independent advocate. Assessments result in multi-agency plans that
improve outcomes and reduce risks.
Assessments of young people who present as homeless are completed swiftly,
resulting in multi-agency plans that address their needs.
A good range of effective services is available for children and young people who are
at risk of harm from domestic abuse, providing increasingly early identification and
intervention in domestic abuse situations. Social workers and partner agencies
understand the impact of multiple parental difficulties, such as domestic abuse
combined with substance misuse and poor mental health.
Well-established systems are effective in determining the risk for children and young
people who go missing or who may be at risk of sexual exploitation. Children and
young people are provided with appropriate interventions that reduce harm.
The needs of children and young people who have disabilities are met with a range
of good and helpful services. However, some assessments and plans for children and
young people who have disabilities are not always updated frequently enough to
ensure that the support is relevant to the changing needs of each child or young
person as they mature.
Children and young people who are privately fostered are not identified or supported
appropriately.
Management oversight and direction is good. Clear and unambiguous decisionmaking by team managers, supported by effective supervision for social workers,
ensures safe social work practice, a strong management grip and a culture of
learning.


Inspection findings
need for escalation to statutory services for many children, young people and
their families. The early help team and the common assessment framework
consultants are pivotal in enabling easy access to early help services by
providing a single point of contact, advice and guidance to all those who work
with children, young people and families. These staff have a firm grip of early
help assessment activity across the borough and work hard to improve
constantly the quality of assessments and plans. Current standards are high
and are maintained by robust monitoring and quality assurance. Assessments
are thorough and detailed, enhanced by the voice and views of the child or
young person and other family members. Staff use a good range of direct work
methods to engage families well. Meetings are well attended, and plans are
effective with specific targets, timescales and contingency planning. This
enables many children, young people and families to improve their situations
without the need for intervention from childrens social care services.
Responsibility for delivering early help services is shared across the partnership,
with lead responsibility being taken by, for example, school staff, health visitors
and other child welfare professionals. The troubled families programme is fully
integrated into the early help service, providing effective support for families
with multiple needs.
young people and families, so that everyone involved can see the impact of
their joint help. To meet the needs of children, young people and families more
effectively, packages of support are adjusted when necessary. The caserecording system supports good-quality performance management information,
which, in turn, is used to inform service development. Management oversight
and supervision of early help workers is in place, but supervision is insufficiently
reflective.
referrals for children, young people and families. Referrers receive good-quality
verbal advice and guidance, supported by clear written guidance in the multiagency referral form and the threshold document. The threshold for statutory
social work services is well understood by all agencies and, consequently, the
vast majority of referrals to the MASH are appropriate. Thorough information
gathering from a wide range of agencies informs decisions about next steps
and ensures that the right services are in place for each child or young person.
The outcome of professional referrals is shared with the referring agency in a
timely way. During the inspection, the local authority issued updated guidance
to ensure that consent is always sought from families to enable agencies to
share and record their personal information safely.


these account for about 40% of all contacts. The vast majority of these are
appropriate and timely. Attending police officers routinely complete a specialist
domestic abuse risk-assessment tool, and thorough completion at the time of
an incident minimises delays in notifying childrens social care of serious
situations. However, instances assessed as less serious can take several days to
come to the attention of the MASH, where a fuller multi-agency assessment of
risk can occur, and agency information not known to the attending police
officer can be taken into account.
service. Activity undertaken out of hours is recorded on childrens and young
peoples files promptly. Good liaison is promoted by the manager of the out-ofhours service attending daytime meetings in the MASH, and this facilitates
stronger handover arrangements.
progressed swiftly to referral and assessment within childrens social care when
appropriate. If needs change, children and young people are stepped up or
down to receive an appropriate service while continuing to receive support. All
children and young people at risk of significant harm are responded to
promptly, with effective action taken to keep them safe. Careful attention is
paid to historical information and the prevalence of multiple difficulties, such as
combinations of adult mental health difficulties, substance misuse and domestic
abuse. Qualified social workers undertake comprehensive investigations,
children and young people are seen and spoken to, and decision-making is
timely and appropriate. The majority of strategy discussions are timely and well
attended by partner agencies that fully contribute to decisions about next steps.
Childrens and young peoples cases tracked and sampled by inspectors
confirmed this standard of work, and no children or young people were seen to
be unsafe.
managers provide good support for their staff, and this gives them the
confidence to develop. This high-quality management oversight ensures safe
social work practice, and there is an embedded culture of learning. Children and
young people who have recently been allocated to workers have their cases
reviewed by team managers to ensure that the case is progressing well. There
is no delay in children and young people being allocated and, when a different
type of service is required, transfer across social work teams is seamless, with
no delay in seeing children and young people and starting assessments for the
majority of children and young people.


assessed promptly and thoroughly. The majority of assessments, including prebirth assessments, are of good quality, are analytical, come to appropriate
conclusions and lead to the provision of appropriate support and help. Research
findings and the childs or young persons voice inform assessments. Good
examples of parenting capacity assessments were seen, with some being
commended as good practice during care proceedings.
created and updated by social workers. The exceptions are those for children
and young people in care proceedings, who benefit from good-quality
chronologies that set out key events in their lives. The absence of chronologies
for most children and young people makes it difficult for social workers to
understand what has happened to them previously and to consider this in
current assessments and interventions. This is particularly significant for
workers who take over a childs or young persons case and need to get a clear
sense of the childs or young persons life up to that point in time
(Recommendation).
when appropriate, so that their views can be recorded and used to inform
assessments and planning. Visits to children and young people on child
protection plans are timely, with 96% in time in the last three months. Work
seen demonstrates that social workers build trusting relationships with parents,
which assists with promoting childrens and young peoples welfare.
and planning to reduce the risks to children and young people. Conferences are
well attended by partner agencies, but resource shortages have resulted in the
police failing to attend some initial conferences, although written reports are
provided. This is a known area of weakness, which partners are working hard
to resolve. In 201415, only 52% of initial conferences were held within 15
days, which was well below the national level of 75%. At the point of the
inspection, this had improved to nearly 86% of initial conferences being timely.
Children and young people do not stay on plans for too long, with no child or
young person being on a plan for over two years, and low numbers being
subject to second or subsequent plans.
understanding of neglect. The local authority has invested in the graded care
profile to support neglect assessments. However, this is not used consistently
by workers when it should be, and there is more to do to embed this in
practice. Senior managers are aware of and monitor this.


plans are progressing and that reports for conferences are of a good quality.
Child protection plans are progressed by well-attended, multi-agency core
group meetings. Family group meetings are used appropriately to support
alternative family arrangements. Meetings involve family members as
appropriate, and effective information sharing and joint working successfully
reduce risk for many children and young people. Children and young people
who need additional services but do not need to be on a child protection plan
are also provided with a range of services appropriate to their needs.
of child sexual exploitation are robust and improving. Numbers of children and
young people at risk are low, compared with many neighbouring authorities,
but partners are not complacent, and all those at potential risk receive goodquality detailed assessments. Partner agencies understand the risks of child
sexual exploitation and work together well to identify and assess the level of
risk faced by vulnerable children and young people. The specialist multi-agency
child sexual exploitation team carefully gathers and analyses information about
child sexual exploitation in the borough, provides advice to other professionals
and supports children and young people. Detailed screening and assessment by
social workers in the team clarify the extent of risk to each child or young
person. Prompt interventions lead to reduced risks for the vast majority. Those
children and young people at potential risk are well understood, and all have
multi-agency support plans. Regular, independently chaired, multi-agency
meetings consider each child and young person, providing additional oversight
and scrutiny. The electronic child-recording system has been adapted to enable
risks of child sexual exploitation to be recorded, so that these are clear to
authorised viewers, reducing the likelihood of potential risks being overlooked.
Effective analysis of intelligence has led to successful disruption activity and
some successful prosecutions of perpetrators.
people who go missing from home are effective and are embedded into
practice. Overall numbers are low, but this is kept under scrutiny to ensure that
children and young people are reported as missing when they should be. In
many cases, return interviews are followed by direct work, and this reduces
future risk, resulting in low numbers who repeatedly go missing from home.
Good information sharing and joint working between the police and childrens
services result in a detailed understanding of the cohort and any emerging
themes or issues. Any possible links between missing children and young
people and the potential for child sexual exploitation are routinely considered,
with effective use of a screening tool. Children and young people who go
missing from education are followed up promptly and robustly. The local
authority maintains accurate records of children and young people missing from
education and diligently pursues them until their locations and educational
arrangements are known.


home. The local authority routinely checks on their educational progress.
Considerable effort has resulted in good relationships with parents who value
the support and guidance that they receive on a regular basis. Staff visit at
least 95% of all home-educated children and young people annually, and
specialist caseworkers have a good understanding of their needs. Twelve
children and young people have access to home tuition and 13 have access to
not in school and ill services so that they can study at home until they are well
enough to return to school.
coordinator who supports all schools to improve teaching about bullying,
transgender and any other relevant issues identified by schools. Many good and
effective activities take place to promote tolerance and anti-discriminatory
attitudes among school-age children and young people, including an event to
celebrate transgender young people.
domestic abuse. In all domestic abuse cases seen during the inspection,
appropriate services are in place to help reduce risk and support child, young
person and adult victims. Perpetrators of domestic abuse are able to access a
voluntary perpetrator programme, which further increases safety planning.
Regular and consistent attendance at the multi-agency risk-assessment
conference by partners results in good-quality information sharing and actions
to reduce risk to the most vulnerable children, young people and adults. Robust
follow-up by the chair ensures that actions are completed.
supported through a range of services to help meet their needs. However, too
many children and young people who have disabilities do not have up-to-date
social work assessments and plans that underpin the services they receive. For
those who have a plan, their views, demeanour and responses are not always
described sufficiently well. Childrens and young peoples records do not tell a
clear story about the child or young person and their family, their journey and
the impact of disability on the child or young person, their brothers and sisters
or parents or carers in their everyday lives. Managers are aware of these issues
and are currently undertaking a review of the support offered to children and
young people who have disabilities (Recommendation).
person throughout the process and are effective in identifying support needs.
Staff complete EHC plans well, and the child or young person is in clear focus
throughout. EHC plans include pictures and scanned documents produced by
the child or young person. Objectives are child-centred and professionals
include the child or young person in deciding actions.
provided with relevant support. There have been no young people placed in
bed and breakfast accommodation for the past 12 months.


needs, including their safeguarding needs, is high. Independent advocates are
available to assist children and young people in having their views heard in
child-in-need and child protection meetings. The service is promoted by child
protection conference chairs recommending advocacy as part of the outline
plan. However, this is not followed up by childrens social workers in all cases.
Increased use of independent advocates would further encourage childrens
and young peoples participation.
who work with children and young people, and referrals to the designated
officer have increased from a range of agencies. Effective awareness raising
and targeted training have been undertaken. Good links have been established
with the major faith groups in the area, resulting in referrals being made.
Detailed records show robust oversight of case progress and outcomes.
under-developed. Small numbers of children and young people have been
identified over time. When children and young people are identified, they are
not visited quickly enough. Only one of six children and young people known to
be privately fostered during the previous year was seen within seven days.
Actions outlined in the most recent annual report to improve practice have not
progressed, although plans are in place to remedy this shortfall
(Recommendation).


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
When children and young people need to become looked after, decisions are
appropriate. Children and young people who are on the edge of care benefit from
good use of legal proceedings and the Public Law Outline (PLO) that is helping
families to access a range of support services. This helps some children and young
people to remain safely at home with their families.
When children and young people looked after return home to the care of their
parents, there is not always a comprehensive assessment and plan in place to help
families to prepare for this. Assessments of the needs of children and young people
looked after are not updated regularly and do not contain enough information and
analysis about important issues. Care plans are not specific enough and lack
timescales and contingencies.
Some children and young people have too many changes of social worker, which
makes it difficult to progress plans in a timely way and to build trusting relationships
over time. IROs are not providing sufficiently robust challenge or quality assurance of
childrens and young peoples plans. They do not routinely monitor the progress of
plans between reviews.
The timeliness and quality of initial health assessments for children and young
people looked after are improving. However, some children and young people still
wait too long to have their health needs identified and addressed.
Childrens and young peoples educational outcomes at key stages 2 and 4 require
improvement.
When children and young people looked after go missing, they receive timely,
independent return interviews to identify and reduce any risk of harm, including
sexual exploitation.
Adoption is considered for all children and young people at the earliest stage, and
delay is minimised through the adoption process. Social work with birth families and
adopters is sensitive and robust.
The vast majority of children and young people live in suitable placements with
carers who meet their needs well. A high proportion of young people looked after
aged 16 to 18 live in semi-independent accommodation. Accommodation options for
outcomes for these young people.
Care leavers have good access to a range of suitable health services and good
support from their personal advisors (PAs). Despite this, too many are NEET.


Inspection findings
appropriate. Children and young people do not enter the care system
unnecessarily. Understanding and application of thresholds are largely
appropriate.
help children, young people, parents and carers when there is a risk of family
breakdown. The range of help on offer to children and young people on the
edge of care, and their families, includes family group conferences and family
therapy. This work is good quality and has helped some children and young
people to stay at home with their parents or to live with other family members.
The work also supports foster carers who are struggling to care for a child or
young person. Although there has been no formal evaluation and analysis of
this work, the improved outcomes in childrens and young peoples cases seen
on this inspection demonstrate its positive impact.
and close monitoring and tracking of cases in PLO mean that children and
young people move swiftly through the system. The average time taken for
proceedings is now 27 weeks, with performance for the quarter prior to this
inspection showing timescales of 23 weeks. This compares very well with a
national average of 30 weeks.
Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and the local
judiciary report that preparation and planning for cases in proceedings is mostly
very thorough, and the authority has produced some good pieces of work. The
judiciary regards the local authoritys use of section 20 Children Act 1989 orders
(voluntary care) as an appropriate way to look after some children and young
people. Children and young people subject to these orders are regularly
monitored to ensure that these remain the right orders for the child or young
person. Thorough, well-researched parenting assessments are undertaken by
the local authoritys children and family centre. These assessments are held in
high regard and make a strong contribution to the overall social work
assessment on a child or young person and their family in care proceedings.
standard of existing ones requires improvement. Some chronologies seen have
not been kept up to date. Too many are replicated from case notes. This makes
it difficult to understand the history of a child or young person or for any new
workers to grasp quickly a sense of the important things that have happened
(Recommendation).


thorough when the children and young people begin to be looked after, but
thereafter are rarely updated and therefore the information within them
becomes increasingly outdated. For example, they do not reflect changes in
childrens and young peoples families, such as births of brothers or sisters, or
parents separating. This is particularly significant for children and young people
who have not yet achieved permanence and whose needs are changing, or for
those children and young people whose parents are requesting their return
home (Recommendation).
includes issues such as the impact of parental ill health on children and young
people and the views of significant family members, such as birth fathers and
grandparents. Diversity, religion and culture are not consistently considered in
assessments for all children and young people (Recommendation).
peoples needs reduces the quality of planning for them. Although plans are
refreshed regularly, and the better ones reflect current information and
circumstances, some sections of plans are not routinely updated. These include
information about childrens and young peoples developmental needs, which
will inevitably change as they get older. Plans include targets for the future, but
are not always specific enough. Responsibility for undertaking tasks is not
clearly ascribed, and the lack of timescales makes it difficult to monitor
progress (Recommendation).
disservice to the knowledge and understanding of children and young people,
as reflected by the social workers during discussions with inspectors. The vast
majority could describe children and young people in detail, including their
histories, key events, current needs and circumstances, and what the future
plans are for them. Most social workers had clearly spent time with the children
and young people and understood their wishes and feelings. Creative examples
were seen of direct work with children and young people to help them to
express themselves. The views of children and young people are recorded on
files, but the written records of these are too brief and do not reflect the good
work that is being done to listen to children and young people.
at the local authoritys children and family centre, which creates a relaxed,
informal, child-centred atmosphere. Comprehensive reports of contact sessions
are shared with parents and social workers, and these usefully inform plans.
and young peoples files. Social workers note when children and young people
have been seen alone. However, the purpose of some visits to children and
young people is not always clear and records are sometimes too brief to see
what has been achieved by the visit.


are not always recorded well enough and do not set out the reasoning behind
the decisions being made. In tracked cases, decision-making in the cases of
children and young people looked after was found to require improvement in 12
out of 15 cases.
some children and young people looked after have had several social workers,
so that they do not get the opportunity to build trusting, meaningful
relationships with them. This makes progress on plans more difficult to
maintain, and parents, children and young people told us that they found it
difficult when they had to get to know and share information with different
workers (Recommendation).
after is improving, but needs further work to ensure that their health issues and
needs are identified and addressed as early as possible.
meet the emotional and mental well-being needs of children and young people
looked after promptly and effectively. Many examples were seen of highly
effective interventions from this team: for example in helping children and
young people to understand and cope with the difficult things that they had
experienced. The provision of individual consultation to carers and staff enables
them to increase their skills and confidence to support children and young
people with more complex needs. The emotional health and well-being
coordinator works closely with the virtual school team to provide a continuum
of care and support in school for children and young people looked after.
after, of whom 201 are of school age, are tracked. Their progress is monitored
closely and is well understood. Individual children and young people are
provided with a learning mentor, through pupil premium funding, if they need
one. The PEPs of children and young people looked after set out clearly what
pupil premium funding is being applied for and what it is expected to achieve.
Ten high level learners receive extra financial support and all Year 11 pupils are
allocated 1,000 to ensure that they are prepared for Year 12. The virtual
school team provides good support for children and young people who are
placed in Bury by other local authorities and pays equally careful attention to
their educational progress, supported by good liaison with the placing
authorities.


the quality of these documents to support all children and young people to
achieve educationally. Learning from these audits is not maximised because
feedback on the strengths and weaknesses of a PEP is not routinely provided to
the authors, and not enough social care staff are accessing training offered by
the virtual school. Therefore, PEPs remain variable in quality, and the input of
the child or young person in the process is not always obvious. Target setting is
not always specific enough to assist the child or young person to progress
swiftly.
point is good. At key stage 4, 12% of young people gained five GCSEs at A* to
C grade, including English and mathematics last year, which is a 1% increase
on the previous years results. The virtual school monitors every child or young
person individually, which allows for a more personalised approach
(Recommendation).
NEET, and this figure is too high (Recommendation).
that is judged inadequate. Children and young people are not precipitously
removed from schools judged inadequate. Rather, careful consideration is given
to all of a childs or young persons circumstances before a decision is made.
Attendance of children and young people looked after at school is good at
are not in receipt of 25 hours education. Each child has a clearly recorded
action plan with timescales for their return to full-time education, and their
progress is tracked. This ensures that they are integrated into full-time
education at the earliest opportunity.
and young people looked after who go missing or who are at risk of sexual
exploitation. All children and young people who go missing are risk assessed to
consider the possibility of sexual exploitation. Return interviews take place
within 72 hours of a missing episode, and information from these is recorded
and considered alongside information provided from other return interviews, to
check for patterns, trends and any other links that might cause concern.
facilitates a regular forum, which successfully brings together the private home
providers in the borough. This is valued and provides an excellent means of
ensuring that all the providers are aware of local arrangements to safeguard
children and young people and promote their welfare, including what to do
when children and young people from other local authority areas run away or
are at risk by other means.


carers spoken to say that they are well supported and were well prepared for
the role. There are currently 160 foster carers approved for 258 children and
young people. Family and friend carers look after a further 56 children and
young people. The campaign to recruit more in-house foster carers has been
very successful, leading to more children and young people living locally. There
is a clear process in place to match children and young people with carers to
minimise the risk of breakdown and to ensure that children and young people
experience better choice as part of the process.
children and young people from 20 families are placed together, with only one
family of two children being placed separately. The reasons for this are clear
and appropriate to the needs of the children.
commissioning and contractual arrangements, ensure that future demand for
placements with foster carers and childrens homes is anticipated and planned.
There is a good range of foster carers who can care for children and young
people with complex needs, babies and older young people. Commissioners
visit establishments so that they are assured of quality and value for money.
social workers. The borough is geographically small, however, and the vast
majority of children and young people placed outside it are within close
travelling distance of their home of origin. Their education and health needs are
identified and met, and they make appropriate progress. Children and young
people placed outside of the borough are well supported to maintain links with
family and friends through visits. This includes providing overnight
accommodation for parents when necessary, to promote contact.
the role. Panel membership has recently been strengthened by the addition of a
mix of professionals and foster carers, providing a more diverse and
independent panel. The panel has been proactive in driving up the quality of
assessments and providing effective challenge to ensure that reports are good
enough to assist the panel in making the right decisions. The panel chair has
not been meeting regularly with the agency decision maker, attributed to
changes in managers within childrens social care, and this is a missed
opportunity to improve communication and coordination. Plans are in place to
remedy this.
people when adoption is not appropriate. A strong focus is placed on providing
long-term foster placements, special guardianships and placements with family
members. Examples were seen of social workers helping to achieve
permanence and stability for children and young people in very difficult
circumstances, such as following a placement breakdown. Inspectors saw good
sensitive work to prepare children and young people for new placements.


parents, placement with parents regulations are not fully met and endorsed by
a sufficiently senior manager within childrens social care. Not all families are
prepared well enough for the impact of children and young people returning to
their care, and parents are not always supported through the transition. Very
good support is available for families who attend the children and family centre
with, for example, parenting courses and activities to help children and young
people to re-establish their relationship with parents. More families in similar
circumstances would benefit from these services.
young people, parents and carers are spoken to before the review. Relevant
professionals attend, and reports are provided to inform the review and
subsequent plans. Although plans are reviewed in a timely way, IRO caseloads
are high, and IROs undertake the dual role of IRO and child protection
conference chair. IROs acknowledge that child protection work often takes
precedence over the added attention that they would like to give to children
and young people looked after, such as checking on their progress and meeting
with them in between reviews (Recommendation).
children and young people looked after is not recorded well, and it is difficult to
see their footprint on childrens and young peoples files. The IRO service is
clear that it does offer challenge and raises concerns when it has them and this
is confirmed by senior managers. However, challenges are not routinely
recorded; so it is difficult to confirm how often this happens or to see what
impact challenges have had (Recommendation).
of single meetings with professionals and then collate the information later to
form a review. This is not good practice and means that the rich discussion,
debate and participation of families is lost from the review process. The local
authority responded promptly when this was brought to senior managers
attention during the inspection, and steps are already in place to cease this
practice and to monitor compliance.
by a dedicated childrens rights service, which includes a youth participation
apprentice. The two age-banded Children in Care Council (CiCC) groups meet
regularly and are reasonably well attended, with an average attendance of
approximately 10 children and young people, who are encouraged to help to
shape the services that they receive. The CiCC is able to publicise its existence
and work through its own website. The local authority has invested in Total
Respect training which encourages youth participation across services.
Representatives from the CiCC attend the corporate parenting board and youth
cabinet. The local authority was successful in meeting independent national
standards for the participation of children and young people looked after, and
has been awarded maximum Leading Improvement for Children in Care (LILAC)
accreditation in recognition of this.


school and at home. They said that they can talk to their social workers and
would tell them if they felt unsafe. They know that they have a right to
complain and could give examples of changes made because they had asked,
such as contact with pets and having more photographs. They have good
opportunities to develop hobbies, interests and friendships outside of school,
such as attending cubs and brownies, football and drama groups.
them. The service is commissioned from an independent provider and is well
used, supporting 123 children and young people in the past year. Positive
feedback from children and young people about the service indicates that they
feel listened to and responded to.
number of instances, supervision had not taken place on time. Supervision files
do not generally evidence supervision that is reflective or challenging. A few
good examples were seen but most workers wanted supervision to be more
reflective to inform casework practice. Social workers say that they feel well
supported by their managers.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
and young people that is underpinned by an integrated strategy and clear
routes to permanence. The local authority was quick to respond to national
guidance on fostering to adopt with 11 children benefiting from this type of
placement since 2014. The recruitment of adopters is highly effective, with the
number of prospective adopters increasing year on year, resulting in more
adopters than are required locally. This has enabled the local authority to refer
has supported the improvement in the number of children adopted over the last
three years. The local authority has used the National Adoption Register to
achieve adoption for children with complex needs in 21 cases since 2013, which
is good.
adopters or in response to recruitment campaigns. Information and guidance
for adopters give a realistic picture so that their expectations are well managed.
Adopters report that they have continuity in assigned workers who are
proactive, supportive and helpful.
adoption in nearly all cases. There have been no revocations since 1 April 2015.
The proportion of children who leave care through adoption is good: 20% of
children looked after who left care did so through adoption in 201415, better
than the national proportion of 17%. Data from 201314 shows that 52% of
children wait less than 18 months from entering care to moving in with their
adopters, which is better than statistical neighbours and the national proportion
of 51%. Scrutiny of cases in which children experience delay confirmed that
this was because of factors that could not be anticipated or controlled, such as
unexpected bereavements. At the time of the inspection, 18 children have a
plan for adoption. Only two children are currently waiting for a placement
order.
adoption reported at the previous inspection. The local authoritys data for
performance in 2012 continues to have a negative impact on the three-year
performance for 201215. The three-year average time between a child
entering care and moving in with their adoptive family has improved to 529
days. This is 42 days longer than the national threshold, but the gap is closing.
Performance on the three-year average of the number of days between
authority to place a child and the match to an adoptive family has also
improved to 244 days. However, this rate of improvement has not closed the
gap, and it remains a challenge, with current performance 123 days longer than
the national threshold of 121 days.


from a minority ethnic background for adoption and placing brothers and sisters
together wherever possible.
training and events. Adopters benefit from the local authoritys commitment to
providing post-adoption support for as long as they want it. Training for
adopters on the use of letterbox contact and how to deliver life story work is
making a demonstrable difference to improving outcomes for adopted children
and young people. The quality of this work is outstanding. The activity-based
support provided for adopted children and young people who attend the young
peoples group is making a difference, and is highly valued both by adopters
and by children and young people.
referral to a genetic counsellor, and support provided by the nurture group that
is age banded and needs led. Examples were seen of creative and proactive
responses to assist adopters as part of the matching process.
delay, and decisions are signed off by an appropriately senior agency decision
maker. The adoption panel chair is suitably experienced, qualified and
independent of the local authority. The panel is diverse, featuring a wide range
of expertise, including representatives from non-social work professions and
adopters, and is sufficiently diverse with regard to ethnicity and gender.
Reports for the panel are consistently good. Adopters report that assessments
are thorough and fair. Life story work is consistently timely and of good quality.
Although the quality of later life letters seen is consistently good, too many of
the childrens and young peoples cases sampled do not have a later life letter
completed in a timely manner.
assessments as part of the adoption approval process. The minutes from
adoption panels set out clear decisions and recommendations. Although
processes are rigorously adhered to, in a small number of cases the rationale
for decisions is not clear from the minutes seen, and this impacts on the agency
decision makers ability to make fully informed decisions.
is shared with the corporate parenting board, keeping elected members
informed. Standards are already high, but the panels plan to improve
continuously is exemplified by its careful consideration of the limited number of
disruptions that have occurred, to see if any lessons can be learned. No families
have experienced a placement breakdown since 1 April 2015.
people with special needs. Panel members make sure that new adopters are
aware of this fund to promote equality of access for children and young people.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
previously been outsourced for many years, was in recognition that the service
had some strengths but required improvement overall. Plans and costings have
been approved and are being progressed to improve the services provided to
care leavers.
through phone calls, drop-in facilities, face-to-face visits and working with other
professionals. As a result, it is in touch with the vast majority of care leavers.
described different ways in which they have been supported. They are positive
about the help that they receive from their PAs and are confident that they will
continue to receive the support that they need.
rising to 51% (year to date) for those young people aged 19 to 21. This
represents a slightly worsening picture from 201415. The local authority lacks
a focus on the progress being made by young people who are over the age of
(Recommendation).
currently 14 young people at university, with many graduates achieving highly.
not involved adequately in the process to make it a valuable or meaningful
experience for them. Staff complete too many plans without the young person
being present. Educational plans are not always realistic for the young person
or specific enough for them to move forward in their career. PAs update
pathway plans in a timely way and review the plan with the young person
wherever possible, but do not involve other agencies and services. This means
that some care leavers experience disjointed services, and different
professionals working with a young person do not always know what everyone
else is doing to help the young person. Pathway plans for young people over
the age of 18 are not independently overseen by, for example, IROs
(Recommendation).
demonstrates the considerable work done by the PAs to help young people as
they mature. This was the strongest element in most plans seen by inspectors.
PAs are good at recognising those young people who are at risk of sexual
exploitation and at ensuring that appropriate specialist services are put in place
to reduce the risk.


year as the requirements for applicants to have A* to C grades in English and
mathematics excluded many young people looked after and care leavers. The
timing of the apprenticeships also meant that many young people had already
made plans for their future. The local authority is currently reviewing its
processes, and in conjunction with adult education provision will be offering
traineeships from September 2016. This will offer placements to young people
while supporting them to improve their English and mathematics grades in
preparation for an apprenticeship or other further education or training. At the
present time, the local authority only has four care leavers in apprenticeships
and traineeships.
other opportunities are currently provided, such as work experience being made
available for young people looked after and care leavers, to encourage them
into employment. Young people with learning difficulties benefit from good
supported placements within the council.
is not written in young person-friendly language and it has little impact on care
leavers. Despite this, care leavers do clearly understand their entitlements and
receive a booklet setting out financial arrangements and benefits. Care leavers
were confident that their PAs would be able to help with securing entitlements
or other resources that they might require, so did not see the charter as
significant.
social worker, to help to prepare them for independence. Care leavers receive
support from PAs until they are 21 or, if they are in further or higher education,
up to the age of 25. When young people move into semi-independent or
supported accommodation, PAs teach them independence skills. PAs are
responsive to young peoples individual needs and celebrate key events such as
birthdays. Care leavers report good access to their PAs and are positive about
the support that they receive, including help with transport to health
appointments, interview practice and help with finances. Care leavers make
good use of the drop-in facility at the care leavers team base.
five young people who are 16, and 17 young people who are 17 years old. This
is a high figure and, while this type of accommodation may be appropriate for a
few young people in this age range, it is unlikely to be the most suitable
accommodation for many who require a more nurturing family-type
environment (Recommendation).


with their foster carers. Young people who have sufficient independence skills
are given priority to bid for a tenancy from the local social housing provider.
Currently, 25 care leavers aged 18 years and over have their own tenancy.
Most (92%) of the 19 to 21-year-olds are in suitable accommodation with a few
recorded as living in houses in multiple occupancy. This latter category includes
some semi-independent accommodation and young people attending university.
the children looked after social work teams. The children looked after nurse
also supports care leavers and provides weekly drop-in sessions at the care
leavers team base. A wide range of health needs is met and advice is provided.
Care leavers are provided with personal health passports which include good
health information and advice. Care leavers spoken to understood their health
histories. Specialist health services, such as sexual health and substance misuse
services, are accessible, young-person friendly and deliver improved health
outcomes to young people.
health assessment, and those young people with complex health needs are the
subject of transitional planning from 16 years of age. The children looked after
nurse contributes well from that point to support the young people into
independence or adult services.
achievements of the young people in their care and care leavers. Last year, two
separate parties were organised for the younger and older children. These were
successful, with the CiCC helping to organise the event. There is a separate
care leavers forum that meets regularly, supported by the care leavers team.
These young people are encouraged and enabled to influence service design
and delivery, and have influenced, for example, the design of sexual health
services for all young people in Bury.
development of services for care leavers. The action plan is comprehensive and
encompasses all areas of key importance to care leavers. Progress has been
made in all areas of the plan. The local authority expects this to result in
improved services and outcomes for care leavers in the north-west, but it is too
early to see the impact of this yet.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Leaders, managers and politicians have worked purposefully to improve the quality
of social work provided to children, young people and families over the past two
years. A permanent senior team has a strong track record of redesigning and
improving services as swiftly and sustainably as possible. Important services have
been developed and implemented, including a robust and effective MASH, a multiagency child sexual exploitation team and a strong, targeted early help service. All
are achieving very good outcomes for children, young people and families. Previously
outsourced services, such as the care leaving service, have been brought back in
house over the past 12 months to accelerate improvement, and work is under way to
achieve this.
The majority of practice seen during the inspection was robust, resulting in childrens
and young peoples outcomes being improved. Children and young people who
require statutory intervention are effectively safeguarded through consistently highquality assessments, plans, interventions, and reviews. Partner agencies work
together well to promote childrens and young peoples outcomes. The senior
leadership team knows the strengths and weaknesses of its services very well and
appropriately prioritises weaker areas, particularly strengthening the IRO service,
services for care leavers, and services for children and young people with complex
and varied disabilities. Although improvements are required, inspectors saw good
work leading to positive outcomes for some children and young people, for example
a good number of care leavers being supported to attend university.
The senior leadership team, well supported by elected members, promotes a culture
of openness and learning, regularly inviting scrutiny from, for example, external
peers and the Bury Safeguarding Children Board (BSCB). Feedback from these
exercises, and feedback from service users, inform continuous service improvement.
Internal quality assurance processes continue to be strengthened. Senior managers
are highly visible to front-line staff, which the staff value. Senior managers regularly
consider the quality of front-line practice in detail and use their learning to make
improvements where the need is identified.
There are coherent and effective strategic relationships between the childrens trust,
the BSCB and key partner agencies, such as health services and the police. These
enable senior managers to effect positive influence and change at decision-making
forums, such as the local clinical commissioning group and the community safety
partnership. Childrens services are prioritised by the council, exemplified by
additional financial investment to increase the number of social work posts and to
provide a good offer to newly qualified workers. Because of this, the stability of the
workforce has significantly improved, morale is high and turnover is low. Staff are
well supported in their learning and continuous professional development.


Inspection findings
performance of childrens services have strengthened markedly since the last
inspection in 2012. Strategic links, responsibilities and accountabilities between
the childrens trust, the Health and Well-being board (HWB), the BSCB and the
CPB are clear and coherent. Engagement across the partnership is good, with
good attendance from senior partner representatives at the childrens trust
board. Priorities are sharp and clearly set out in an up-to-date children and
young peoples plan. This plan includes the BSCBs priorities and challenges.
The HWB formally assesses the progress of the plan twice a year as well as
undertaking additional deeper periodic progress assessments. This ensures that
progress is continuously scrutinised, and any structural difficulties benefit from
partner agencies jointly overcoming them.
board and strong cross-party political attendance at the CPB. There are
sufficient checks and balances in the governance system holding the leadership
of childrens services to account, providing coherent political and strategic
oversight. Frequent meetings are held between the chief executive, the director
of childrens services (DCS), the assistant director, and the lead and deputy
lead members for children. These provide a forum where close and wellinformed oversight of plans and priorities is reviewed and feedback from staff is
considered. The BSCB and CPB both include the DCS and lead member, and
this supports good information sharing and progressing of actions.
this and find all levels of managers approachable. Engagement is substantial
with, for example, the DCS holding regular detailed case discussions with social
workers and observing child protection conferences each month. This personal
engagement style is complemented by other frequent and good-quality
methods of communication with staff, including weekly written briefings,
regular open house sessions and lunchtime briefings.


with senior managers, their clear understanding of priority areas for childrens
services, and conveyed a sense of being valued. Loyalty to the local authority
and childrens services was expressed strongly and repeatedly. This emphasis
on the importance of good communication and staff participation is mirrored in
the careful attention given to the involvement and engagement of children,
young people and their carers. There is a range of active and influential bodies,
including a well-attended youth parliament, schools councils, CiCC and a care
leavers forum. Participation leads to tangible and demonstrable influence. For
example, the children and young peoples network has reviewed proposals for
revised services, such as the CAMHS transformation programme, early help
offer and sexual health services. Their views have influenced service design.
Interviews for managers in childrens social care do not proceed unless children
and young people are available to participate in the recruitment process. The
council actively promotes participation by children and young people across
partner agencies, with a clear strategy and action plan underpinned by
accessible resources. This helps partner agencies to take account of their users
views regularly.
needs analysis, and prevalence data on domestic violence and young peoples
substance misuse, informs the commissioning of services. There is recognition
that the current joint strategic needs analysis provides high-level data at a point
in time, and deeper dives are required to improve understanding of need in
order to commission services accordingly. Active efforts are in progress to
introduce a more detailed joint needs analysis which can be easily updated.
While this is in progress, alternative approaches ensure that services are
commissioned to meet need.
families affected by the compounded difficulties of parental substance misuse,
domestic abuse and mental ill health. Partner agencies all recognise the
importance of identifying children and young people living in these home
environments, and careful screening of all referrals where these factors are
prevalent ensures that risk assessments and interventions are comprehensive.
A recent exercise identified 57 children most seriously affected by these
difficulties, and a subsequent audit of plans and interventions was undertaken
to ensure that responses were sufficiently robust.


met through membership of the regional commissioning consortium for
independent fostering and residential placements. Additional oversight of
contract compliance is undertaken by the local authoritys childrens
commissioning unit. Effective application of an Invest to Save model resulted in
the successful recruitment of 13 new carers in the last year. Placement stability
is comparatively good, with the majority of children and young people looked
after placed close to their family homes, even those who are placed outside of
the borough. While there is an issue relating to the young age at which some
care leavers move into supported housing, the actual quality of the provision is
good.
is currently under way. The developments have demonstrably been informed by
the involvement of children, young people and their families. Pooled funding
between the local authority and the clinical commissioning group will
incrementally increase financial resources over the four years. CAMHS for
children and young people looked after and care leavers are already accessible
and effective. This transformation plan will further enhance access to emotional
well-being services for more vulnerable children and young people.
based on evidence and local needs, is a service in development to reduce the
number of teenage young people coming into care. Successful securing of
corporate investment has enabled this to proceed, despite continuing fiscal
pressures. Inspectors saw advanced development of this service, which will
benefit from bespoke premises providing respite care, mediation and family
work. This illustrates that the local authority is responsive to evidence-based
arguments that support improving services and reducing longer-term costs, and
is prioritising childrens services.
elected members. Four CPB sub-groups scrutinise progress against identified
priorities, including the quality of placements and the health and education of
children and young people looked after. Remedial actions are instigated where
targets are not being met, and these are refined to ensure that actions achieve
the desired outcomes. The CPB, as the governing body for the virtual school,
designates one sub-group to concentrate on care leavers engagement in EET
for those aged 16 to 18 and 19 to 21 years. Despite this scrutiny, performance
is not good enough. CPB minutes confirm that partners are aware of the
volume of young people not engaged in EET, but more work is needed to close
the gap, as some care leavers do very well while others are not engaged in
positive activity. The CPBs field of vision regarding children and young people
looked after is suitably broad, but its effectiveness would benefit from tighter
priorities and more qualitative information on the experiences of children and
young people (Recommendation).


and the Bury Resilience Forum provide effective governance of the Channel
Panel and Prevent steering group, including advising the BSCB of their work.
Effective activities are undertaken regarding the potential radicalisation of
young people, including awareness raising, responding to agencies concerns,
and assessing individual risks. Bury is not a Home Office priority area, but
because it borders local authorities which are, there is careful liaison regarding
children and young people of concern crossing local authority boundaries. Work
with local communities is effectively and sensitively undertaken by the councils
community cohesion officer in partnership with a voluntary organisation
specialising in work with local minority ethnic communities.
senior managers in childrens social care to ensure that priority targets are
being met. The datasets predominantly comprise information on early help,
child protection and child-in-need performance. There is little information
regarding the outcomes for children and young people looked after, and none
on the experiences and outcomes of care leavers, which is a shortfall.
Evaluative written commentaries are not routinely provided alongside the
datasets, and this inhibits understanding of the data and what it means over
time (Recommendation).
some areas, but is under-developed in others. Positive impacts can be seen in
the uniformly good quality of assessments, effectively reducing delays in
management decision-making in the MASH from an average of four days to
one, and in redesigning services to increase the number of children leaving care
via special guardianship orders. Under-developed areas include the IRO service,
the children with disabilities social work service and EET provision for care
leavers, but the local authority was already aware of these and has plans to
improve all areas, currently at different stages of maturity. For example, senior
managers are committed to supporting the IRO service to improve its offer to
children and young people looked after and enable them to scrutinise the
progress that children and young people make between their reviews.
development, with the delay in progressing this attributed to difficulties in
recruiting sufficiently good senior managers to oversee this work and its
development. Themed audits undertaken are leading to tangible practice
improvements in tackling child sexual exploitation, neglect and working with
families where parents have multiple difficulties. Audits commissioned by the
BSCB have generated learning which has also been applied and has improved
practice across the partnership, including in childrens social care. Learning from
recent SCRs is disseminated widely and in very accessible formats. Staff spoken
to confirmed that they understood messages from SCRs and could describe
how these influence their practice. Routine case auditing would further help to
identify strengths and weaknesses of current social work practice, and help to
drive continuous improvement.


the majority of cases seen by inspectors. However, there is variability across
the teams, with supervision being insufficiently frequent or effective in the
children with disabilities and the leaving care teams. This contrasts with
management oversight, decision-making and direction being effective in the
MASH, early help and child protection services. Supervision and management
oversight are present but less consistent in the children looked after teams.
Records do not routinely include evidence of reflection and challenge, but social
workers told inspectors that reflective discussions are held and are
complemented by the availability of managerial advice.
Staff benefit from a comprehensive workforce training and development
strategy. Bury is an active member of numerous Greater Manchester learning
alliances, featuring partnerships with local universities and the pan-Manchester
social work academy. Newly qualified social workers receive enhanced support
and protection. Training is thoughtfully commissioned, using high calibre
trainers, and is linked to learning priorities such as disguised compliance and
peer-on-peer abuse. Social workers confirmed good access to diverse learning
opportunities, and the pathways for career progression are well understood.
The numbers of complaints received about services for children and young
people are relatively low, with the large majority promptly resolved, averting
escalation to formal, adversarial investigations. There are no common themes
arising from complaints, although they are carefully scrutinised for themes and
trends, but individual learning points are succinctly captured.
worker workforce with low turnover rates. Despite this, too many children and
young people looked after have had multiple changes of social worker. A
permanent group of experienced team managers is now providing a consistent
environment, enabling social workers to flourish and develop. Caseloads have
substantially reduced, partly through an investment in an additional 22 social
workers, the majority of whom are recently qualified but well supported. Small
pockets of higher caseload pressures remain, but these are not widespread.
The use of locum social workers is minimal, and they are primarily used to
cover short-term leave periods rather than long-term vacancies. Alongside this
significant and positive investment in attracting and professionally developing
new social workers, the workforce is sufficiently experienced, with the majority
of social workers having five or more years of experience.


overseen by the BSCB sub-group. Operational activity is closely monitored by
the child sexual exploitation and MASH steering group which meets regularly,
chaired by a senior manager. This group reviews risks, progress and outcomes
for individual young people. Regional child sexual exploitation tactical meetings,
convened by the police, enable effective cross-border information sharing and
working. Direct work undertaken in the multi-disciplinary child sexual
exploitation team is particularly effective in reducing the risks to children and
young people. Strategic and operational responses to missing children and
young people are also effective with all children and young people offered a
return interview. Return interviews for children and young people missing from
care seen by inspectors were thorough.
assessments and evidence for children and young people who are the subject
of care proceedings. Bury progresses cases promptly, with an average of 27
weeks in the year to date. However, in the most recent quarter, proceedings
had further improved, reducing to an average of 23 weeks.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
Bury Local Safeguarding Children Board (BSCB) meets its statutory responsibilities,
and strong links are in place with other strategic bodies, such as the childrens trust.
The boards structure is well established and effective. The business plan is up to
date, and focuses on three appropriate priorities. Partners from a range of agencies
chair sub-groups that make good progress on their work programmes. Board
members are sufficiently senior to implement changes recommended by the board.
Records demonstrate useful challenge from the board, resulting in improved services
and outcomes for children and young people. The board informs and influences local
services in relation to emerging trends, recommendations from serious case reviews
(SCRs) and findings from its audits.
The board is independently chaired and efficiently run. Accountability would be
improved by minuting the regular meetings between the chief executive of the
council and the DCS. Handover arrangements for the incoming chair are in place and
have been well planned.
Safeguarding procedures are up to date, comprehensive and reflect local and
national priorities. The threshold document is also clear and up to date. It supports
professionals and the publics understanding of when a child or young person may
require additional help or protection.
The board evaluates the effectiveness of early help services and provides challenge
where necessary. The board has a good understanding of the effectiveness of
frontline services and checks this in a variety of ways. This knowledge would be
strengthened by a clearer picture of single-agency auditing activity and findings in
partner agencies. There is good oversight of strategic and operational responses to
child sexual exploitation and children and young people who go missing. Private
fostering requires improvement. The police do not attend all initial child protection
conferences, and not all domestic abuse notifications are promptly dispatched to the
MASH.
The board regularly scrutinises performance data. However, the multi-agency data
set adopted in June 2015 is not yet supporting scrutiny of performance across all
agencies. The board facilitates a wide range of relevant training, which is positively
received across the partnership, and practitioners report that there has been a good
impact on practice.
The boards annual report is detailed but lacks analysis and does not fully reflect
some of the positive work done by the board in the preceding year.


Recommendations
facilitate a broader understanding of strengths and weaknesses of practice
across partner services.
limitations of police resources on practice and safeguarding children and young
people, and seek reassurance from the police that these are being addressed.
comprehensive and analytical, in order to inform the board of performance
across agencies, including outcomes for children and young people looked after
and care leavers.
Bury as a priority and ensure that action to improve awareness and practice is
scrutinised by the board.
board and its partners, including providing clarity on areas for development and
actions being taken to address them.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
both the Health and Well-being Board and the childrens trust, which set out
their respective responsibilities and reporting arrangements. The board is
influential in informing and influencing local services in relation to emerging
trends or recommendations from SCRs. Examples include changes to the
referral pathway for children at risk of female genital mutilation, and
challenging the childrens trust in relation to gaps in the accessibility of
parenting support.


other independent chairs though regional and national organisations. A full-time
business manager supports the efficient running of the board. The independent
chair has regular meetings with both the chief executive of the council and the
DCS. As these meetings are not recorded, it is not possible to assess their
impact. The chair also conducts annual individual reviews with board members.
These are a useful opportunity for members to share their views on the boards
strengths, challenges and their own contribution to the effectiveness of the
board. The chairs term of office was extended by one year to support
continuity when the chief executive of the council left his post. A new
independent chair has been appointed and suitable arrangements have been
made for a smooth handover. Lay members initially recruited to the board have
completed their term of office. Recruitment undertaken in 2015 has led to the
appointment of one new lay member, and a further recruitment campaign is
planned to fill the second post.
board, the business group and sub-groups. Minutes demonstrate transparency
and thoroughness. Partners from a range of agencies chair sub-groups, which
are governed by terms of reference, and clearly progress their individual work
programmes. Board members are sufficiently senior to implement changes
recommended by the board. For example, in response to findings from a multiagency audit on neglect, the assistant director of childrens social care issued
an instruction that the graded care profile should be used in all cases where
children and young people are subject to a child protection plan for neglect.
The board has challenged the failure of some partners to contribute financially
to the board. This has resulted in one partner providing a significant
contribution in kind through collecting and analysing data. Consequently, the
board has sufficient financial resources to progress its work. Unused
contingency funds set aside for potential SCRs are now being utilised to fund a
part-time data analyst. An up-to-date business plan focuses on three
appropriate priorities: safeguarding vulnerable groups, strengthening the voice
of the child or young person in core activities, and improving the quality
assurance capability of the board.
that apply across the region. They are detailed and up to date: for example, in
relation to changes in legislation regarding female genital mutilation. Local
guidance supplements these procedures, such as that on suicide and self-harm
developed in response to a local SCR. The local threshold document is clear and
supports professionals and the publics understanding of when a child or young
person may require additional help or protection. The board reviews this
document to ensure that it remains relevant, up to date and in line with
statutory guidance. Application of thresholds is tested by the review of data and
audit. For example, a recent audit of contacts to MASH by GPs found that the
large majority were appropriate, sufficiently detailed, and met the threshold for
intervention by childrens social care.


effectiveness of early help services since July 2013. This has enabled the board
to challenge the childrens trust when necessary: for example, in relation to the
integration of the family nurse partnership with the early help offer and
regarding some gaps in parenting programmes. This was effective.
challenge. Board meeting minutes, a challenge log and risk register
demonstrate examples of challenge from the board that have been effective in
improving services and outcomes for children and young people. The board has
worked constructively with the designated officer to raise concerns, at a
national level, about a private adolescent mental health hospital resulting in a
visit from the Childrens Commissioner and an inspection by the Care Quality
Commission. Scrutiny by the board of the experience of young people from
Bury detained in one of Her Majestys young offender institutions (YOIs)
resulted in improved communication between Burys youth offending service
(YOS), the YOI staff, and greater scrutiny of the application of restraint. The
board has recommended that YOS officer presence at the YOI increases from
two to five days to support the safeguarding of young people. Funding for this
is currently being pursued. Delays in producing a domestic abuse strategy were
escalated by the chair of the board to the chair of the community safety
partnership.
understanding of the effectiveness and quality of frontline services in Bury.
These include annual reports, information on allegations management, children
and young people who are electively home educated, and private fostering.
Multi-agency themed audits, results of inspections, and a range of other regular
or requested reports, alongside performance data, underpin the boards
assessment of the effectiveness of services. Regular reporting on agency
caseloads led to the board questioning high caseloads in safeguarding and
children in care teams. A report on police attendance at child protection case
conferences identified that the police public protection team was struggling to
meet demand due to the high volume of child protection conferences across
Greater Manchester, and that Greater Manchester police do not have a protocol
for attendance. As a result, the chair raised this issue at the Greater
Manchester LSCB group. Police administrative resource limitations are cited as
the reason why domestic abuse notifications are received in batches at the
MASH. Although serious incidents are fast tracked, instances which appear to
the attending officer as less serious may not be triaged at the MASH for many
days after the event, and therefore do not benefit from a comprehensive
analysis of agency involvement and historical information. This is an area for
improvement (Recommendation).


service, reflective supervision and the conduct of child protection case
conferences. Good use has been made of observation and discussion with
practitioners, as well as the review of case records and policies. Action plans
are developed as a result of the audit findings, and the board monitors the
progress of these. An independent audit of the children with disabilities service,
commissioned by the board, identified shortfalls in practice, including the failure
to use chronologies consistently, limited information on childrens and young
peoples case files and a lack of planning in some cases. A service improvement
plan is in place in response to these findings. The boards ability to understand
the quality of frontline practice could be further strengthened by the scrutiny of
agencies own auditing activity (Recommendation).
performance reports in relation to childrens social care. Recent scrutiny of the
high numbers of children and young people on a child protection plan led to a
sampling exercise being commissioned, to test the hypothesis that partners
may be reluctant to step down from child protection plans to child-in-need
plans. Board members have also observed child protection conferences to
assess the effectiveness of child protection conference chairs and the decisionmaking process. A multi-agency dataset adopted in June 2015 is not yet
supporting the boards scrutiny of performance across all agencies. The board is
aware of this and is addressing this through the monitoring and evaluation subgroup (Recommendation).
range of training linked to local priorities and a training needs analysis. Take up
of training is good, with a wide range of agencies represented, including
practitioners from the voluntary sector. Workshops on self-harm, facilitated by
CAMHS, in response to findings from an SCR, have been well received and, as a
result, more have been scheduled. The boards trainer post has been vacant for
some months. During this period, training has been commissioned from
independent trainers. This has ensured that all planned courses have taken
place. The board has developed its evaluation of the impact of training on staff
practice. In addition to providing immediate feedback, course participants are
contacted three months after attending training. Feedback has been positive,
with practitioners reporting changes to their practice. The trainer vacancy has
recently been filled.
to review child and young person deaths. The child death overview panel
(CDOP), chaired by Burys director of public health, also works with the Greater
Manchester CDOP to consider themes or trends relevant across the region.
Work has been completed in relation to a small number of suicides by young
people. However, no common theme was identified.


audit tool to conduct section 11 audits. The tool was used for the first time in
organisation that provides advice and support to young people on drug and
alcohol misuse completed an audit specifically designed for voluntary
organisations. The result of this audit was reported to the board, an action plan
developed, and progress monitored by the monitoring and evaluation subgroup. An example of improvement resulting from the audit is a change to the
child protection element of the induction programme for local authority adult
services social workers. Although arrangements to challenge partners selfassessments are in place, these could be further strengthened. The board
recognises this, and plans are in place to introduce challenge sessions into the
next audit round.
board has a detailed understanding of local activities to tackle child sexual
exploitation, to help children and young people, and to disrupt perpetrators.
The board has endorsed the local authoritys child sexual exploitation strategy.
The child sexual exploitation sub-group has recently re-established its role as
the strategic body to monitor performance after initial difficulties in receiving
data from the pan-Greater Manchester child sexual exploitation team (the
Phoenix team). The board has ensured swift progress on the action plan,
following a peer review conducted by the Phoenix team in November 2015. The
board has ensured that the revised threshold document includes child sexual
exploitation and children and young people who go missing, to enable a wide
understanding of the public protection response in Bury. Training for
practitioners has been rolled out, with participants reporting positively on its
impact on their practice. Strengths are the provision of advice for parents on
the website and making training accessible to them.
affords opportunities to share good practice, lessons learned from SCRs and to
raise awareness of issues such as child sexual exploitation. The board has been
less effective in raising awareness of those children and young people living in
private fostering arrangements, and there has been delay in implementing the
recommendations arising from the most recent annual report on private
fostering (Recommendation).


board, through the case review and learning sub-group, has effective processes
to identify when the threshold for an SCR has been met. If the threshold is not
met, consideration is given to whether a critical case review should be
completed. The board is persistent in seeking assurance from agencies that
action plans resulting from SCRs are completed. Examples of such actions
include childrens social care increasing their capacity to undertake specialist
assessment of young people who have committed sexual offences, and the
redesign of the CAMHS Asperger syndrome referral pathway. Learning from
SCRs and critical case reviews is disseminated widely within agencies, through
roadshows and the boards website. Lessons learned are incorporated into
training, and specialist courses commissioned in response to SCR findings. A
total of 130 practitioners attended seven roadshows in 2014, and training
delivered by a national expert on disguised compliance in 2014 was
recommissioned in November 2015. Practitioners who spoke to inspectors
during this inspection were able to describe learning from SCRs and BSCB
training that they had attended.
report is detailed and supported by a number of appendices. However, the
report is insufficiently analytical and does not fully reflect some of the positive
work done by the board in the preceding year (Recommendation).


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other, and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMIs) from
Ofsted and one additional inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Sheena Doyle
Deputy lead inspector: Nick Stacey
Team inspectors: Peter McEntee, Susan Myers, Jenny Turnross, Tracey Zimmerman,
Janet Fraser, Gary Lamb (additional inspector)
Shadow inspectors: Stella Elliot, Melanie Davies
Senior data analyst: Hywel Benbow
Quality assurance manager: Christine Williams, Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.

Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


