Calderdale Metropolitan Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 13 January 2015  4 February 2015
Report published: 20 March 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services require
improvement
The authority is not yet delivering good help and protection and care for children,
young people and families. It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children
and young people receive good help, care and protection.2
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires
Improvement

permanence

Requires
Improvement


Inadequate


Requires
Improvement


Requires
Improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Calderdale require improvement
because:
Senior managers and elected members, supported by partners, have shown clear
leadership and worked hard to address areas of the service that were judged to be
inadequate in previous Ofsted inspections and improvements have been made in a
number of services.
Risk is now better managed and many children and families are receiving the
services they need to help them and keep them safe. No children were identified
as being left at immediate risk during this inspection and early help services are an
area of strength.
Child Sexual Exploitation (CSE) is given a high priority in Calderdale and effective
information sharing including the use of a central register, means that agencies
have comprehensive and timely information about those most at risk and can
coordinate services and plan interventions to reduce risk.
Looked after children have improving outcomes, but practice is not yet consistently
good and progress in improving outcomes for children in some areas has been too
slow. Children wait too long to be adopted and there are delays in the recruitment
of adopters.
Concerted and focused performance monitoring has driven progress but is not yet
effective in ensuring consistency in all areas of the service.
The quality of assessments is not yet consistently good and whilst good examples
were seen, too many lack robust analysis of information to inform decisions.
Permanency planning meetings do not consistently consider all permanency
options at an early enough stage. This means that in some cases there is delay in
making the decision about the right permanency placement for children.
Child protection and child in need plans do not always include clear outcomes or
timescales. Care plans are not always sufficiently clear about childrens needs, how
these will be met, and when this will be done by. Contingency plans do not always
make clear what will happen if plans do not progress and when parents and carers
fail to engage with plans, there is not always timely challenge.
Arrangements in relation to private fostering are not robust.
Some care leavers do not understand the purpose of pathway plans and not
enough care leavers have access to apprenticeships.
Management oversight, including by Independent Reviewing Officers, does not
consistently ensure a clear focus on children and young peoples progress against
plans.


The local authority senior leaders are aware of the improvements still required and
have a clear plan to deliver these. There is still much to do to ensure practice is
good in all service areas but good progress has been made to date.

What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Ensure that there is focused work and robust management oversight to reduce
the timescales that children wait to be matched and placed with adopters.


Improve the timeliness of adopter recruitment to reduce the time that children
have to wait to be adopted.


Ensure that there is a robust analysis of the reasons for young people not
taking up the offer of a return interview and that findings inform planning and
commissioning to increase the uptake of return interviews when children are
missing from home and care. Areas for improvement

Areas for improvement

Leadership, management and governance

Ensure that effective performance management and quality assurance further
drive improvement and consistency in the quality of practice, and that
assessments, planning and the use of chronologies are given priority.


Ensure that there is robust management oversight of plans, and appropriate
challenge to reduce drift and delay, and that all managers including
Independent Reviewing Officers are clearly focused on securing timely,
permanent placements for children and young people.

Help and protection

Improve the quality of assessments including those for children at risk of CSE
by ensuring that effective and robust analysis of all the information informs
decisions.


Ensure that all children have plans which clearly record intended outcomes and
identify timescales for actions, so that parents, carers and children know what
needs to change to improve childrens wellbeing and safety.


Ensure that there is appropriate challenge when parents and carers do not
engage with plans, and that contingency planning clearly outlines the
consequences of the plan not progressing.



Improve the quality and consistency of work that is undertaken with children
who are privately fostered to ensure that statutory requirements are met.
Ensure that there is senior management oversight of private fostering, to
support improvement of recognition and response to this group of young
people.

homeless consider the benefits of them becoming children looked after and,
where assessments identify them as children in need, that this results in the
provision of services through a robust child in need plan.

Looked after children
options for children are considered at the outset of their time in care.
suitability of permanence plans for children, and ensure that this is clearly
recorded in the record of looked after review meetings.
happen, how and when this will be achieved, and who is responsible, and
include consideration of the purpose and intended outcome of contact.
and plans put in place to meet these.

Adoption
performance of the local authority at the panel.

Care Leavers
they understand the purpose of their plans. Make sure that the plans have clear
objectives and timescales and detail clearly all actions required to meet the
young persons key needs.

The local authoritys strengths
services from a low starting point. This action, underpinned by good knowledge
of local communities and effective joint commissioning arrangements, means
that many children and their families have good access to a wide range of
services to meet need, with support for early help being a particular strength.
These services were seen during this inspection to be making a positive
difference for many children and their families.


have provided opportunities for external challenge and scrutiny. Many of the
findings from these have been used well to focus on priorities that have
improved services for children. These priorities fit well with the Calderdale
Safeguarding Children Single Integrated Improvement Plan.
the Early Intervention Panels which ensure effective information sharing and
timely access to services, so that children and families are offered help when
needs are first identified. This is reducing the need for formal social work
intervention.
Exploitation (CSE) team, is resulting in timely decision making to ensure
effective responses to referrals to reduce risks to children, including those at
risk of CSE.
is resulting in effective and timely information sharing for those missing from
home, care and education and those at risk of CSE. This means that agencies
have comprehensive and timely information about those most at risk and can
coordinate services and plan interventions to reduce risk.
of need for those at risk of domestic abuse and CSE. This means that many
children and young people of different ages are receiving help to address risk
and minimise harm.
enables social workers to record effectively, including clear recording of
childrens wishes and feelings, and supports performance management and
monitoring.
young people are involved in developing the new children looked after strategy.
to the communities they come from.
those who live out of borough. All children are involved in developing their
Personal Education Plans (PEPs), including those in nursery and reception.
time working directly with children and getting to know them well.
significant impact in ensuring stable, permanent social work teams and a
reduction in the use of agency staff.


Progress since the last inspection
services to be adequate, with safeguarding arrangements for children judged to
be inadequate. Subsequent inspections of children in need of help and
protection in 2012 and 2013 continued to judge services for the protection of
children to be inadequate. The Secretary of State issued Improvement Notices
in April 2012, January 2013 and January 2014.
need for improved management oversight of thresholds for access to services,
improved practice in the management of strategy discussions and Section 47
enquiries and the need to improve assessment of risk when children are first
referred to ensure that risk is appropriately addressed. Further
recommendations included the need to use chronologies to ensure that
historical information is considered in assessments and is informing decisions
and for childrens views to be sought and considered in assessments and
planning. Transfer of cases between teams needed to take place without
delays and performance management and audit embedded with themes
reported to senior managers. Finally the need for sufficient social work and
management capacity in the contact referral and assessment service was
identified, and for staff to be suitably qualified and experienced.
improvement, for example management oversight of the application of
thresholds for access to childrens services is now consistent and robust.
Response to referrals is appropriate and there is timely intervention and
assessment for children who may be at risk. The management of strategy
meetings has significantly improved and is now effective, and no children were
identified during this inspection as being left at risk of significant harm.
Transfer of cases between teams is timely and chronologies are now used in
most cases to inform decision making about next steps.
practice, including the recording of chronologies and the recording of childrens
wishes and feelings in one dedicated site. Many social workers undertake direct
work with children and this is helping them to understand children wishes and
feelings.
workers and management capacity across the service to enable social workers
to have manageable caseloads. There is commitment from the local authority
that case loads will be monitored and additional funding for more staff provided
if they increase.


Board, and a comprehensive programme of audit and performance
management has ensured that significant progress has been made in many,
although not all, aspects of the service. However, practice is not yet
consistently good across the whole service. Assessments do not always include
a robust analysis of all information and plans do not always include clear
outcomes and timescales. Contingency planning is not yet sufficiently robust.
Further work and more focus on robust permanency planning at an early stage
are needed to improve outcomes for children. The pace of change for children
waiting to be adopted has been too slow and the recruitment of adopters takes
too long in too many cases.
improve performance with significant improvements in the workforce in place,
strong partnership working in many areas of practice including CSE, an
improving Local Safeguarding Childrens Board and effective use of audit to
drive improvement in some areas of the service. However performance
management and audit need to clearly focus on the areas identified during this
inspection as needing improvement and the level of challenge and management
oversight of practice needs to be consistently robust across all areas of the
service.


Summary for children and young people
 Services to help and protect children and young people in Calderdale have been
poor for a long time, and in the past not enough children and young people
received a good service. The senior managers know this and have been working
hard over the last two years to make improvements, but they know there is more
to do to make sure that all services are good.
 Partners and services work extremely well together when children and young
people first need help. This means that problems can be sorted out quickly and
very early on, before they become too difficult to cope with. We found that
children and families who have suffered domestic abuse have very good support.
 Not enough children have good assessments and plans. Too many of these do
not explain what children need, or how things at home affect them. They do not
always explain what will happen and when, nor how the professionals responsible
will know if the support is helping children and their families. We have asked the
local authority to make sure that they use and learn from the good examples
seen in some assessments and personal education plans to make sure that all
plans for children are good.
 Children and young people who have plans in place receive support from a wide
range of services and these services work well together to help different family
members. Social workers work hard to get to know children and families well, and
to make sure they have the help they need. For many children and young people,
this is making a positive difference.
 The new systems to record, monitor and think about the risks to children missing
from education, home or care are working to make sure that children and young
people get the help they need. By working together, the police and local authority
and others share the information they have to make children and young people
safer. This means that these children get help from services more quickly, which
helps to reduce risk.
 When children and young people cared for by Calderdale Council have brothers
and sisters, social workers try to keep them together if that is what they want
and it is best for them. However, some children need to be given more help so
that they can understand what has happened to them in their lives and why
decisions have been made.
 Social workers try hard to find adoptive families for those children who need it,
but too many children in Calderdale have to wait too long, and much longer than
children in some other parts of England, before they are adopted.
 Children and young people in care do well in Calderdale, especially as they move

into Year 3 and above. Young people do particularly well in their GCSEs, and
much better than children in care across the country. They are increasingly doing
almost as well as the rest of the young people in Calderdale. More of you leaving
care are going to university, but only a few of you are going into an
apprenticeship.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in the area
 Approximately 45,771 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Calderdale. This is 22% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 21% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 17% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 13% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 17% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British and mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 17% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 13% (the national average is 14%).
 Calderdales minority ethnic population is mainly Pakistani, Indian and
Bangladeshi. Other communities include those of Chinese, Black British and
Eastern European ethnic origin, with the last of these growing as a population in
the borough.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 January 2015, 1,278 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 31 January 2015, 204 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 249 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 January 2015, two children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 January 2015, 322 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 70 per 10,000 children). This is a slight increase from 320 (70 per


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


authority area
 one child is an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 21 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
 one young person ceased to be looked after and is now living in a house
of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates three childrens homes. Two were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since April 2012.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since January 2014.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement
The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Judgement grade
Requires improvement

Summary
Significant improvements have been made in services for children in need of help
and protection but the quality of childrens experience is not yet consistently good.
Early help services are well developed and coordinated in Calderdale. The Early
Intervention Panels have promoted multi-agency engagement in early help, and this
means that there is a wide range of support services to help improve the lives of
children and families when needs are first identified.
The number of referrals to childrens social care has reduced as a result of early help
arrangements, including improved screening of domestic abuse notifications.
Thresholds are understood with most children supported at the right level.
The multi-agency safeguarding team (MAST) ensures effective information sharing in
respect of children in need of help and protection, including those at risk of child
sexual exploitation. Children and young people at risk of immediate harm are
identified, and strategy meetings take place promptly to make decisions about
investigations and actions required to protect children.
The quality of social work assessments is not yet consistently good, and
management oversight does not always provide appropriate challenge and ensure
action when plans are not progressing. Child protection plans and child in need plans
do not consistently prioritise actions, nor always have clear outcomes or timescales.
Children who are subject to child protection plans have regular visits from their social
worker and plans are regularly reviewed. Many children receive comprehensive
support from a range of agencies to meet their needs and those of their families.
An effective Central Register of the children missing education, missing from home
or care, and those at risk of CSE is supporting key agencies in working together,
sharing information and ensuring timely and appropriate responses to those at risk.
Arrangements in relation to private fostering are poor. There has not been enough
work to identify children who are privately fostered, and current social work practice
is not ensuring effective assessment and support for these children.
The potential to accommodate vulnerable homeless 16- and 17-year-olds under
section 20 (Children Act 1989), or to provide support through robust child in need
plans, is not sufficiently considered at the point their needs are assessed.


their lives can access timely help and support through a wide range of early
help services. There is an effective and comprehensive early help offer which is
co-ordinated by locality Early Intervention Panels (EIPs), and this is having a
significant and positive impact on outcomes for children. Through effective
information sharing, the panels determine which agencies are best placed to
provide help to children and families who need it. The wide range of agencies
providing early help, including childrens services staff, childrens centres,
schools and the voluntary sector, means that services can be provided to
different family members according to age and need. For example, the
Womens Centre, which has national recognition, offers early intervention work
with 5-13 year-olds and there is good engagement with East European and
Asian communities in childrens centres. Parents and carers value these services
and speak very positively about the difference they are making to their lives.
Assessments (EISA), which is slightly below the target set by the local authority
and further work is needed to extend and increase the use of the EISA.
Although the majority of EIAs are timely and clearly reflect the family history
and reason for referral, too many do not reflect the experience of the child well
enough. It is positive that cases that are subject to Early Intervention Plans
cannot be closed without the explicit approval of the Early Intervention Panel,
ensuring that children are only moved to universal services after multi-agency
consideration of progress. In addition, robust step-down arrangements from
Childrens Social Care to EISA ensure that risks are effectively managed and
children continue to receive support in line with their assessed needs.
outcomes for many children and young people. This service was reviewed in
July 2014 by the Department for Communities and Local Government and the
quality of family intervention and support work was judged to be outstanding.
This has resulted in Calderdale being able to deliver the expanded Troubled
Families programme early and reflects the range, effectiveness and positive
impact of early help services.
of staff from health and education alongside social workers and police as well
as access to electronic recording systems for adult services, is resulting in
timely information sharing and decision making on contacts received by
childrens social care. A wide range of agency checks are undertaken, with
parental consent where needed. The co-location of staff from the Child Sexual
Exploitation (CSE) team at MAST is supporting the identification of young
people who may be at risk of CSE, and ensuring that where the threshold may
not be met for immediate social work intervention, information sharing and
assessments of risk results in appropriate signposting of children and young
people for further work.


the quality of information provided by some agencies to the MAST, and many
now include chronologies of agency involvement which supports timely
decisions about next steps. Some referrals, however, do not contain all relevant
information, and more work is needed to improve consistency in the quality of
all referrals.
to improved understanding and application of thresholds and a new system for
screening domestic abuse notifications. Domestic abuse incidents which do not
meet the threshold for social work intervention are forwarded by the police
directly to dedicated staff in the Early Intervention Team, who review them and
refer those that require early help support to the Early Intervention Panel.
Information is also provided to any professional working with the child, and
schools report that this is enabling them to better support children in school.
This approach ensures that children living in homes with domestic abuse can be
provided with support at an earlier stage.
from adult services to childrens social care, and the local authority has
undertaken a range of work to improve pathways from adult to childrens
services. This is beginning to have some impact, with contacts from adult
services increasing from 83 during 201314 to 106 in the year to date and the
local authority recognises that more needs to be done to further increase
referrals rates.
applied in the majority of cases. Children in need of immediate assessment are
allocated swiftly to the First Response Team (FRT); others are discussed at
multi-agency referral meetings held at MAST to gather further information. This
results in timely intervention and assessment for children who may be at risk.
Strategy meetings are timely and are attended by a range of relevant agencies,
and information is effectively shared. Minutes of meetings are well recorded
and strategy meetings result in clear and appropriate decisions and timely child
protection enquiries which consider risk and take appropriate action to protect
children. In a small number of cases, single agency investigations were
conducted which would have been more effective had joint investigations been
initiated from the point of the strategy meeting.
young people. Arrangements for responses to concerns raised out of hours are
appropriate and well-resourced. The quality of recording available to the
daytime service is effective in ensuring safe follow up of activity.


inspectors requiring improvement. Better assessments seen included direct
work with children to elicit their wishes and feelings, clear descriptions of the
impact of parental behaviour on children, thorough consideration of family
history and effective use of research to inform analysis of risk. However, too
many assessments are too long and descriptive, and lack effective analysis to
inform decision making. This means that in too many cases, not all areas of
need are adequately addressed, and therefore children do not always receive all
the services they need at the right time. The good examples of assessment
work seen during this inspection need to be better promoted and shared across
the workforce to drive further improvement and consistency in practice.
in all cases, and children and families were receiving services in most cases
before assessments were completed. All single assessments have a locally
agreed timescale, and are reviewed by managers and only extended as
requested by the social worker based on their early findings and the childs
needs.
since the last inspection. In some cases these are used well to consider
historical information and key events, but some contain too much information,
preventing them from being effective documents that really tell a childs story.
domestic abuse are well understood and used by partners. Multi-Agency Risk
Assessment Conferences are well established and have a committed, consistent
multi-agency membership which supports effective consideration and planning
to reduce risk.
domestic abuse provided by the Womens Centre. During 201314 the centre
provided support to 596 women, 26 men and 145 children and young people.
The extensive range of support means that children and parents can access
services to meet differing levels of need ranging from early help and prevention
through to support for children and young people subject to child protection
plans. There is close multi-agency working and links with the Safe Hands
project in recognition of the links between domestic abuse and CSE, as well as
established links with the Youth Offending Team (YOT) and Family Intervention
Team workers who ensure that hard to reach groups can access the Womens
Centre. Effective multi-agency working is ensuring good access to an extensive
range of services.


the last inspection. Children in need are benefiting from co-ordinated multiagency planning, which is regularly reviewed, and in many cases seen this was
delivering effective support packages to children. Child in Need plans are of
variable quality, with too many plans seen not having clear outcomes, or
timescales. This does not support parents, children and professionals to
understand how change will be measured and when it needs to happen.
improvements in the management of child protection conferences. The model is
promoting a more focused approach to the identification and analysis of risk,
and the needs of the child. This, together with the routine provision of
advocates for children subject to child protection plans, has started to make
some improvement in the participation of children and young people. Between
October and December 2014, ten conferences had children present, and 39
children were represented by an advocate, resulting in childrens views being
independently represented at 43% of conferences. In one conference observed
by inspectors, a young person was an active participant in the meeting. She
was very well supported by an advocate, and this meant that her wishes and
feelings were well considered in developing the plan. The vast majority (97.3%)
of conferences are held on time, and in the majority of cases seen there was
evidence of appropriate multi-agency attendance.
in Calderdale has decreased from 54.4 (201314) to 48.1 in quarter 3 of 2014
indicates that thresholds for children coming onto plans are now appropriately
applied. However, in some cases there is evidence of a lack of robust challenge
by conference chairs when plans are subject to drift and delay, and in some of
these cases parents are not adequately challenged about their lack of
engagement. Contingency plans are not always clear as to the long-term
consequences of parents and carers not engaging with the plan.
were held regularly but the quality of planning is too variable. There were
examples seen of good plans which were clear and focused on childrens needs,
and some examples of childrens wishes and feelings, including those of very
young children, influencing planning. However, in too many cases plans did not
clearly identify the outcomes being sought and the actions and timescales
required to achieve them. This means that for some children change may not
happen quickly enough if families and professionals are not clear about what
support will be offered by when, and how change will be measured.


childrens disability team is well resourced in terms of skills and expertise to
meet the diverse needs of children. Transition arrangements, whereby two
transition workers spend one day a week within the disabled childrens team,
ensure that childrens needs are identified at an early stage and appropriate
resources commissioned.
needs in respect of their culture, religion and language, which results in a
better understanding of childrens needs. This included the use of interpreters,
the translation of documents, and the allocation of support workers who were
able to speak the same language as families. Effective direct work is
undertaken by social workers in many cases, and this is helping them to
develop meaningful relationships with children.
professionals understand their role. Education inclusion, education welfare and
schools work closely together to take effective steps to locate and promote the
welfare of children missing education. There were a total of 83 children missing
education during the year, and at the time of the inspection nine children were
missing from education, four of whom had been contacted and appropriate
steps taken to establish their whereabouts of the other five. A strong and
effective central record of all the most vulnerable children and young people in
Calderdale has been established that includes all those missing from education,
those not receiving their full educational entitlement, all children missing from
home or care and those at risk of CSE. The record incorporates information on
other risk factors, such as Special Educational Needs and young people known
to the Youth Offending Team. The record is updated on a daily basis by the
Vulnerable Young Peoples Coordinator, and can be accessed by the police,
childrens social care and the Head of Learning. All children on the central
record have a key worker. This process supports key agencies in working
together and sharing information to develop strategic and individual responses
to protect children and young people. At the time of the inspection, there were
four children missing from care, and none missing from home. 24 young people
were identified as being at risk of CSE and all were receiving support from the
specialist Safe Hands project, and this was seen to be reducing risk to young
people in cases seen during this inspection.


the assessment and identification of young people at risk of CSE. CSE is
managed through a dedicated team who meet daily to review and plan multiagency responses to the young people who have come to the attention of any
agency that day, and to review those known to be an ongoing concern. The
weekly multi-agency meeting, which involves the CSE team, Police, Education,
Safe Hands, and YOT, review all ongoing cases of CSE. Information from both
meetings is added to the central record on a daily basis. Evidence has been
seen on case files of these operational meetings providing clear analysis and
assessments of the level of risk to young people and producing action plans to
address needs and reduce risk. Children and young people who require social
work intervention are allocated to a social worker from the CSE team and 11
young people were open to the social worker at the time of the inspection. In
cases seen during this inspection, children and young people are receiving
timely and effective intervention from a range of agencies to provide the
support they need and reduce risks in relation to CSE. In some cases, young
people would have benefited from a more holistic assessment and support plan,
to ensure that other needs were also met. This has been brought to the
attention of the local authority, who are taking immediate steps to address this.
monitored and appropriate action taken to find children missing. Children who
are missing are reported to the childrens social care portfolio lead and tracked
by the police and individual agencies as well as through the Central Record
and a monthly multi-agency missing children operational meeting. This group
is responsible for identifying patterns and trends involving CSE, missing children
and trafficking. When serious concerns were identified through the analysis of
return interviews, there was good evidence of appropriate action that resulted
in reducing the risks to young people of CSE.
agree to a return interview and in the vast majority of cases (93%) contact is
made, but only 40% of children agree to an interview. All children who have
been missing will receive a visit from the police and from their social worker if
they have one. The local authority recognises the need to increase the uptake
of return interviews and is reviewing the order in which children receive visits
from professionals and return interviews in an attempt to increase the uptake.
Not all interviews are undertaken in the timescales required, and in recognition
of this the local authority has recently secured funding for an additional
member of staff to undertake return interviews. Return interviews are not
always uploaded on to childrens records, and are therefore not readily available
to inform decision making.
and welfare is monitored effectively. Reasons for elective home education are
carefully scrutinised and any patterns or trends are analysed and, if necessary,
acted upon.


are on Child Protection Plans. The provision focuses on children, whose
attendance is below 85%, providing six-week blocks of support to help the child
to improve attendance and outcomes. Currently, progress of this work is being
monitored and there is evidence that aspects such as behaviour and attendance
improve, particularly whilst the support is in place. In one case seen, the virtual
school had made a significant contribution in helping a young person to reengage with school. It is as yet too early to analyse the longer-term impact of
this work against outcomes at key stages.
are in private fostering arrangements. Despite some publicity during 2014, the
number of private fostering notifications remains low, with only four received
during the year, and only two children privately fostered at the point of
inspection. Although children are identified as children in need, and are the
subject of single assessments, work which specifically addresses private
fostering requirements is not always carried out. Whilst this has not placed
children at significant risk in cases seen during this inspection, it has affected
the quality of their care planning.
effective. 149 referrals were received from a range of employers in 201314
and were responded to and investigated in a timely way. In 20132014, 91%
of LADO cases were concluded within a month, and 99% within three months.
The LADO also offers advice and training to agencies, and evaluation of work is
incorporated into the annual report to the LSCB.
who are homeless with emergency accommodation and assessments of their
need. Assessments result in support being provided, but do not evidence
consideration of the benefits of them becoming looked after, nor do they
always result in robust children in need plans. In cases seen, all young people
were provided with support, but some would have benefited from closer multiagency working via a child in need plan.


Key judgement
The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Judgement grade
Requires improvement

Summary
Most looked after children in Calderdale are supported well by the local authority and
live in stable placements but planning for their future is not always timely and this
means that some children wait too long for a permanent placement.
The children in care council is well developed and is well supported by the local
authority.
There is a good range of placement choice, meaning that most children are placed
close to home and that brothers and sisters are able to live together when
appropriate.
However, care plans are not always sufficiently clear about childrens needs, how
these will be met, and when this will be done by.
Children missing from care are tracked and monitored effectively and offered return
interviews by an independent person. Those identified as at risk of CSE are offered
appropriate support to reduce risk.
Most children looked after do well in school, and their progress is effectively tracked
by the virtual school; specialist support is available when needed. Personal education
plans are generally well written, and the views of children are used to set targets for
the following year.
Permanency planning meetings do not always consider all permanency options early
enough, and in some cases this causes delay in securing permanency for children.
Independent Reviewing Officers critique and oversight of plans, including
permanence plans, is not sufficiently robust in all cases.
Cases in the pre-proceedings phase of the Public Law Outline (PLO) do not always
progress quickly enough, though more recent work is better in this regard. Letters
before proceedings, which set out the changes the local authority expects parents to
make, do not always do so with sufficient clarity.
Children in Calderdale wait too long to be adopted and there are delays in processes
to recruit adopters. A range of measures have been put in place to address shortfalls
in practice, but have not yet had time to affect performance sufficiently and more
needs to be done to improve practice.
There is a range of adoption support services in place and these are valued highly by
adopters. There has been only one adoption breakdown in the last three years.


Almost all care leavers live in safe, suitable accommodation that meets their needs.
Robust challenge and support, and effective collaborative working are ensuring that
increasing numbers of care leavers are in education, employment or training. Not all
pathway plans have clear objectives and timescales, or enough details of the needs
of young people.
proportion of children looked after in Calderdale remains higher than the
national average of 60 per 10,000. This is partly as a result of appropriate
action being taken on a number of cases which had drifted due to previous
poor practice, and where children have now become looked after or been made
subject to proceedings. While appropriate action has now been taken, in some
cases children should have become looked after sooner.
applied through the Gateway Panel. Inspectors saw no cases where children
had entered care inappropriately.
(PLO) process, progress is not always timely, but more recent work shows
improvement. Letters before proceedings are clear about the local authoritys
concerns, but some contain lengthy lists of actions for parents which are not
sufficiently focused on outcomes for children and which do not have clear
timescales. This makes it difficult for parents to know what is expected of them
and by when. Parents have legal representation at meetings to discuss the
concerns. Family group conferences are offered to support families to identify
ways forward, but the impact of family group conferences in reducing the need
to enter proceedings is not fully understood by the local authority.
to just under 32 weeks for completed cases and the figure for cases currently in
proceedings has improved further and is now better than the national average
at just under 27 weeks. Partners feel that there have been improvements in the
local authoritys court work and that relationships between social workers and
childrens guardians are improving. Guardians are included in key meetings
when appropriate, and regular liaison between IROs and guardians was seen
on some cases.
support for children on the edge of care who experience problems of drug and
alcohol use, offending, adverse peer relationships or CSE, to prevent them
having to become looked after. In cases seen, Vulnerable Young Peoples
workers, together with a range of agencies, were engaging well with young
people aged 13 to 17 and providing appropriate levels of support to prevent
admission to care.


with parents on care orders. The placement with parents reports completed by
social workers and signed off by senior managers are of variable quality,
though do identify risks adequately. Managers monitor these cases on a
quarterly basis, but there remain some cases where long-standing plans to
discharge care orders have drifted and only recently been put into action. This
means that some children have remained in care for longer than necessary.
and are monitored closely and appropriate support provided. Overall, a low
proportion (7%) of children currently looked after have previously been looked
after within the last 12 months, indicating that children and their families are
well supported to prevent the need to return to care.
implemented an action plan which included the establishment of a specialist
family finding team and allocation of family finders at the point of a child going
into proceedings, to prioritise the identification of permanent placements. There
has been a rise in the use of Special Guardianship Orders (SGOs) from 10 in
thorough and detailed, and social workers provide good support and transition
planning to children moving to relatives under SGO arrangements.
most, consideration is given to the assessment of family members as potential
carers, and for younger children the possibility of adoption is often considered.
However, discussions do not always adequately address important issues early
enough, such as whether brothers and sisters should remain together or be
placed apart, or the wider range of permanence options, such as Special
Guardianship. This means that comprehensive plans to secure permanence are
not always in place as quickly as they should be.
views of children and young people are regularly sought by social workers, are
presented in recording and can directly influence changes. However, where
children are not in support of the care plan, and will need help to understand
why the plan is not the one they want, it is not always clear that this been
discussed in detail with them.


of 201415. The opportunity for children to have an advocate is routinely
discussed at looked after reviews. An independent visitor service is available for
those children who have little or no contact with anyone independent of
childrens services, and is currently working with 21 children. Young people
spoken to were aware of how to make a complaint. When children make
complaints, these are listened to and resolved, with children being offered
apologies and explanations for the reasoning behind the local authoritys
response. Learning from complaints has been incorporated into training for
social workers; for example, the importance of ensuring timely, clear
information for children about planned changes in their placements.
and, when incidents occur, staff work with young people to promote
understanding and help to prevent recurrence.
system between April and December 2014. There is regular monitoring of and
reporting on offending by children looked after by the Youth Offending Team
(YOT) to ensure that patterns and trends are understood and young people can
be provided with the support they need. The YOT is represented at key decision
making forums such as the Vulnerable Young Peoples Panel, where plans to
support young people are discussed and agreed, and this ensures effective
support to those young people who are looked after. There is a range of
services available to young people who misuse substances, both through
schools and through a specialist drugs service, Branching Out.
social worker in the CSE team, and so receive a specialist service. In cases
seen, the work undertaken had helped to reduce the risk to children over time.
Children going missing from care are considered as part of the same system
that responds to children who go missing from home. Children placed within
the borough and those placed within 20 miles of the authority have return
interviews conducted by the Safe Hands project. For those children living more
than 20 miles from the authority Safe Hands contact a local Childrens Society
project or identify another agency to conduct a return interview.
on time is high, and 10% above the national average. Health assessments are
robust. This means that children and young peoples health needs are
addressed in a timely way, and where concerns are identified referral to the
relevant agency is prompt. A dedicated tier-three mental health service
provides children looked after with timely support, and is currently working with
around 100 children and young people.


progress. Almost all (97%) attend good or better schools. The few children who
are in a school requiring improvement are there because the school has only
recently been judged to require improvement. The local authority considered
the implications of this for individual children and made decisions based on
their needs; their attendance, behaviour and progress are closely monitored.
There are no significant differences in educational outcomes between children
looked after placed within or outside the authority.
readiness. Children do not make good progress in their early years or at Key
Stage 1, and their attainment is not as good as national performance for
children looked after. However, by the time they complete Key Stage 2 their
attainment exceeds that of their peers nationally: in 2013/2014 attainment at
Key Stage 2 in mathematics was 20% higher, in reading 14% higher, and in
writing 9% higher than nationally. This represents a significant improvement on
the previous year, and reflects the impact of the collaborative monitoring and
challenging of pupils by their own school and the virtual school.
similarly good. The proportion of pupils attaining five good GCSEs including
English and maths was 42.1% in 2013-14 significantly above that of similar
pupils nationally at 14%.The gap with other young people in the local authority
is narrowing as the figure for Calderdale is 59%.In this same year the
percentage of children looked after making the expected level of progress
increased by 36% in English, and 10% in mathematics.
the voice of the child well, and use this creatively to set targets for the
following year. In early years and reception, an excellent range of methods,
from observations to play and drawing, are used to capture the views of
younger children. Reviews of progress are thorough and articulate clearly the
progress children and young people are making. Robust and challenging audits
of the PEPs completed each week monitor their rigour and usefulness.
trends and issues. PEP targets align closely to the allocation of Pupil Premium
Funding, and the virtual school monitors the use of this well. Where there is
insufficient evidence of the appropriate use of this funding, it is withheld until
further evidence is obtained.
virtual school works in close partnership with schools, alternative providers and
providers of individual tuition to ensure that all children looked after receive
their full educational entitlement. Currently, only two young people are not
accessing their full entitlement, and they are closely monitored and receiving a
good range of support.


they are directly responsible for who are accessing alternative provision, and
monitors the quality of this provision. However, until very recently, the number
of children and young people accessing alternative provision through schools
has not been recorded by the authority. As a result, the authority does not yet
have a full understanding of the extent and quality of this provision.
and support for these is provided well, for example through the fostering
allowance. Foster carers are clear about their responsibilities in respect of
delegated authority, and welcome the freedom this gives them to make day-today decisions for children.
sufficient focus on the specific needs of children, the intended outcomes and
timescales for actions to be completed. Childrens views are represented in
most, though not all, plans and consideration of permanency is not always
sufficiently robust.
role, however their oversight and critique of care plans and permanence plans
for children is not always sufficiently robust. The dispute resolution process has
been recently revised, and this is beginning to show signs of impact, with an
increased number of issues being raised by IROs and monthly reporting to the
Senior Management Meeting of all issues identified in cases. Looked after
reviews are held regularly and within timescales, and consider the day-to-day
arrangements for children well. IROs are beginning to monitor progress
between looked after reviews, and notes of this monitoring were seen on some
cases. Children attended their reviews in 60% of cases between April and
October 2014, though their views were represented at 87% of meetings.
arrangements are set out in care plans and scrutinised in reviews. However, the
purpose of contact and its intended outcomes should be more carefully
considered to show how it is meeting childrens needs. Contact arrangements
and their purpose should be more clearly recorded in childrens plans.
educational and health needs, are addressed well. It is notable that workers
from the advocacy service will travel to see children placed out of authority,
even when these placements are at some considerable distance. This provides
additional assurance that the voices of these children will be heard effectively.
children currently looked after have had two or more placement moves, below
the most recent national figure of 11%.


good or better, and where a placement falls below standard there is a clear
protocol in place to respond to this and make decisions in childrens best
interests about whether it is safe for them to remain in placement.
meet their needs. This is well managed by the central placement finding
service, which is able to consider all options available to identify that which will
best meet these needs. Few children (4%) are placed more than 20 miles
outside the local authority, and this number has reduced. Overall, 62% of
children looked after are placed within the local authoritys borders compared
with 60% for England as a whole, and 65% of children are in placements
provided directly by the local authority. Placements with external providers are
monitored effectively through the Resources for Children Panel to ensure that
they continue to meet childrens needs. The local authoritys work on placement
choice includes membership of the regional commissioning consortium, which
provides it with a good range of choice in fostering, residential, and post-16
placements.
carers is done well. Foster carers receive regular support and supervision; the
majority say they feel support is available when they need it, and are
enthusiastic about the training on offer to them. The local authority has
targeted its foster carer recruitment at carers who will be best placed to meet
the particular needs of the children who are becoming looked after. Twelve
fostering households were approved in 201314, while nine households ceased
to foster. Reports to the fostering panel are detailed, comprehensive and
thorough in evaluating risk factors, and receive appropriate scrutiny and
challenge from the panel.
individual childs needs and the capacity of the adult to meet them. Children are
well prepared for making transitions to permanent carers, and social workers
provide transition plans and some direct work to help the child make the
adjustment and understand what is happening.
was not carried out to a consistent standard and not all children with a plan for
permanence had life story books. This has resulted in all children who have
been identified as needing this work receiving it, or work is ongoing. This
means that some children have had to wait too long for work to help them to
gain an understanding of their identity and family history, but that plans are
now in place to meet this need. Recording on childrens case files is regular and
comprehensive, though it is sometimes not sufficiently focused on progressing
the care plan.


development. The group is clear and confident in its purpose, and engages
positively with corporate parents, helped by a getting to know you exercise
undertaken by young people, elected members and officers at a meeting of the
corporate parenting panel. It can point to areas in which it has had an impact
on local authority policy and practice, such as the development of an internet
safety policy for children looked after and the inclusion of young people in
interviews for social workers. It is acknowledged that there is more work to be
done to further engage the wider children looked after population; the group
has plans in place to address this, and is being solidly supported to do so.
arising from diversity. However, this was not always the case, with some
examples where needs arising from identity had not been addressed as
carefully and thoroughly as they should have been.

The graded judgment for adoption performance is that it is inadequate

reports that between 2011-2014 children in Calderdale waited on average 742
days from coming into care to being placed for adoption. This is 195 days
above the national target and 114 days longer than the national average.
Quarter 3 data this year shared by the local authority indicates that there has
been a further slight deterioration in current performance, with Calderdale
children now waiting on average 746 days; 199 days over the government
target and 118days longer than children in other parts of England.
waited 358 days, to be matched, 141 days longer than children nationally, and
than in 2013, increasing from 337 to 358 days as a three year average. Quarter
has deteriorated further at 458 days, and now children in Calderdale wait 335
days over the government target and 268 days longer than children wait on
average nationally.
Calderdale waited less than 18 months between entering care and being placed
with adoptive families, compared with 51% in England, using a three year
average. On this measure Quarter 3 data supplied by the local authority shows
that the three-year average has now improved to 36%, and that performance
counted during the year has now reached 44.7%. This is an improvement but is
still well behind the England average and there is more to do to close the gap.


March 2014 to address shortfalls in practice and these have begun to make a
difference, but they have not yet had time to affect performance sufficiently.
the earliest stage. This includes the Gateway Panel at point of entry into care
and the Permanency Panel, which meet six-weekly for all children where
adoption is a possibility. Calderdale performed consistently well over the last
three years in respect of the proportion of children leaving care for adoption,
with 26% in year 201314 which is 4% higher than statistical neighbours.
backgrounds than other local authorities nationally. Seventeen per cent of
children placed for adoption between 2011 and 2014 were of BME background
compared with 8% nationally, which reflects the proportion of the child BME
population locally.
needing adoption at 31 March 2014. At that time there were 45 adopters
approved in Calderdale waiting for a match and 65 children who needed
placements. Currently, Calderdale has 19 adopters who are waiting to be
matched and 55 children with an adoption plan (Quarter 2 data). The
discrepancy between adopters available and children waiting is currently 36,
which is a now greater than 10 months ago. Some of the gap is mitigated by
the fact that, due to its small size, Calderdale places up to half of its children
outside its area and also uses a range of external adoption agencies and the
Adoption Register to find adopters. Despite these efforts, this still leaves more
children needing an adoptive placement than there are adopters available for
them.
complex health needs living in stable foster placements. Some of these children
have been waiting in foster placements for as long as six years with their need
for permanency only being recognised and addressed very recently. They have
now been either placed for adoption or adopted by their foster carers. This
means that whilst living in homes that met their needs well, historically these
children did not have the security of an adoptive placement.
that children wait in Calderdale, but delay is not limited to these children.
inspection shows that out of the 44 children subject to a Placement Order, only
within the government target. Of the 28 children subject to Placement Orders
without a match with an adoptive family, only one could potentially meet the
government timescales for adoption at the time of inspection.


These include insufficient focus on reducing delay in the planning for children in
care, poor practice in family finding such as sequential planning, and practice of
not placing children in Calderdale itself. In addition the local authority were not
proactive in seeking to secure adoptive placements for some children who were
seen as difficult to adopt and who were living in stable foster care
arrangements that were meeting their needs.
recommendations have been implemented to improve performance. Managerial
and social work capacity has been increased through use of the Adoption
Reform grant, a dedicated family finding pod has been created, tighter
permanency planning mechanisms have been implemented, and a tighter focus
on timeliness has been achieved through the adoption tracker. A tighter grip
has been evident in cases over the last three or four months.
Calderdale children have been placed inside the local authority following
individual risk assessments. Family finding has started earlier in the adoption
process, and family finders now start engaging with children coming through
the Gateway Panel. Family finding is now more effective and comprehensive,
making use of the Adoption Register, the regional consortium, Adoption Link,
voluntary adoption agencies, monthly exchange days, and national events to
find potential adopters. However, there is more work to do to build on these
relatively recent improvements and reduce delay. For example, the matching of
children to adopters is not yet done simultaneously at adoption panel when
approving adopters.
designed to reduce the time children wait, are still at a very early stage. Just
one Foster to Adopt placement has been recently approved and there are no
concurrent placements currently available, although this is now being explored
as part of a regional approach.
recruitment has been sustained and Calderdale is on target to exceed its
recruitment from last year.
and the checks and assessment of potential adopters are thorough. However,
last year the timeliness of processing new adopters was poor in the majority of
cases. Only six out of 19 adopters were recruited within six months, and
analysis of current practice indicates that delay in processing approvals
continues to be a feature. The adoption team has streamlined the application
process to improve the consistency of response, but more needs to be done to
reduce drift and delay in the recruitment and assessment of new adopters.


and children, and adopters know what support is available and value the
service highly. This includes a newsletter, a parent and toddler group, single
adopters group, and network events such as Picnic in the Park during the
summer. Therapeutic support is provided by CAMHS or the Calderdale
Therapeutic Service (CTS). A Young Advisors Group engages adopted young
people in social events and uses their input to inform and improve service
delivery from an adopted childs point of view. Disruptions in Calderdale are
low, with just one in the last three years. A review of a recent disruption is
currently underway to learn lessons.
There have been 22 new requests for post-adoption support since April 2014
and 21 of these households are receiving a package of support. Where placing
outside its area, the adoption service links adopters up to the multi-agency
network and local resources available within those areas. Life story work for
adopted children seen by inspectors was of a high standard and helped young
people to understand their history well. Ninety-three per cent of children who
have been adopted have received life story work.
adopted children needs to be more child centred, to reflect the childs voice, be
informed by more robust assessments, and have SMART plans. In one adoption
case seen, the childs needs had not been thoroughly assessed, including the
need to consider referral for a strategy meeting to decide if there was a
safeguarding issue that required further investigation. The local authority took
immediate and appropriate action to address these concerns when raised by an
inspector. More needs to be done to raise the performance and quality of case
work to support adopted children, and to ensure that safeguarding concerns
are properly recognised and dealt with.
medical advice and an educational psychologist. It is now providing effective
challenge and scrutiny of matches and adopter applications. Panel members
receive training annually and performance is appraised annually by the Chair.
Panel minutes provide a clear record of the issues discussed and the reasons
for decisions taken. The Agency Advisor quality assures Prospective Adopter
Reports (PARs) and the Child Permanency Reports (CPRs) before they are
presented, and these are thorough and detailed. The Panel solicits feedback
from adopters and this is used to reflect on the way that the Panel is managed.
Agency Decision Maker decisions are taken within timescales.
monthly updates on the work of the adoption panel. They do not however
receive a separate report from the Adoption Panel chair and the Adoption
Annual Report for 201314 did not contain any feedback from the Adoption
Panel Chair both of which would further enhance their ability to fully scrutinise
the work of the Adoption Panel.


The graded judgment about the experience and progress of care leavers is
that it requires improvement

enough care leavers understand the reason for their pathway plans, risk
assessments for temporary accommodation need to be more robust and the
pledge has only recently been published and not all care leavers spoken to
understand what this means for them.
living. They know where they can go to in an emergency and most are
confident that, should they need it, help will be there. Effective partnership
working between the pathways team and key partners such as Safe Hands
ensures that care leavers receive appropriate information about all aspects of
staying safe, including the risk of CSE.
an up-to-date pathway plan. Plans scrutinised by inspectors contained an
overview of the young persons history, and current factual medical information.
Despite pathway advisers knowing their young people well, and understanding
their vulnerabilities, recording of this in plans is weak. Targets do not clearly
state what needs to happen and by when, or who will support progress towards
agreed targets.
there is evidence that the young person is completing the plan themselves.
However, when talking to care leavers, not all of them could identify the
usefulness of the plans. A few care leavers expressed concern that reviews took
place in venues which they felt were not suitable, such as their foster home,
making it more difficult to discuss sensitive issues.
However, too many care leavers are not clear about their entitlement to receive
their health history. This means that they may not know about important
details when accessing or receiving medical treatment. This is currently a key
focus for the designated nurse for children looked after and care leavers. To
support this, a dedicated nurse is currently located within the leaving care team
for two days a week, working with care leavers to develop a health information
card that will enable them to access their health records.


programmes and activities such as the Goal Group, the Tenancy Programme
and the Sunday lunch group. Care leavers spoken to report that they are
confident to ask their adviser if they need specific help. Most spoken to say that
the leaflets and other information they receive are helpful in supporting them to
develop their independent living skills. Despite this, they identified that more
specific help with managing money wisely would be useful.
are successfully engaging and re-engaging more young people in education,
employment and training. The latest data held by the local authority
demonstrate the positive impact of this rigorous approach, with 18.6% of care
leavers currently not in education, employment or training, compared to the
national figure of 38%.
(10.2 %) are in years one to three of a university course. They receive good
financial support during their time at university, and are particularly
appreciative of the bursary they receive when graduating. Although numbers
are increasing, and the figure is above the national figure for all care leavers
(6%), it is considerably lower than the figure for all Calderdale school leavers.
Although the authority guarantees all care leavers an interview for an
apprenticeship, it does not have a ring-fenced apprenticeship programme to
support care leavers. This therefore restricts the choice of options open to care
leavers when they prepare to leave school.
high, and well above statistical neighbours and the national average. Bed and
breakfast is rarely used for under 18-year-olds and no care leavers were in bed
and breakfast accommodation at the time of the inspection. One care leaver
was in a house of multiple occupancy. On the infrequent occasions when this is
used, it is for very short periods. The local authority acknowledges that risk
assessments of such temporary accommodation need to be more robust, in
particular through working with the police and the local community to identify
areas of risk and vulnerability prior to placing young people. Despite this lack of
documented risk assessment, pathway advisers closely monitor all young
persons placed in short-term accommodation through frequent visits and
telephone calls. Strict boundaries for the young person around aspects such as
overnight visitors further mitigate and manage risk. Long standing and effective
partnership working with landlords and housing also ensure that young people
accessing temporary accommodation are safe. A very new risk assessment
process which is currently being implemented more appropriately addresses all
key risks in a locality, and pays particular attention to CSE, drug misuse and
crime.


ongoing support throughout their transition to independence. Only a few care
leavers are currently taking advantage of the staying put policy, but those who
are report that it is providing them with a helpful bridge towards independence.
The local authority is extending the level of support to young people in
residential care by establishing independent accommodation close to a
residential unit. Young people will be able to live there independently, but
receive support from the residential unit should they need it.
at the age of 16, providing an opportunity for trust and relationships to develop
before the move onto adult services. This considered planning enables the
complexities of young peoples needs to be well understood before they move
to adult services. For those young people with learning difficulties and/or
disabilities who do not meet the thresholds for the disabled childrens team,
planning for transition takes place through annual reviews from Year 9
onwards. Independent travel training has a very high priority in Calderdale and
is central to the aim of enabling all young people to live independently. For
children with disabilities and special educational needs (DSEN), this training
starts in Year 5.
the process, although many care leavers spoken to do not understand what the
pledge meant for them and many were not aware that it existed. Although
most are clear that they can make complaints, care leavers do not know the
processes to follow should the need to complain arise.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
The senior management team has worked determinedly, supported by partners and
political leaders, to improve services for children in Calderdale. Significant progress
has been achieved, but improvement in some key aspects of the quality of practice is
yet to be embedded to ensure that children and young people receive a consistently
good service.
The Director of Childrens Services (DCS), the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and
elected members of the authority understand their roles well and have demonstrated
a clear commitment to working with the Improvement Board to address the serious
shortcomings previously identified through previous inspections of Calderdales
childrens services.
Partnership working, for example the multi-agency early intervention service and
multi-agency screening team (MAST), provide a good base from which to develop
and sustain improvement.
The effectiveness of the local authoritys performance management and the quality
assurance processes has been critical in driving improvement across a range of
services. However, these arrangements are not yet having sufficient impact on the
quality of assessment work or on care planning and performance in the adoption
service.
Management oversight and the quality of supervision are improving but are not
consistently good in ensuring a clear focus on children and young peoples progress.
The Independent Reviewing Officer (IRO) service does not provide sufficient
challenge to ensure that childrens plans progress and timely action is taken to
secure their long-term future and security.
Commissioning is well developed and informed by strategic priorities, resulting in
some effective multi-agency services to address child sexual exploitation, children
missing from home and education, and domestic abuse.
The workforce development strategy has had significant impact in securing the
stability of social workers to support children and young people.
An effective focus on the voice of the child is developing and is influencing planning.
Education outcomes for children looked after in Calderdale are improving and the
virtual school works well in partnership with the schools.


since 2010. The Secretary of State for Education has issued three improvement
notices since then, in 2012, 2013 and 2014. The pace of change to drive
improvements in practice has increased over the last year, since stability in the
senior and middle management of the service has been secured. With the
support of an effective Improvement Board, significant progress has been made
in many, though not all, aspects of the service. The pace of change for children
waiting to be adopted has been too slow. The local authority recognises that
there is more work to be done to ensure consistency in the quality of practice
across most services and to improve services for children for whom the decision
is adoption.
in some cases of effective case work leading to good outcomes for children.
Despite this, the quality of social work practice identified through case tracking
and sampling in this inspection was too variable overall in respect of the quality
of assessments, analysis of information, care planning and the use and quality
of chronologies.
Whilst inspectors saw some evidence of consistent and effective management
oversight, in some cases tracked, the rationale for decision making was not
always clear, recorded or appropriate. In addition, when plans were not
progressing and parents and carers were failing to engage, this was not always
challenged by managers or practitioners.
needed to be more challenging of individual social workers practice. This
resulted in an overview of IRO work by managers, including a revision of the
dispute resolution process, resulting in a quarterly report of challenge, which is
beginning to have an impact in driving improvement. However, in some cases
there remains insufficient focus on planning by IROs, contributing to delays for
long-term planning for children and young people.
Calderdale for some years. Although a range of measures to address the issues
identified have been put in place by senior managers following the adoption
diagnostic in 2014, they have not yet had time to sufficiently improve
performance. This, together with a lack of consistent and robust early
permanency planning, means that too many children continue to wait too long
to be adopted.
senior managers, leaders and elected members to discharge their individual and
collective statutory responsibilities.


children and young people in Calderdale and meets regularly with the DCS,
Lead Member for Childrens Services and Chair of Calderdale Safeguarding
Children Board (CSCB).
Calderdale. A weekly briefing on childrens service performance, and attendance
at the CSCB, complements governance arrangements, ensuring that he has
good oversight of priorities and progress across the improvement agenda.
issues for the local authority, including the report of the CSCB, the ongoing CSE
agenda and education achievements. Action planning and tracking of progress
is evident, with a work plan that is reviewed and updated at each meeting.
links effectively with the JSNA, commissioning strategy and safeguarding plans
to ensure multi-agency partnership commitment to the identification and
prioritisation of local needs.
confidence in the positive trajectory of change within Calderdales Childrens
Services, and acknowledge that this progress is due to the determination of the
DCS and his senior management team working effectively together, developing
a culture to drive improvement.
Areas of current focus for the improvement plan have been informed by the
local authoritys own self-analysis and a range of external challenge and review
including: peer reviews of front door; children looked after and care leaver
services; and adoption diagnostic.
the Improvement Board identifies strong and improving partnership working
since March 2013 as being critical to progress in Calderdale. This, together with
highly effective commitment from senior managers, politicians and partners,
means that significant progress has been made in improving frontline services
for children and young people in Calderdale. The Early Intervention Service is
effective and well-established, and MAST and First Response Teams are
ensuring timely and appropriate responses to referrals. This commitment is
underpinned by some effective strategic planning to tackle the key priorities for
the authority and its partners.


and suitable arrangements are in place for the transfer of responsibility for the
delivery of the single integrated improvement plan to Scrutiny, the Health and
Wellbeing Board and the Local Childrens Safeguarding Board. The Chair of the
Improvement Board is satisfied that the strengthened LSCB is now able to take
responsibility for appropriate aspects of the plan and she has given a
commitment to remain in her role to oversee any transfer of the plan.
identification of children and young people at risk, and targeted action to
address and reduce risk. The number of recorded cases of CSE has increased
from 27 cases in the year 20132014, to 27 cases in the first 2 months of year
result of increased intelligence, from 14 in 2012-13 to 27 in 201314.
to promote preventative work around CSE. A sensitive and considered approach
led by the Neighbourhood Cohesion Manager has brought together members
and key stakeholders within the community to develop a community-based
approach to the prevention of CSE. Whilst some of this work is at an early
stage, a good level of engagement across the community is evident and strong
trusting relationships with the police have begun to develop, which provides a
solid foundation for raising awareness and recognition of warning signs and the
likelihood of increased reporting of CSE.
the associated costs to a range of agencies, and the lack of a strategic
understanding of need in relation to domestic abuse, a JSNA for domestic
abuse has been developed. This has enabled services to have a shared
understanding of needs and gaps within services. The Health and Wellbeing
Board has endorsed a strategic approach to domestic abuse, with input from
key partners such as health, the police, childrens social care and the voluntary
sector. This has resulted in a common commissioning framework utilising
pooled budgets, as well as funding from the Transformation Challenge Award,
to ensure that services are targeted to meet need; for example, funding for a
project to work with perpetrators.
the CYPP framework to ensure that priorities are addressed and children and
young people can benefit from a range of appropriate services. Effective
regional networks such as the White Rose partnership ensure good quality and
value for money in placement choice. External placements have reduced with
the provision of more foster carers. However, recruitment campaigns for
adopters have yet to ensure that the individual and complex needs of some
children can be met in a timely and appropriate way.


arrangements based on needs analyses which involve consultation and
feedback from children, young people and families. Strong collaboration with
commissioning partners in Calderdale, including the clinical commissioning
groups (CCGs) and Public Health, has resulted in CCG funding for an additional
CAMHS post to support vulnerable children with their emotional health and
well-being.
services are robust, with effective arrangements for monitoring poor
performance and inadequate providers to ensure that children and young
people have good placements. All current registered placements for children
and young people are judged good or adequate by Ofsted. One service recently
judged as inadequate has been decommissioned.
supporting key strategies such as CSE, children missing and domestic abuse.
Safe Hands, a commissioned service from the Childrens Society, supports
vulnerable children and young people, and includes those at risk of sexual
exploitation. Safe Hands also provides one-to-one support for children, training
to Calderdale Safeguarding Children Board and return interviews for children
who have been missing. Further achievements include the commissioning of
two voluntary organisations to manage the 21 childrens centres in Calderdale
and the electronic health needs survey (eHNA) questionnaire, which has been
rolled out successfully across schools and is being further developed for sixthform pupils. The eHNA supports strategic priorities in identifying issues such as
self-harm amongst children and young people, to inform effective
commissioning and action plans.
demonstrated through providing support such as a leisure card. The vast
majority of councillors have undertaken training in corporate parenting. Young
people have begun to attend the panel on a regular basis to present the views
of the children in care council. As a result, the panel has had influence in
developing local authority policy on children looked after, for example in respect
of internet safety. The panel receives a range of performance information to
enable it to hold officers to account. Some aspects of corporate parenting are
less developed. For example, the panel does not yet have a method on place to
review progress on publicising the pledges to children looked after and care
leavers.


to improving frontline social work practice. Progress is seen through the results
against some key performance indicators and improving outcomes for children
and young people. For example, re-referral rates are slowly reducing and
referrals for domestic abuse are now appropriately signposted and appropriate
action taken. Section 47 enquiries show a drop in volume from the very high
level of 1,127 in 20132014 to a potential total of 615 (based upon six months
data) for 20142015 which is in line with statistical neighbours and national
averages.
analysis of issues. For example, a themed audit to consider children on child
protection plans for more than two years was undertaken. This resulted in
some improvements in identifying potential cases of drift. These cases are now
flagged in the electronic recording system at 15 months duration, to enable
decisive action to be taken where needed. Consequently, performance figures
for open child protection plans show a reduction in children on plans for two
years or more. Of the 220 open cases in 20132014 the percentage of child
protection plans open for two years or more was 9% (compared to 2% for
statistical neighbours and 3% for England). This has now reduced to a current
level of 6%, but this is still comparatively high.
work practice and performance management and monitoring. CASS has been
upgraded to reflect the need for improvement in practice and to support
workers in effective recording. For example, chronologies can easily be edited
by workers to ensure that only significant information is included and the
recording of the voice of the child can be filtered to provide an overview of this
aspect of work. A further positive feature has been a recent development
whereby children and young people can electronically provide their views and
opinions onto CASS.
and some excellent progress has been made in incorporating their views across
a range of areas. Young people are involved in developing the new children
looked after strategy, and have commented on and assisted with the
development of the CSCB website and the content and design of the Yoyo
(young peoples) website. Importantly, young people commented on, and their
voice was instrumental in changing, terminology from looked after children to
children looked after. Further evidence of consultation with children is included
in the commissioning of services, for example CAMHS, and more recently two
young people have been co-opted to the local authority scrutiny panel.


significant impact in ensuring stable permanent social work teams and a
reduction in the use of agency staff. In 20142015 the vacancy rate was 8.7%,
compared with the England rate for 20122013 of 14%. The use of agency
workers in 20132014 was 7.4%, while the England rate for 20122013 was
vacancy rate of four posts in total. As a result of the commitment to workforce
development and stability, data for December 2014 showed that social workers
have manageable caseloads averaging around 17 children. Alongside the
significant improvements in the stability of the workforce is the cross-party
commitment to the 'caseload calculator', the system whereby increasing
demand can be monitored and funding provided for additional workers to
ensure that caseloads remain manageable.
includes career development training in leadership for managers and senior
managers and a rolling programme of training to support frontline practice and
development. All training is evaluated and feedback used to develop
appropriate courses to support staff in their work. Current training on systemic
practice is being rolled out across the local authority to support improved
practice in how teams respond to and work with children and families.
supervision and effective management oversight. Social workers and their
managers are enthusiastic about the 4x4x4 model of supervision which the local
authority has adopted, and about the training that is being delivered to support
it.
consideration of work, personal impact and good practice issues. However,
sometimes recording does not include evidence of reflection, and supervision of
personal advisors within the care leaving service is not as consistent or
rigorous. In addition to face-to-face supervision, managers undertake
observations of practice, and undertake staff appraisals.
reported having access to workshops. Senior managers use information from
the evaluation of complaints and serious case reviews to prioritise and improve
practice such as quality of assessments and management oversight.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.

Summary of findings
The LSCB requires improvement because:
Effectiveness of scrutiny and challenge
 The LSCB is meeting its statutory responsibilities, but there is more to do to
secure the changes made and embed the progress of the last 12 months so that
newly implemented systems, processes and frameworks are fully effective.
 The performance management framework and scorecard are still evolving. The
multi-agency data set is incomplete and this limits the Boards ability to provide
effective scrutiny in all areas.
 The reach of Section 11 audits needs to be extended, both in terms of the issues
and areas covered by the self-assessment questionnaire and the number of
organisations that complete it. More needs to be done to ensure that the results
are subjected to rigorous challenge and are moderated effectively.
 Although comprehensive, the CSE action plan needs to be more outcome-focused
and SMART. Targets need to be clearly identified against all actions in order to
measure progress in all areas.

Private fostering
 More needs to be done to raise awareness amongst partners of private fostering
arrangements and increase the number of notifications. The Board needs to
ensure that the local authoritys response to private fostering arrangements is
meeting statutory requirements.

Multi-agency training
 The LSCB does not have a comprehensive multi-agency childrens workforce
strategy which sets out clear standards and expectations, and this means that the
LSCB is not yet in a position to ensure that all those involved in working with
children and families are suitably trained and competent or that training
resources are being targeted effectively.
 The impact and effectiveness of multi-agency training is not evaluated to
evidence impact.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Areas for improvement

Managing the response to CSE
measures impact in all areas of work.

Effectiveness of scrutiny and challenge
comprehensive multi-agency data set that will provide information about all
aspects of service delivery and enhance the ability of the Board to routinely
evaluate and monitor frontline practice across the agencies.
organisations involved in safeguarding children and young people, that audits
include questions about CSE and learning from serious case reviews, and that
results from audit are subject to rigorous challenge.

Private fostering
fostering and ensure that the local authority reviews and strengthens the
response to private fostering arrangements to ensure that it is meeting its
statutory responsibilities.

Multi-agency training
evaluate the impact and effectiveness of the multi-agency training that is being
delivered to ensure that those working with children and families are suitably
trained and that training resources are being targeted effectively.

Openness and transparency
more accessible and enable stakeholders, including children, young people,
parents and carers, to monitor the LSCBs activities and hold it to account, and
that they are easily accessible on the LSCB website.


Inspection judgement about the LSCB
Manager brought to an end a period of considerable turbulence, during which
time the LSCB lacked focus and failed to provide robust scrutiny and critical
challenge. Since then, considerable progress has been made in making sure
that the LSCB is fit for purpose. While it now meets its statutory responsibilities,
there is still further to go in ensuring that new systems, processes and
frameworks are fully embedded and enable the Board to monitor and evaluate
multi-agency frontline practice more effectivity.
established between the LSCB, the Children and Young Peoples Partnership
Executive, the Health and Wellbeing Board and the Improvement Board.
Partner agencies are well represented on the LCSB and membership is at an
appropriately senior level to ensure that action agreed at the Board can be
taken forward. This joined up approach means that the Board is starting to
exercise greater influence; for example, partners are now giving the
safeguarding agenda a higher profile within their own governance
arrangements, priorities are suitably aligned to the improvement plans and the
Board has begun to take responsibility for some aspects of the plan.
drive improvement in safeguarding practice and demonstrate impact and
effectiveness. Priorities have been refined, are clear and explicit and are
targeted appropriately. The work of the seven sub-groups is informed by a
SMART business plan which is aligned to the Improvement Plan and the
Children and Young Peoples Plan. The sub-groups activities are well
coordinated by an energetic and effective Business Group which reports directly
to the Board.
means that Board members, including lay members and representatives from
the voluntary and community sector, feel confident and able to question and
comment. There is increasing evidence of effective challenge. For example, the
LSCB queried the level of data and analysis in the Independent Reviewing
Officers (IRO) annual report and has asked for more information about the role
of the IROs in chairing child protection conferences. It has also asked the Local
Authority Designated Officer (LADO) to provide a breakdown of allegations by
sector and profession in order to be able to identify any trends or patterns.


Board, Business Group and sub-group meetings are recorded. They are not
easily accessible to anyone who was not present at the meeting and does not
have access to background papers. Similarly, while the LSCB website has been
revamped, minutes of Board and sub-group meetings are not being routinely
uploaded onto it. This lack of transparency means that the LSCB is not fully
accountable, and limits the ability of stakeholders, including children, young
people, parents and carers and to monitor its activities and hold it to account.
better able to scrutinise frontline practice in order to safeguard and promote
the welfare of children and young people. The new performance management
framework provides data and detailed commentary on a number of key
indicators around early help, child protection, looked after children and
adoption, and leadership and governance. However, the data set is incomplete
and this limits the Boards ability to provide scrutiny in all areas.
and procedures, underpinned by a clear strategy and coherent action plan, are
evidence of a collective determination to tackle child sexual exploitation.
Awareness has been raised; in the last academic year 2,340 secondary school
pupils attended awareness raising sessions, and more recently training
delivered to hoteliers has generated an increase in the volume of intelligence
received and acted upon.
response to missing, CSE and trafficking, receives data on children missing from
home care and education and is able to evidence both reach and impact leading
to improved outcomes for children, young people and families. For example, a
dedicated police officer linked to childrens homes ensures that all children
looked after, including those placed in Calderdale by other local authorities,
have trigger plans. This has led to the local authority identifying a reduction in
the number of missing episodes.
action plan is neither outcome-focused nor sufficiently SMART; milestones are
conflated with tasks which are not always specific, and lead to progress
statements that are generally descriptive. This makes it difficult to measure
progress.


oversight of, and has made a significant contribution to, the introduction of the
Early Intervention Single Assessment and the review and revision of the
Continuum of Need document and the Signatures of Risk guidance. Early help
is an area of real strength in Calderdale. The fact that 70% of cases return to
universal services following early intervention means that more families are
having their needs met without the need for formal social work intervention. A
judicious approach to the choice and timing of multi-agency audits around, for
example, children looked after and care leavers, neglect, pre-birth assessments
and the effectiveness of the joint adult/child protocol means that the Boards
awareness and understanding of frontline practice is increasing, and contributes
to the improvement in services to children and young people.
organisations arrangements for safeguarding and protecting children and
young people, the process is not yet sufficiently robust. The audits rely on selfassessment, and more needs to be done to ensure that the results are
subjected to rigorous challenge and are moderated effectively. Their reach also
needs to be extended, both in terms of the issues and areas covered and the
number of organisations that complete it. Currently the Section 11 audit does
not include questions about CSE or learning from Serious Case Reviews (SCRs),
and in 20142015 only 60% of schools and some, but not all, commissioned
services completed an audit. The Boards three-year strategy incorporates plans
to address these issues and a compact with the voluntary and community
sector is close to being finalised.
Safeguarding procedures have been given greater prominence on the LSCB
website and a poster distributed to all agencies. Where the audit identified a
lack of knowledge or understanding of safe recruitment and/or the role of the
Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO), specific training is being provided to
address the shortfall. A task and finish group has also been charged with
reviewing the multi-agency supervision framework.
performs better than the national average in terms of data completion, the
percentage of child deaths that are subject to a review and the throughput of
cases within the year. 19 children who died in Calderdale between 1 April 2013
and 31 March 2014 were notified to the panel, 2 of whom were not
immediately reviewed as the decision had been taken to commission a Serious
Case Review.


attention over the last 12 months. Three separate SCRs are about to be
published, one of which dates back to 2009 but which, for legal reasons, it has
not been possible to publish before now. The Serious Case Review Framework
has been comprehensively re-written and the Learning and Improvement
Framework revised. There is evidence of increased rigour around the
commissioning, scrutiny and publication of SCRs. Action plans for the three
SCRs which are about to be published are SMART, and the agencies responsible
for implementing them will be required to attend formal challenge events and
provide evidence to demonstrate that lessons have been learnt and
recommendations implemented.
before taking action. One SCR led to the development of the neglect strategy
and multi-agency toolkit, the replacement of the Common Assessment
Framework (CAF) with the Early Intervention Single Assessment (EISA), the
adoption of a joint adult and child protection protocol and the establishment of
the Maze project for male victims of domestic violence. In response to another
SCR, health are now routinely collecting and sharing information on young
people who attend Accident and Emergency as a result of self-harm, and the
dispute resolution process for children looked after and child protection has
been revised. Learning from SCRs is disseminated in a number of different
ways, including the use of multi-agency reflective practice sessions, learning
lessons leaflets and the LSCBs website.
improve outcomes for children and young people by focusing on key aspects of
the childs journey. For example, a multi-agency audit on referrals from primary
schools to the MAST resulted in action to improve communication and the
quality of information provided at the first point of contact. Partner agencies
are now able to get professional advice from the MAST without needing to
make a formal referral. A new schedule of multi-agency audits, commissioned
in response to identified risks, has been developed to ensure that in future
audit resources are targeted effectively and maximise shared learning.
Boards ensures access to high quality policies and procedures. They are
constantly being reviewed and updated in response to changing legal and other
requirements and lessons learnt from practice in Calderdale and elsewhere. For
example, in response to the learning from the SCR on Child J, the procedure on
missing children has been amended to ensure that information about children
looked after who are absent is also shared with other professionals.


LCSB organised an advertising campaign to raise public and professional
awareness of private fostering. While it was successful in prompting one
notification, more needs to be done to increase reporting and strengthen the
local authoritys response to private fostering arrangements to ensure that it is
meeting its statutory responsibilities so that children are safeguarded
effectively.
Boards priorities, are being delivered. However, the Board is well aware that it
needs to do more to evaluate the impact and effectiveness of the training
provided. The absence of a comprehensive multi-agency childrens workforce
strategy with clear standards and expectations means that the LSCB is not yet
in a position to ensure that all of those involved in working with children and
families are suitably trained and competent, nor that training resources are
being targeted appropriately.
and self-critical. It recognises the previous lack of focus, robust scrutiny and
critical challenge and the need to work differently in order to improve outcomes
for children and young people and ensure that they are effectively protected
and safeguarded at every stage of their journey.
website more accessible. They have also been involved in designing a series of
Shocking Facts posters on topics identified through discussion with other
young people and the results of the eNHA survey. The first poster produced is
on children missing from home or care.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Wendy Ghaffar
Deputy lead inspector: Fiona Millns
Team inspectors: Mike Ferguson, Paula Thomson-Jones, Nigel Parkes, Deane
Jennings and Elaine Clinton
Quality assurance manager: Chris Williams


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


