Devon County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 24 February  18 March 2015
Report published: 12 May 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services require
improvement
The authority is not yet delivering good protection and help and care for children,
young people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.2
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires
Improvement

permanence

Requires
Improvement


Good


Inadequate


Requires
Improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Information about this local authority area

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Devon require improvement because:
Quality of work with children and young people
 The local authority cannot currently assure itself that 301 of its care leavers are
receiving appropriate support to prepare for adulthood.
 Not all children and their families receive a coordinated offer of early help when
concerns are first identified.
 Some children experience delays in having their needs and risks appropriately
identified and addressed. This is most apparent for children living within
situations of chronic neglect.
 The quality of assessments and plans for children remains too variable, with some
still being very poor.

Management of service quality and provision
 Frontline practice, including assessment, planning, reviewing and delivery of
support to children and families, is not sufficiently quality assured to ensure a
consistent and appropriate level of service.
 Performance monitoring has improved significantly. However, further work is
required to ensure that it is informed by quality measures and comparator
information.

Leadership, Governance and Partnerships
 Some data collected by the local authority are not yet reliable enough, particularly
data about care leavers. Further work is required to make sure that data are
accurately reporting activity and are sufficiently reliable to inform planning.
 Individually, children who go missing and are at risk of child sexual exploitation
receive services to identify and reduce risk. However, there is limited strategic
overview of the effectiveness of these services, and the themes and intelligence
are not being shared for all groups of children to ensure that prevention and
disruption measures are fully effective.
 The governance and planning arrangements between the local authority, the
Health and Wellbeing Board, Children and Families Alliance and Local
Safeguarding Children Board are not clear.
 Professionals from partner agencies are not fully engaged within early help and
do not always attend relevant safeguarding meetings for children.
 Effective joint commissioning arrangements are not yet in place.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Quality of work with children and young people

Review all those care leavers about whom the local authority does not have upto-date information and ensure that they are safe.


Ensure that care leavers receive high quality services to meet their assessed
needs, with a specific focus on pathway planning and review processes, risk
assessments for all young people living in unsuitable accommodation such as
bed and breakfast (B&B) and access to health histories.


Ensure that childrens past experiences are fully considered and that
professionals adequately consider factors of chronic neglect when assessing
referrals to the MASH, so that all children who require a statutory social work
service receive one.


Improve the quality, consistency and timeliness of work with children for whom
there are concerns about chronic neglect, especially when these are linked to
any of the toxic trio of domestic abuse, drug and alcohol abuse and parental
mental ill-health.

Management of service quality and provision

Improve the quality of care leaver data and analysis so that the local authority
is able to meet its corporate parenting responsibility to this group of vulnerable
young people.

Leadership, governance and partnerships

Clarify governance arrangements between the key childrens strategic groups to
improve influence and impact in setting and achieving priority improvements.
The Health and Wellbeing Board (H&WB), Devon Safeguarding Children Board
(DCSB), the Children and Family Alliance (C&FA) and the Corporate Parenting
Board (CPB) to coordinate, share and align plans and objectives.


Establish ambitious plans, with clear timescales, for full implementation of an
effective early help offer.


Enhance work with children at risk of child sexual exploitation and those who
have been missing from home, care or education, by strengthening strategic
arrangements with partner agencies to identify and help the most vulnerable
children and to drive prevention and disruption work at a county level.


Establish a stable, permanent middle and senior officers group in childrens
services.


Areas for improvement

Quality of work with children and young people
and those in receipt of early help, benefit from high quality assessments and
plans that identify needs and risks, and that these inform coordinated support
and intervention.
are receiving services.
(MARAC) process by ensuring that all designated local authority attendees have
access to information on the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) system.
timescales.
those in secondary schools.

Management of service quality and provision
capacity to manage and monitor in a timely manner investigation of allegations
against professionals who work with children.
children and young people when they are moving over to adult services.
identified as needing a child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS).
foster care to their adoptive placement to ensure that it is a positive experience
for them.
vulnerable children, including timely completion of assessments and family
group conferences (FGC).
(EET), including higher and further education.
outcomes.


Leadership, governance and partnership
agreed plans and engage all relevant statutory, voluntary and community sector
agencies. Where possible these should be joint, shared or aligned across the
statutory agencies.
should include qualitative measures and comparator information.
service direction and development at all levels.

The local authoritys strengths
workforce, thereby reducing the previous reliance on agency staff.
discussions within their MASH. Strategy discussions, following relevant
consents, now fully engage key partners in important decision making and
planning prior to child protection enquiries.
exploitation via its now expanding REACH team and has recently established
weekly Missing Monday meetings which effectively review and monitor the
progress of children missing education (CME).
promotes their welfare. The service has built constructive links with local
language schools and guardianship agencies. Assessments and intervention
with children fully meet their needs, including those arising from religion and
trans-national placements.
significantly improved as a result of robust quality assurance by education
managers within the local authority. This is yet to have a positive impact on
educational outcomes for children in secondary schools.
(app) to engage more directly with children and young people.
The team successfully achieves placements for children with complex needs,
provides comprehensive training both for adopters and social workers and also
delivers highly valued adoption support.


promotion and support for special guardianship orders, which means that
children are able to move quickly into their permanent family home.

Progress since the last inspection
protection of children was in April 2013. The local authority was judged to be
inadequate. The last Ofsted inspection of Devon County Councils services for
looked after children was in August 2009. The local authority was judged to be
good. The quality of services for children looked after has deteriorated since
this inspection.
to move the local authority to a position where its safeguarding services now
require improvement. However, the pace of change was initially slow and this
now needs to be increased significantly, particularly through active engagement
of partners to ensure that early help and safeguarding services to children and
their families continue to develop and become fully effective.
recommendations from the previous inspection, including the improvement of
risk assessment, management oversight and the extent to which the individual
experiences of children are identified and considered. However, these
improvements are recent and not yet found in all work with children and young
people.
time of the last inspection has been insufficient. Although plans to improve the
co-ordination, quality and impact of early help services are now being put in
place, these are too recent to have yet had an impact.
serious staffing challenges from the past. A far more stable base of permanent
staff is being secured, thereby reducing the previous over-reliance on agency
and interim staff and managers. This has meant that compliance and
managerial oversight has increased, which is leading to some emerging
improvements in the quality of work with children and families.
increased their contact with frontline staff to ensure that they understand
issues affecting them. This has led to a more responsive approach from
managers to tackling problems as they arise.


Improvement Board (CIB), have rightly focused their priority work on improving
safeguarding services for children. This means that less attention has been
given to developing services for children looked after. However, recent
developments such as the launch of the refreshed Childrens Access to
Resources Panel (CARP) are beginning to bring greater focus to planning for
children becoming looked after.


Summary for children and young people
 Inspectors found that some services for children have improved since the last
inspection. For example, children in need of protection now receive services that
reduce risks more quickly and efficiently.
 The adoption service is good; it is successful in placing children with complex
needs and provides very good post adoption support for children and families.
 Managers have led improvements to services, but these have not been quick
enough. The Director is very aware of this and plans to use the outcome of this
inspection to help drive improvement faster.
 The quality of work with children and families has improved, particularly over the
last six months. However, significant areas remain where practice is not yet good
enough.
 There is a range of early help support for families, with professionals from
schools, health and family services involved. However, not all agencies are
making sure children and their families receive the right help at the right time.
 The quality of assessments and plans for vulnerable children is too variable, with
some plans still being very poor and not fully addressing childrens needs.
 Arrangements to support children missing education are good, but for children
who go missing from home and care, they could be better.
 Children who are looked after achieve quite well at primary school, but too many
older children do not do well enough at their secondary schools. The quality of
personal education plans is improving.
 Children spoken to by inspectors knew their social workers and felt that they
were listened to. However, a number had experienced frequent changes in social
worker. Some children have to move homes too often, which means they may
not feel settled.
 Support for care leavers is inadequate. There was some effective work seen
which supported individual care leavers well. However, the local authority has lost
touch with too many care leavers, and too few are in suitable accommodation or
in education, employment or training.
 Care leavers are not clear about what they should be able to expect from the
local authority in terms of support and financial assistance.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area
 Approximately 141,554 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Devon. This is 19% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 13% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 12% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 10% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 4% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Mixed and Asian or Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 3% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 3% (the national average is 14%).
 Additional contextual statement: The local authoritys coastal areas have a
transient population due to seasonal work and this is echoed in the agricultural
areas of the county. There are a significant number of children from other
authorities who are looked after in Devon.
Child protection in this area
 At 16 March 2015, 4,578 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 16 March 2015, 476 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 600 at 31 March 2014.
 At 16 March 2015, 56 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from 48 at 31 March 2014.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Children looked after in this area
 At 16 March 2015, 684 children are being looked after by the LA (a rate of 48.3
per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 685 (48 per 10,000 children) at 31
March 2014. Of this number:
authority area
authority area
area
 In the last 12 months, there have been:
subsequently returned to be looked after
on to independent living
 the local authority did not record data regarding children and young
people who ceased to be looked after and are now living in houses of
multiple occupation during the year 201415.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one (secure) childrens home. This was judged to be
adequate in the most recent Ofsted full inspection on 23 September 2014. An
interim inspection was held on 24 February 2015 and the judgement was that the
home has sustained effectiveness.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services, who is also the Director of Adults Social
Services, has been in post since 27 May 2011.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since August 2013.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
The quality of work with children and families, and the structures and procedures
through which it is delivered, have improved since the last inspection. Consequently,
outcomes for children and young people have also improved. This improvement is
particularly evident over the last six months. Significant areas remain where practice
is not yet good and strong services are not in place. However, where failings have
been identified, these are not widespread or serious and children have not been left
at risk of harm.
The local authority is not yet working effectively with partners to improve the coordination and impact of early help services. This was a recommendation arising
from the last inspection, and insufficient progress has been made. Partner agencies
do not fully understand or apply thresholds for making referrals for a statutory social
work service. A small number of threshold decisions result in no further action or a
referral to early help services when the level of childrens or young peoples needs
requires a statutory response.
Information sharing between the local authority and partner agencies in the MASH is
timely and thorough. Child protection strategy discussions happen quickly when a
child who has been referred is thought to be at immediate risk of significant harm.
Consistent management oversight and monitoring of cases within the MASH ensure
that decisions are followed through and children are transferred to other teams or
agencies to receive assessment and services.
The quality of assessments and plans is not consistently good enough, and work with
children who have suffered from neglect is not effectively addressing their needs.
Social workers do not always consider the impact of childrens past history,
particularly when domestic abuse, drug and alcohol abuse or parental mental illhealth have been a concern. Partner agencies are not attending important meetings
for children, and so cannot be fully involved in information sharing and planning for
children to ensure that the best decisions are made. Services for children with
emotional difficulties or emerging mental health problems are limited, difficult to
access and not joined up with other services for children.
Individual work with children and young people who are at risk of child sexual
exploitation or have been missing from home or education is often effective in
reducing risk. The local authority and its partners have been less good at sharing
information and planning strategically to identify the most vulnerable children and
young people and to improve prevention and disruption work at a county level.


early help services sufficiently for children and families in Devon since the
recommendation arising from Ofsteds last inspection in April 2013. Although
the current early help offer has been in place since April 2014, agencies are not
as involved as they need to be to improve outcomes for children with additional
needs. Schools take on the lead professional role in 59% of Devon Assessment
Framework (DAF) interventions and childrens centres in a further 15%. Other
agencies are less involved, with health agencies being particularly low at 4%
(as reported by the local authoritys recording system at the time of the
inspection). The quality of DAFs is variable, with most seen by inspectors being
of poor quality with limited information included. This does not support
effective planning with families to improve outcomes for children and young
people.
the lack of engagement of some partner agencies means that when risk for
children has been reduced and their needs could best be met through the
provision of early help services, this cannot always be achieved in a timely or
well-co-ordinated manner due to the difficulty in identifying a lead professional
for the DAF and team around the child (TAC) process.
impact. This includes bringing together the youth service, youth offending
service, young persons substance misuse service and targeted family support
more firmly within early help. Additionally, eight early help co-ordinators, four
early help advisors and a new county-level senior manager have recently been
appointed. These are positive steps, but are too recent to have had an impact
on practice.
Families programme, has operated in isolation rather than as an integrated part
of the early help offer and had turned around 53% of the 1,370 identified
families by the end of December 2014. This is below the national average of
from April 2015 onwards.
applied consistently by referring agencies. This means that some children are
referred when their needs may be met by early help services, while other
children may miss out on the service needed to adequately address their needs.
passed by the contact centre to the MASH, which brings together staff from the
local authority with professionals from a broad range of relevant agencies.
Parental consent to share information is routinely sought when contacts are
received. The MASH also offers helpful consultation and advice to members of
the public and professionals who are considering making a referral.


childrens cases are progressed as referrals to childrens social care, they
provide timely direction about assessments or services required. Information
sharing between agencies within the MASH is thorough, particularly within child
protection strategy discussions, which routinely involve health and education in
addition to the statutory presence of police and local authority staff. This
provides a solid foundation for assessing risk and making decisions, and is a
strength.
protection investigations are almost always undertaken in a timely and focused
manner, both within and outside office hours. The local authority has made
significant improvements in the timeliness with which they hold initial child
protection case conferences, 92% of which were held within the statutory
timescale of 15 days at December 2014; this is better than similar local
authorities.
rationale for decisions is not always clear when there is not an immediate
presenting risk of significant harm for a child. In a minority of cases, contacts
about children result in no further action or a referral to early help services
when the information received should have led to a statutory social work
service. This means that children do not always receive assessments and
services that are proportionate to their needs or robust enough to improve their
outcomes. For some children, repeated contacts or referrals take place before
services are provided and improvements achieved. Decision making in these
cases frequently lacks an adequate consideration of childrens histories or
recognition of the cumulative impact of neglect.
manager and, for some children, this has led to poor decision making and
delay. This is particularly evident in situations of chronic neglect, where there is
a need to consider the cumulative impact on children of neglect and the toxic
trio of domestic abuse, drug and alcohol misuse and parental mental ill-health.
The local authoritys own case auditing highlights the need to strengthen its
work with children in need, for many of whom such issues are the main
concern. This picture has recently improved with the appointment of more
permanent social workers and managers, less staff turnover and a reduced
reliance on temporary agency staff. There has also been a general
improvement in decision making and practice over the last four to six months,
although further improvement and consistency are required.
of management oversight and supervision has also improved over the same
timeframe. Additionally, social workers report that the CARP acts not only as a
route to access resources but also as a forum for gaining high quality
consultation and advice on complex cases.


children subject to protection plans in Devon, but the local authority and its
partner agencies have not been sufficiently joined up in this area of work.
Although the police, who chair Devons MARAC, report significantly improved
attendance and engagement by the local authority over the last six to 12
months, gaps remain in the quality of information sharing and specialist advice
available to social workers. Only one of the local authoritys four areas has a
specialist domestic abuse social worker to support best practice or a MARAC
representative with access to the MASH electronic record system. This limits the
quality of work and depth of relevant information that local authority attendees
are able to bring to the MARAC. The need for better attendance and
engagement by all agencies was highlighted in the CAADA (Coordinated Action
Against Domestic Abuse) review of the MARAC in Devon carried out in
September 2014.
consistently attended by senior local authority managers. The police chair
reports that the local authoritys commitment to, and engagement with, the
MAPPA process has significantly strengthened over the last six to 12 months.
Evidence that proactive communication between agencies is leading to earlier
identification of risk was seen by inspectors.
consistently good enough. Many lack clarity, consideration of key issues, an
adequate analysis of the impact of concerns on childrens welfare and what
needs to change to improve things. The use of the RISK 2 assessment tool by
social workers is embedded in practice and is helping to sharpen the focus on
risk and protective factors. However, social workers currently lack clarity about
whether the RISK 2 assessment or the social workers report is the main
document for child protection conferences. Social workers reports are often
overly brief and lacking in analysis, although risk and protective factors are
listed. This does not best support informed and clear decision making and
planning for children and young people.
single assessments, they are not yet completing assessments within a timescale
to meet the childs needs and are also not meeting their own target of 45 days.
The most up to date figure, from the local authoritys own data, of 63% for
January 2015 is below the 201314 average figures for similar councils of 82%.
This means that some children are experiencing delay in having their needs
assessed and met.
Devon was slightly higher than the figure for similar local authorities (42
against 41 per 10,000). Neglect is the key concern for 67% of children and
young people subject to child protection plans at January 2015. This is an
increase from 2014 and reflects the local authoritys increasing focus in recent
months on robustly addressing issues of neglect for children.


increasingly true for child in need meetings. However, plans are not always
clear about what needs to change, by when and who is responsible. They are
not used routinely to drive or measure progress. The local authority has created
an improved planning template; however, it is not yet being used consistently.
Although meetings are generally well run, their effectiveness is hampered by
the variable quality of inter-agency working. Some meetings are not attended
by all key professionals, so the information needed to plan and measure
progress is not always fully available. In December 2014, 42% of relevant
health professionals, including GPs, CAMHS and adult mental health
practitioners, did not attend child protection conferences. A particular difficulty
is also reported regarding attendance by adult mental health and drug and
alcohol professionals.
process. In January 2015, 47 (3%) of MASH contacts were from midwives and
unborn children. Assessments of risks and needs for these children are
consistently carried out. However, the local authoritys risk assessment tool for
pre-birth assessments does not focus sufficiently on the specific risks and
considerations for these children and so does not support clear analysis and
planning for them.
some delay and a lack of clarity when considering risk. However, children are
not left at risk of significant harm or without the provision of appropriate
services. Transition arrangements between childrens and adults services are
not clear, and the local authority is working with partners to develop agreed
pathways to streamline processes for disabled young people and their families.
this is appropriate. The voice of the child is increasingly evident in case
recording, which is kept up to date in most cases. Purposeful recording of visits
to children is supported by a template introduced within the last six months
that has specific sections to record the purpose of the visit, the child or young
persons wishes and feelings and an analysis of the visit. A number of examples
of good direct work were seen during the inspection, particularly in the work of
family practitioners who work with families alongside social workers, and in that
of the specialist REACH team.


at risk of child sexual exploitation and was providing such support to 70 young
people at the time of the inspection. The teams work is well integrated into
wider planning and work with children and young people. Young people say
that they value the service, and inspectors saw evidence that risk for young
people is reduced as a result of interventions. Although not always completed
with sufficient clarity by social workers, the child sexual exploitation indicator
tool, which is repeated at regular intervals during interventions, acts as a
helpful measure of risk and of progress made in reducing it. The resource for
the REACH team is being increased, as they are currently working to capacity
and have a waiting list of 15 young people.
people who do not meet the threshold for statutory social work intervention
and have been missing from home. The teams current staffing level means
that they are struggling to meet their standard of providing return home
interviews within 72 hours of the end of a missing episode. Consequently, of
the 45 return home interviews completed in January 2015, only 50% were
achieved within 72 hours.
social work service who have been missing from home or care are carried out
by their allocated social worker. In most cases, although it is clear from records
that return home interviews are being conducted, there are some gaps that
may limit their impact, such as missing documents, poor analysis or delay in
conducting interviews. Learning from return interviews and child sexual
exploitation risk assessments for individual children is being used to inform
planning, and evidence was seen of the risk of sexual exploitation being
reduced for children and young people. In a number of cases, complex strategy
discussions with the police have been used effectively to consider groups of
young people. This has led to the conviction of offenders and proactive
measures to disrupt perpetrator activity, such as sex offender prevention orders
(SOPOs) and the issuing of child abduction notices.
childrens social care, attendance and education staff, and the virtual
headteacher, review and monitor the progress of vulnerable children. They are
an effective forum for ensuring that children missing education (CME) are
swiftly identified, tracked and returned to education in Devon or elsewhere.
This meeting considers electively home educated children and those attending
part-time for whom a safeguarding concern has been identified. The meeting
also monitors those in alternative provision to ensure they are in receipt of their


provider to monitor the use of alternative provision in maintained schools. This
is an agenda item for the regular meetings between school improvement
professionals and headteachers. Any concerns are reviewed by the Head of
Education and Learning. Education, health and care plans are reviewed as part
of the regular annual monitoring of pupils with a statement of special needs.
The commissioned provider for school improvement is responsible for working
with maintained schools in evaluating the outcomes for children with special
education needs and disability (SEND) pupils through its regular monitoring
cycle.
sexual exploitation and CME data are not yet brought together to create a
holistic picture to inform strategic planning, prevention and disruption activity
across Devon. Multi-agency child sexual exploitation (MACSE) meetings are held
monthly in venues across Devon to consider risk to children and young people
who do not receive a social work service; these and complex strategy
discussions provide information sharing and planning forums to reduce risk for
individual children and some linked groups of children and young people. The
local authority and partners do not yet have a mechanism for sharing themes
across the local authority, nor a single list cross-referencing relevant data that
identifies Devons most vulnerable children and young people. During the
inspection, the local authority reacted swiftly to concerns raised by inspectors
about the lack of oversight of themes for children at risk of sexual exploitation
who are subject to a child protection plan, and established a Vulnerable
Childrens Panel. The local authority and partners are aware of the need to
further develop their approach to child sexual exploitation and missing.
service that helps to promote the welfare of privately fostered children and
young people. The service has been proactive in building links with language
schools and guardianship agencies, children from which currently account for
needs arising from their ethnicity, culture and religion was a recommendation
from the last inspection and although still not routinely considered, some
examples of good practice were seen by inspectors. The private fostering team
has shown considered and creative practice in ensuring that privately fostered
young people are supported in their religious beliefs and, when placed transnationally, in maintaining the language and culture of their native country. This
has helped young people to settle in their private foster homes and enhanced
their welfare.


of allegations against professionals who work with children. However, the
timeliness with which this work is carried out is poor in most cases. The local
authority conducted a review in late 2014, and is considering options to
increase the capacity within the LADO service to improve this. Although risk is
reduced by prioritising cases based on risk assessment of their gravity and
urgency, this remains a significant concern.
decision making and improved outcomes were seen in most cases looked at by
inspectors. However, the local authority does not have the ability to track
performance in this area as they do not consistently share information with
partners and most data are held by housing services. This means the local
authority does not have a clear picture of how well it is improving outcomes for
this group of young people.
engagement with broader multi-agency work with children and limited service
provision. Plans currently out to tender for a new tier 2 emotional wellbeing
service for schools are positive, but not yet in place. Tier 4 in-patient provision
is also limited. This has been highlighted by Devons government appointed
Children Improvement Board.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Decisions for children to become looked after have not always been timely. This
means that a small number of children have been left in situations where their needs
were not being met. The local authority has been working proactively to address this
and ensure that children become looked after at the appropriate time. Once looked
after, some children have experienced changes of placement. This has made it more
difficult for them to feel settled or develop sustained relationships with their carers.
Children spoken with say they have good relationships with their social worker.
However, some have had changes of social worker. Currently only half of children
looked after have contact with their IRO prior to reviews. Both of these factors make
it harder for children to develop trusting relationships with key adults involved in
planning for their care.
The quality of work with children looked after is too variable. Whilst most
assessments were of good quality, many plans lack clear detail about what is being
addressed and in what timescale. Children and their families now benefit more
routinely from family group conferences, with 142 being completed since April 2014.
When children return home after going missing from care, they have an interview
with their social worker in the majority of cases, and risk of child sexual exploitation
is also explored. This ensures that effective plans are put in place to reduce risks for
children.
A lack of accurate health data for children looked after means the local authority
cannot be confident about how well the health needs of these children are being
met. The provision of CAMHS is currently insufficient to meet the needs of Devons
young people, and half of children looked after requiring the service are not receiving
it. Education progress for primary age children looked after is above the national
average, but current outcomes at Key Stage 4 are poor. The adoption service is
strong and is managed effectively to ensure that the majority of children requiring
adoption are identified early and placed with suitable and skilled adopters.
The local authority cannot evidence that it is in touch with approximately half of its
care leavers and, as a result, young people leaving care do not consistently receive
the support they are entitled to in order to help them make a successful transition to
adulthood. Too many care leavers aged between 19 and 21 are not in education,
employment or training, and too many do not live in suitable accommodation.


Numbers have remained stable for the past year, with 669 recorded as the
highest figure in April 2014, dropping to 634 in September. No cases were seen
where children have become looked after inappropriately. However, decisions
for children to come into care are not always timely. Of 11 newly looked after
children whose cases were seen by inspectors, three should have come into
care earlier but were left in situations of increasing concern. The local authority
has recently refreshed its approach to CARP to consider requests for children to
become looked after and ensure that the right children enter the looked after
system at the right time. It has access to legal advice, considers thresholds and
can initiate requests for the PLO to commence. However, the evidence of these
three children suggests that it is too early to see full impact.
the progress of a childs journey to permanency. These have only been in
operation for three months, so it is too soon to assess their impact. Children in
need of adoption are being appropriately monitored. However, managers
acknowledge that they are not yet confident that they know about all children
who require other forms of permanency.
timely manner. Inspectors saw cases with a clear PLO pathway, but in two
cases seen there was evidence of delay. Devon has a higher proportion of
children voluntarily accommodated (under section 20 of the Children Act 1989)
than comparable authorities. The local authority believes this is due to legacy
cases, but some cases are still presented to the CARP with a recommendation
for Section 20 accommodation where a care order might be more appropriate.
Information from the local judiciary indicates that too many cases of children
accommodated under section 20 change into care proceedings without
sufficient planning.
conferences (FGC), with a rise from 103 in 20132014 to 142 in the year to
date. However, FGC managers reported that these conferences are often
recommended too late, for example when families are in crisis, and this was
seen in one case viewed by inspectors. The FGC report (November 2014) shows
that there have been 103 recommendations from CARP for a FGC since
February 2014 when this became a mandatory offer for all families with a risk
of a child becoming looked after. Of these, 26 had already been referred for a
FGC prior to the CARP. Of the 77 new recommendations, only 17 were followed
up by a referral for a FGC. The local authority has not explored the reasons why
social workers are not promoting family group conferences more. The lack of
referrals can cause delay in the court process and opportunities for children to
be placed within their family or friends network may be missed.


listened to. This includes those young people who live outside the local
authority area. Children spoken to by inspectors all reported a change of social
worker in the past year. In the year to January 2015, almost 30% of children
had experienced a change in social worker. This limits their opportunity to
develop a trusting relationship with a worker who has an in-depth
understanding of their history and circumstances. The LA has taken action over
the past year to reduce changes of social worker for children looked after and
the figure for the year to Feb 2015 showed a big improvement at 12%.
to express their views and to understand their current circumstances. However,
life story work is not carried out with children who are in long-term foster care
to help them understand their histories.
service from their social worker. They said they were happy with their foster
carers, who supported them with their education and hobbies. One young
person said we get a lot of support and this was echoed by others. Children
know how to complain, and one child had done so and received an appropriate
response from the local authority. The childrens guide is currently being
refreshed; children said that they do not yet have a copy. This means that they
may not have information regarding entitlements and relevant contact numbers
for complaints, advocacy and support services.
these children had been placed in Devon by other local authorities and two
were Devon children. They were all successfully located and returned to their
placements as a result of coordinated work by social workers and police. Social
workers are responsible for undertaking return home interviews, and
arrangements are in place for those young people who live out of area, with
effective liaison established with the relevant police service. These interviews
inform effective planning to reduce future missing episodes. However, they are
not always completed after each missing episode for some children who
regularly go missing. In the majority of cases, multi-agency meetings discuss
the risks associated with children who go missing repeatedly. These identify
risks associated with going missing, including the potential risk of child sexual
exploitation, and put effective plans in place to reduce them.


range of useful services for young people. They have a fast route into services,
including a local young peoples drug and alcohol resource, and have recently
received information regarding legal highs. They also said that they are clear
about Devons expectations regarding reporting children missing. Foster carers
have received training on bullying and cyber bullying, and know that when
bullying occurs in school they should make contact with education staff to
ensure that the issue is addressed. Foster carers confirmed that delegated
authority arrangements are in place and they are aware of their responsibilities.
They believe that they are well matched with the children who are living with
them.
Children Health Report 2015 is low, with only 19% of initial assessments
completed within 20 days of the child becoming looked after and 42.4% of
review health assessments completed on time. The local authority
acknowledges that data on health assessments are not reliable, so it cannot
assure itself that all children looked after are having their health needs met.
The quality of health assessments viewed ranged from being comprehensive to
having limited recording and evaluation. Plans identify health needs but are not
always specific about what needs to be done and in what timescale. Too few
children looked after have had dental checks (56%) and only 75% have had
their emotional health needs assessed using the strengths and difficulties scale.
Effective arrangements are made to ensure the health needs of those children
looked after who are placed outside Devon are met by local services in their
placement area.
January report notes that services are not available for 50% of children looked
after who need them. The lack of CAMHS services may affect the outcomes for
children in other areas of their lives, such as education and the development of
friendship groups. In most cases seen, children with disabilities who are looked
after have a good range of services provided, with agencies working well
together to meet childrens needs.
schools than they do in their secondary schools, where their outcomes are
poor. The number of children receiving fixed term exclusions has been
reducing. Only 32 children looked after were subject to fixed term exclusions in


(82%) of children looked after attend primary schools that are good or better
than secondary schools (72%). The latest figures show that 74 children looked
after attend schools judged to require improvement and seven attend schools
that are inadequate. The authority closely monitors the most appropriate school
placement for children currently placed within inadequate schools and takes
action to ensure they are receiving a good education.
lower proportion of children looked after attain a good level of development
compared with all children in Devon. Similarly, Year 1 phonics screening checks
show children looked after achieving less well than all children, and this has
declined since 2013.
averages for this group between Key Stages 1 and 2 for reading, mathematics
and particularly for writing. However, there continue to be significant gaps in
the progress made by children looked after in these subjects when compared
with all other Devon children. At Key Stage 2, the attainment gap has been
narrowing between children looked after and other pupils since 2010. The
proportion of Devon children looked after achieving the expected level in
reading, writing and mathematics all show improving trends and in 2014 were
above national figures in each subject.
below progress against all pupils nationally. In 2014, 26% of Devon children
looked after made expected progress in English compared with 39% for
children looked after nationally. In mathematics, the proportion of Devon
children looked after making expected progress in 2014 was 21%, compared to
the national figure of 29% for this group.
weak. The proportion of children looked after gaining 5 A*- C GCSEs including
English and mathematics fell to 6%, from a figure of 15.8% in 2011. This is
now half the national average figure. The gap in attainment for 5 A*- C GCSEs
including English and mathematics between Devon children looked after and
other pupils remains significantly greater than the national figure. The local
authority has identified this as an area for urgent action and has begun to take
measures to improve outcomes for children looked after in secondary schools.
Young people who live outside the local authority area have experienced
difficulty engaging with education. For one, this had resulted in a reduced
timetable for a period.


was good; they were comprehensive, contained clear information on attainment
with sharply focused targets, and also included responses from children, their
teachers and parents or carers.
school able to provide a comprehensive analysis of outcome data for children. A
clear tracking system is in place for all children looked after, both within and
outside the local authority, noting outcomes for their attainment and progress.
As a result of this tracking system, during 2014, the local authority restructured
the virtual school and introduced a multi-agency education panel to address the
poorer educational outcomes for children during 2013/14. This structure is still
too new to evidence sustained impact.
within 12 months is 14%, which is higher than the England average of 11%.
The local authority has recognised that this is an area of concern and has
developed a number of initiatives to support placements. These include a
service around the child approach offering CAMHS support and strategies to
carers. The Placement Review Panel is attended by a number of agencies to
agree plans of support to prevent potential placement breakdown. The role of
fostering support workers is also being broadened in order to provide more
support services, such as play therapy and solution-focused therapy for children
in placements at risk of breakdown.
report to the review meeting; the quality of these assessments was variable. In
the majority of cases seen, assessments were of good quality, with risks
identified, impact of parental behaviour analysed and options for the future well
covered. In half of the assessments, the voice of the child was captured well,
giving full accounts of views regarding placements, education and wishes for
the future. However, a minority of assessments lacked a robust assessment of
risk, consideration of the quality of attachments and detailed analysis. The
variability of assessments means that not all childrens needs are properly
addressed and that resulting plans are not all based on robust analysis of the
childs circumstances.
consideration of contact arrangements. Young people confirmed that they are
able to maintain contact with family and friends. However, plans lack detail
regarding actions and timescales to secure change.


includes a paper-based pre-qualification process, contracts and a site visit. The
Commissioning team knows the Ofsted rating for all placements, and if a
service is graded as inadequate, the local authority will suspend any new
placements and review all existing placements, taking the childrens cases to
the placement resource panel for consideration.
placements. The brokerage team and the fostering service work well together
to ensure that the most suitable placement is identified, but there can be
compatibility issues if other children are already in placement. The local
authority has met with residential providers to develop a service for four
emergency singleton placements and this is under development. There are also
hours.
they are recruiting the right carers to meet their demands. Currently the local
authority is aware of its need to recruit carers to work with children with
complex needs, those with disabilities and also parent and child placements. It
has revised its foster carer recruitment plans over recent months to ensure that
it can best meet the needs of Devons children looked after. It has recruited 49
new foster placements. Taking into account placements lost, there has been a
net gain of 26, still well short of its target figure of 73. However, the local
authority is reviewing its current requirements for placements to establish a
revised figure which is based on current needs. The local authoritys figures
show that just over half of Devons children looked after are currently placed in
its own provision.
Assessments are comprehensive, clear, analytical and completed within
timescales. Foster carers receive regular visits every four to six weeks from
their allocated worker. These are effectively used to identify training needs and
address any issues of concern. The skills and knowledge of Devon foster carers
are being developed to equip them to manage children with more complex
needs, teenagers and sibling groups. Fostering panel chairs and foster carers
are positive about the service and the level of training and support offered to
carers.
Tracking Panels to ensure that children are in appropriate placements, and
without delay. Permanency planning meetings are held to coincide with review
timescales and, for the majority of children, permanency options are addressed
well. However, permanency discussions were not well replicated at the looked
after review and it is not clear whether the review or the permanency planning
meeting is the main driver to achieve permanency.


effective legal planning meetings are held when necessary. Court statements
and letters before proceedings are clear, setting out the local authoritys
concerns and what needs to change. Local authority solicitors recognise that
further work is required to ensure consistency in cases, drafting of PLO letters,
use of chronologies, research and analysis.
proceedings is variable. On occasions they have been incomplete or even
absent, and this has resulted in delays for children. The local authority agrees
with this view and is reviewing its current arrangements for completion of these
assessments. It is not aware of how many cases are returned by the court as
requiring further work nor of when local authority recommendations are not
accepted by the court. This is an area of concern recently identified by senior
managers and they have plans in place to analyse it.
relationships with the local authority. The average duration for care
proceedings has shown an improving picture over time. The figure for 2012
weeks at the time of the inspection. Although timescales have improved, Devon
remains behind other regional local authorities in the area that perform well
within the target of 26 weeks but is now only slightly behind the national
average of 30 weeks. A newly appointed judge is working with the local
authority to identify the reasons for delays in order to improve practice.
parents, records do not clearly show how well risks for the children are
assessed. However, social workers spoken to were able to describe the
involvement of a number of multi-agency professionals who were working
together to support placements and manage risks.
Guardianship Orders (SGOs). This is a growing area, and a new team will join
the adoption service shortly to complete SGO assessments and offer support.
The local authority is scoping how many long term foster carers (internal and
external) will consider SGOs or adoption for children placed long term. The
quality of SGO assessments is good, with careful consideration given to
whether this option is the best for the children concerned. Support needs
including finance and contact arrangements are addressed well.


year to evaluate whether siblings should be placed together or apart. These
assessments are of good quality. Similarly, there are some good Child
Permanence Reports, though this is not consistent and other examples of this
important document were of insufficient quality. Children told inspectors that
they felt fully prepared for moving into a permanent placement. They had
access to carer profiles to obtain basic information about potential new families
and carefully planned introductions. One young person talked about how well
her social worker had listened to her unhappiness about her foster placement
and had enabled her to move to carers where she now feels happy and settled.
overview of the work completed during the past year. It is unclear how many
looked after child reviews have been completed within timescales. Data
provided to inspectors by the local authority showed that of 829 children looked
after or who ceased to be looked after in the previous 6 months, only 269 had
a statutory review that was on time; 350 were late and 210 had no record. This
contrasts with what the IRO service told inspectors, that only 17 reviews have
gone over time in the past six months. This discrepancy needs to be addressed
urgently by the local authority in order to assure itself that childrens plans are
being reviewed in a timely manner.
half of Devons children looked after do not have opportunities to share their
views with a key individual who is shaping their future. IROs are now escalating
cases in accordance with a process introduced in September 2014 to challenge
social workers when plans have not progressed or actions have not been taken
following reviews. IRO managers collate information to analyse trends and
attend managers meetings to discuss their findings. IROs report that the
escalation of cases has not always been well received by social work teams,
and more needs to be done to develop a shared understanding that the
escalation process is to promote the welfare of children.
with young people and their families, with clear discussions and reasons for
actions taken. In one case, a child had met with an advocate prior to the review
and his views were shared through a comprehensive document along with the
completed My Review form. In another, considerable direct work had been
completed with two young children to ensure that their views were included in
the meeting. The number of My Review forms completed is declining each
month. This has been recognised and a new mobile phone app-based advocacy
service, Mind of my Own (MOMO), has recently been commissioned by the local
authority. This shows strong potential to provide a more accessible form of
communication for children requiring support, and also when making
complaints.


IRO managers reporting that 50 children now receive this support. The latest
data (for October to December 2014) from the independently commissioned
advocacy provider show that of 82 referrals, 11 (13%) were for children looked
after reviews. Children spoken to were all aware of the advocacy service, but
more needs to be done to ensure that all social work teams are promoting its
use.
worked with the corporate parenting board to develop a Pledge for children
looked after. Several young people spoken to had been involved in the artwork
and design of the promotional materials but could not recall what the Pledge
was, suggesting that it lacks meaning for them. Engagement with children and
young people is taking place through their involvement in staff training, the
production of training films giving top tips for social workers and involvement in
role swap days. Children and young people also met with children from foster
families to help them understand their experiences of being looked after.
Childrens involvement in training and informing the service has been taken
forward from the 2013 inspection, and children spoke enthusiastically about the
social activities they shared in the Really Im Ordinary group (RIO) group, and
their enjoyment of the annual award celebrations.
was not well covered, there was a lack of detailed consideration given to
identity and religion. However, some good examples were seen, including a
deaf young person whose foster family all learnt sign language and another
child who was supported when she was rejecting her heritage. Social workers
spoke confidently about meeting the needs of children with disabilities and
special educational needs, along with recognition of the impact of disability and
history of birth parents.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
looked after children in Devon, including older children, brothers and sisters
together, disabled children and children with complex needs or serious medical
issues.


the proportion of children looked after who are adopted has increased over the
three-year period 2011 to 2014. In 201213 the proportion was only 8% and
this increased to 12% in 201314. Although this equates to an increase from 30
to 40 children, it is still below the England average of 17%. At the time of the
inspection, 13 children with a plan for adoption were awaiting permission from
the court and 15 children with a placement order were waiting for a placement
to be found. Matches for adoption have been made for 53 children; 44 of these
have been placed and nine children are in the process of being placed. There
are 28 children successfully placed awaiting an adoption order. There have
been 60 adoption orders in the last 12 months, demonstrating continued good
progress.
performance is good, and shows that children in Devon move quickly into their
permanent families. The average time between a child entering care and being
placed with their adoptive families is 545 days; this is 83 days quicker than the
England average, and continues to improve. Once the court has agreed that a
child can be placed for adoption, a family is found within 153 days on average;
this is 64 days quicker than the England average and on a par with the
comparable authorities. While the average time over a three-year period had
improved, it was longer in 2014 than in 2013 for this indicator.
This includes consideration of a significant number of in-house approved
adopters; immediate referral to the adoption register; use of the South West
Adoption Consortium; Voluntary Adoption Agencies and other linking services;
DVD evenings; profiling events, where the foster carer was asked to attend to
speak directly about the child; and regular use of adoption activity days and
foster to adopt. Childrens profiles seen were high quality, child centred and
demonstrated the wide range of children that Devon aims to place for adoption.
This included children over the age of five and placements for brothers and
sisters together.
development and use of foster to adopt placements, and has progressed 13 of
these. Of the 13, only one child went home and one was turned down by the
court. There have already been eight orders granted since national
implementation of the scheme in 2013, resulting in continued placements for
children and a quicker process. Assessments undertaken to provide interim
approval to adopters for the scheme are of good quality. Foster to adopt was
considered in all adopter assessments.


brothers and sisters together, older children and for children with complex
needs and developmental uncertainty. This commitment does, however, impact
on scorecard performance. Some children were adopted before their first
birthday, and recently an adoption order application has been submitted for a
child who is only seven months old. A small number of children have been
waiting too long for an adoptive family. The reasons for this vary, with some
delays being due to extensive efforts to find a family for children with complex
needs. However, for a very small number of children, avoidable delay was
evident. Of five such cases seen, permanency had since been secured for three
children but not yet for two. The local authority is aware of this and is working
to ensure that it offers a timely adoptive outcome for all children who require it.
cases (14%). This is higher than the 12% England average. There is some
evidence of improvement in this area, and at the time of the inspection 18
children (12%) had planned changes away from adoption. A sample of these
cases showed that appropriate permanent alternatives have been identified for
the majority of these children.
adoption scorecard showing a considerably better performance than the
comparable authority average (75 compared with 42 as of 31 March 2014). A
clear marketing strategy is in place for adopters, as is an up-to-date and robust
statement of purpose to steer this area of work. The service is on track to reach
its target of recruiting 60 adopters in 201415, with 55 already recruited by
February 2015. All adopters spoken with were very happy with their
recruitment, preparation and assessment; a number had already recommended
the service to friends interested in adoption. They were equally positive about
the matching process, including comments such as,  couldnt have been
matched any better and I didnt think they would get it so right and had I
known it was so easy, I would have done it sooner. However, some cases
showed that the initial experience of first contacting the adoption service was
not universally positive.
succinct, well evidenced and analytical. The use of theory and research in
assessments was particularly impressive. The local authority is seeking to
improve timeliness in preparation at stage 1 of the recruitment process, with
the stage 2 assessment timescales being met in the majority of cases. All
adopters spoken with said the pace had been the right one, and they did not
consider that there had been any delay other than when this was needed or
purposeful. The inspection found mixed feedback about how well the transition
from foster carer to adopter is working for children, and this is an area that the
local authority should review to ensure that it is getting it right consistently.


regularly as required to ensure that timely progress is achieved. The medical
adviser attends every panel, and meets adopters to provide advice and
information. There is a culture of healthy challenge and learning, and a
forthcoming Special Learning Panel will assist the adoption panels when
considering their role in disruptions or complex cases. Disruptions are low in
number and the local authority has undertaken considerable work to
understand any themes over the last five years, including participating in
national research. There have been two disruptions in the current year, and
both had a disruption meeting and were appropriately managed. Decisions for
children are appropriately considered and scrutinised by the Agency Decision
Maker. An adoption agency report is completed every six months and is clear,
analytical and well evidenced using clear data.
conference is held which focuses on current issues in adoption practice and
research issues. Adopter feedback directly informs the programme for the
following year.
team has trained 120 social workers on permanence, 60 on working with
siblings and 60 on writing child permanence reports. The service provides a
range of high quality tools and guides for social workers, adopters, children,
carers, birth parents and birth relatives. Exceptional thought is given to
considering the support and emotional needs of birth parents, including a
settling-in letter soon after placement.
letterbox support and 57 direct contact arrangements with families. The service
has completed 125 assessments for adoption support in the past 12 months
and has no waiting list. A wide range of services is offered, including advice and
support from a participation worker and an educational psychologist, and the
established therapeutic parenting course. Adopters spoken with who are
currently in receipt of the post-adoption service were very positive about the
service, describing it as without fault and saying that therapeutic parenting
had saved their family. All adopters spoken with were aware of their
entitlements regarding support, both now and in the future.
day and 30 such days have taken place since 1 April 2014. Life story work
materials are innovative and sensitive, and ensure that all people in the childs
network are considered and that the childs needs are considered at different
stages in their development. This includes two forms of life story books and
later life letters that have been informed by input from adopted young people.
In one case, the local authority had paid for a similar approach for voluntary
agency adopters who were identified for a Devon child.


undertaking direct work with adopted young people. These young people have
contributed to the development of the service by sitting on recruitment
interviews; advising on materials, including later life letters; and through the
creation of the stand up, speak up website, which includes a young persons
guide to adoption. Adopted young people can meet others in a group setting
for advice and support or have individual direct work. The first summer
activities day for all adoptive families, planned this year, will enable adopted
young people to take part in a range of activities, while adopters meet
separately for support.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is inadequate
people are allocated to personal advisors and social workers in the Permanency
and Transition (P&T) teams. The authority does not know what, if any, support
is being provided to the remaining 301 care leavers for whom it has corporate
responsibility. These care leavers may be receiving services from other parts of
the local authority, such as Learning Disability Services, but the authority is
unable to verify this through accurate performance data. For those care leavers
allocated to the P&T teams, where the local authority has undertaken work to
assure itself of the accuracy of its data, there are a further 166 care leavers
with whom the authority is not in touch. As a corporate parent, the local
authority has failed to assure itself that a total of 467 of its care leavers are
safe or that their welfare is being promoted through receipt of the care leaving
services to which these young people are entitled.
widespread and serious failures, as performance in respect of care leavers is
not monitored by elected members in accordance with the action plan set out in
the local authoritys corporate parenting strategy.


be living in suitable accommodation. It is not possible to determine the full
extent of unsuitable accommodation for all care leavers in Devon due to the
lack of accurate performance data for this vulnerable group. Furthermore, the
local authority does not know whether any of its care leavers are living in
houses of multiple occupancy and is not confident about the reliability of the
information held in respect of young peoples accommodation. For example,
initial information provided at the start of the inspection suggested that four
young people were in bed and breakfast accommodation, but this was found to
be incorrect. Measures are in place to prevent care leavers being placed in bed
and breakfast, but this accommodation is used on occasions when there is no
alternative available. In such circumstances, risk assessments are not in place
and, as a result, the local authority cannot be assured that care leavers are safe
in their accommodation. Following detailed scrutiny of data by inspectors, it
was clear that there were no care leavers living in bed and breakfast
accommodation at the time of the inspection.
national level. The proportion of care leavers aged 19, 20 or 21 years who are
allocated to the P&T teams and are in education, employment or training is
determine the full numbers of care leavers in education, employment or training
due to the poor management information. Personal advisers and social workers
have high aspirations for care leavers, and provide encouragement and
practical support for them to move on to higher or further education. However,
whilst there are 15 care leavers studying at university, this is just 4% of the
Devon total and just over half the national rate. Only 11% of the total number
of Devon care leavers are in education other than higher education, which is
significantly below the national comparator of 19%.
cases seen by inspectors. This means that subsequent plans are not informed
by an assessment of need to assist young people in making a successful
transition to adulthood. Pathway planning practice is variable, with a minority of
plans seen which were comprehensive and provided a real sense of the young
person. The majority, however, provided insufficient detail about need and risk
to enable effective planning, and many lacked actions, timescales and
contingencies. A new pathway plan format has been developed and is now in
use, which captures young peoples views. However, training had not taken
place in advance of its introduction and its use is inconsistent.


predominantly completed by personal advisors with the young person, without
any management oversight. This is a practice which is not compliant with the
local authoritys own policy, which states that pathway reviews will be carried
out by team managers. The review process is further weakened by the fact that
pathway reviews are not subject to managerial sign off or quality assurance.
There is a plan for managers to sign off all pathway reviews and for these to be
quality assured through a panel process. However, at the time of the inspection
this was not in place. As a consequence, the local authority cannot be confident
about the quality of its planning and review processes for care leavers and
whether young people are receiving the right support to assist them in making
a successful transition to adulthood.
They were positive about the support they receive from the Youth Service.
They were also very positive about the support they receive from Devon Young
Peoples Accommodation Service (DYPAS  a resource provided through the
local authoritys Fostering Service), as well as from a local charitable
organisation, which is commissioned by the local authority. These services
support young people to develop independent living skills and maintain their
tenancies, and they promote health and well-being and provide direct work.
with individual support packages, training flats and supported lodgings. This is
in addition to private tenancies and other housing options provided through the
district housing authorities. All accommodation commissioned from outside the
local authority is subject to quality assurance through the South West
Peninsular arrangement, and placement provision is managed robustly through
the placement panel process.
they reach their 18th birthday through the staying put scheme. Sixty-one young
people are in such placements across the county. Cases seen where young
people were in these arrangements were focused on the young persons longterm needs and provided consistency and stability to enable a successful
transition to adulthood.
actively engaging with those care leavers who are known and worked with.
They see them regularly and work hard to ensure that young people receive the
support that they need. Personal advisors are strong advocates, and decisions
are focused on what is in young peoples interests. Personal advisors are
generally positive about their experience of working in the service and report
that there is good support from managers. They feel listened to and that
decision making is child centred.


explaining their rights and entitlements. Whether young people receive such
information and the consistency with which this occurs is too dependent on
individual workers. Care leavers met by inspectors confirmed this lack of
consistency. The local authority has already been proactive in addressing this,
and has developed a new website and mobile phone application (app) which is
about to be introduced across the county. These will offer a good range of
information for children looked after and care leavers and provide a creative
approach to capturing young peoples views and experiences, including
providing a simple way to enable young people to complain if they need to.
Care leavers have been fully consulted and involved in the development of
these resources and they reflect young peoples views. Care leavers do not
consistently receive information about their health histories. Work is underway
to address this deficit, but is in its infancy.
personal advisors and social workers are ambitious for the individual care
leavers they are supporting. They encourage young people to identify the
positive aspects of their life and promote their aspirations. Personal advisors
and social workers are positive about young peoples achievements,
acknowledging these by referring them for recognition through the annual
celebration event held by the authority.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Since the previous inadequate inspection judgement for safeguarding and child
protection, much has been achieved in ensuring that compliance with core
responsibilities is met. The achievements are substantial given that, following that
inspection, even further deterioration in a range of service areas is reported to have
occurred. Senior managers have a sufficiently clear understanding of very many of
the challenges ahead for the local authority and key partner agencies. The focus has,
by necessity, been on establishing a more effective child protection service response.
This includes the additional efforts to address the needs of many more children who
have experienced neglectful parenting for a long time. The real improvements are
yet to be sufficiently secure, with a need for greater consistency to make higher
quality responses routine.
Senior managers, the Director of Childrens Services (DCS), Chief Executive and a
very involved Lead Member for Childrens Services have prioritised this area of
activity, ensuring that greater resourcing has been applied to achieve improvement.
Accountability is exercised, although this is not always explicitly recorded. The more
formal arrangements for scrutiny and governance within the local authority are in
place, but are not sufficiently well focused on the key areas for improvement.
Leadership at a strategic planning and partnership level is weak. The Children and
Families Alliance, Health and Wellbeing Board and the LSCB do not evidence clear
leadership, resulting in limited and insufficiently well-coordinated improvements, for
example, in implementing a full early help offer. These impact adversely on the pace
of change in driving improvements in jointly commissioned services. While changes
involving partner agencies do take place, they are often slower than needed. The
pace of improvement needs to be increased following the significant success in
stabilising and improving the organisation and practice of the workforce.
Progress has clearly been made in establishing more robust social care responses to
risk and harm. Practitioners now want to stay working in Devon. Reduced workloads,
reductions from the previously very high volumes of activity, and the establishment
of more routine measures of performance and quality assurance reporting have all
been introduced, contributing strongly to staff retention. The DCS and senior
officers, some of whom are long-term locum workers, have focused their energies on
establishing the safer core services, and have a clear and detailed understanding of
the service and continuing challenges. The need is recognised for further work to
achieve better performance and quality assurance information, and consequently
greater consistency in management oversight.


Executive (CE) understand the recent history of the performance and quality of
services for children. They are appropriately engaged with some improvement
activity. However, much improvement remains at early stages of development
(for example corporate parenting, the Children & Families Alliance, and
strategic arrangements). Senior managers in social care show an extensive and
detailed knowledge of the current range of needs, risks and performance for
children within their remit. A transparent and thorough understanding of the
challenges across the local authority and across the partner agency network is
in place. This has been well supported through a robust CIB as well as recent
peer review activity. The CIB continues to perform a significant role in
supporting improvement, though there is now scope for the local authority and
LSCB to take up a greater role in strategic developments.
leadership and governance arrangements for strategic planning, commissioning
and evaluation of impact are insufficiently clear and, in some respects, not
evident. The lines of influence, authority and impact between the LSCB,
H&WBB and C&FA are not sufficiently evident. The lack of clarity over
governance contributes to the limited effectiveness of strategic planning
between the local authority and the broader partnership of agencies.
commitment to robust improvement. A number of key senior roles continue to
be filled by interim arrangements, however the impact of this continues to be
minimised through the use of consistent, longer-term interim staff. A necessary
restructuring of middle management to support work with partners within
geographic areas is also in progress. The local authority has recently agreed
additional resources to support the DCS role and an external review of the test
of assurance has been commissioned to risk assess the continued dual role of
the DCS combined with that of Director of Adult Services.
Substantial progress has been made in achieving a consistent workforce of
social workers from a previously high annual turnover of over 29% during 2014
to 11% at the time of the inspection. Agency staffing had been high (at almost
a third of the workforce), but is now less than half what it was in December
the last 12 months indicate considerable improvements in confidence and in
feeling clear and supported in their roles. A high proportion of locum staff
remain, many of whom have been in position for relatively lengthy periods of
up to, or more than, a year. Some locum staff have been retained above
establishment to support the service with the relatively high number of newly
qualified workers.


knowledge and understanding of the quality, variations and extent of service
delivery across the area. Many arrangements are in place supporting this,
including critical decision-making arrangements (through, for example, the
CARP and private fostering oversight), direct personal contact with teams and
practitioners across the area, proactive principal social workers, and the
substantial and continuing efforts to establish effective performance reporting
and quality assurance. Some of these changes are recent and all require further
refinement.
failure to establish a reliable platform of performance reporting data and
outcome focused analysis. Performance and quality assurance reporting is
increasingly understood and actively used at all levels across the area. This
includes an established, routine and evaluated quality audit programme. The
local authority acknowledges that the focus has, necessarily, been on achieving
compliance with statutory requirements. This is changing to a consideration of
indicators aimed at identifying improved service quality and better outcomes for
children.
Strategic governance arrangements between the local authority, LSCB, H&WBB
and the C&FA are not yet informing commissioning strategies. The C&FA is
identified as undertaking similar functions to the previous childrens partnership,
which has been dissolved. Commencing in autumn 2014, it is yet to be fully
functional. This means that medium and long-term strategic planning cannot be
well-focused, informed or targeted. The profile of those currently most
vulnerable is known, being well described through a children-specific Joint
Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA), although the trajectory of changing
populations of need is less well scoped.
of local authority data, and this is now informing some planning, for example,
in recruiting sufficient carers to meet the needs of children looked after. Some
service re-commissioning has been conducted, with variable success. For
example, some changes are being achieved in the provision of emotional health
services. After a lengthy period of challenge and negotiation, hospital provision
for Tier 4 CAMHS is now more assured. An extensive investment in services for
those identified with early emotional health difficulties has been secured, but
this will not be in place until the autumn of 2015. There is an improving focus
on contract monitoring, using more regular reporting, with feedback from those
who use services. Again, this is yet to be a routine approach.


leavers are not well established, with the formal panel arrangements still in
development. Elected members and officers are active in re-establishing and
promoting the commitments of the overall council. While consultations have
been undertaken with children and young people on a range of issues, these
are yet to be a routine part of the formal arrangements. Priorities and work
plans are yet to be established, although elected members are sufficiently
supported by senior officers. There is currently limited evidence of the
galvanising of engagement across the whole of the local authority, for example
in supporting apprenticeships within, and brokered through, the authority.
issues, but is yet to be sufficiently and routinely focused on the key priorities
and core responsibilities in relation to safeguarding and promoting the
wellbeing of children. While there is regular contact between the chief
executive, independent Chair of the LSCB and the DCS, the extent of robust
support, shared planning and challenge is insufficiently evidenced.
have impaired a number of improvements and slowed progress in others. Much
remains to be done to ensure consistent understanding and ownership of
thresholds for service; to deliver a robust, assured early help offer; and to
progress the coordination and delivery of services to those most in need. For
example, it is acknowledged that there is yet to be full coordination of activity
between key agencies in identifying and combating the risks of child sexual
exploitation. Additionally, early support and in-patient provision for those with
emotional and mental health needs have either only been recently assured or
plans are still in progress. Much more remains to be done with health partners
to prioritise the needs of children looked after, as well as ensuring a greater
level of coordination with adult mental health services.
(FJB) are effective. It is recognised by all that there has been much
improvement in the decision making on thresholds and in applications brought
before the family court. However, there remains much more to be achieved to
produce thorough and realistic assessments, concise histories and timely filing
for family proceedings. Devon remains behind national performance
expectations with the most recent average duration of 31 weeks (February
substantial increase in proceedings last year, many following long-standing
neglect, have necessitated a considerable increase in investment to ensure that
progress is being made.


substantial and sustained improvement. Significant progress has been made in
recent months to identify and report on a broader suite of data and
information. Service deficiencies are routinely identified and followed through
rigorously from service to team to individual levels of responsibility. It is,
however, acknowledged by the authority that many changes are yet to be
delivered to ensure meaningful monitoring that can be relied upon to provide a
full understanding of the effectiveness of services.
beginning to be used to support managers in focusing on compliance and
future planning. The now embedded audit activity is adding an extra focus and
detail not available within the higher level data. More broadly, evaluation and
general learning from complaints are taking place and being used to inform
performance.
to be used to inform service planning and delivery. However, so far, these have
been on a one-off basis. Learning from childrens as well as adults complaints
is yet to be fully taken into account within the suite of qualitative information.
There is limited insight to, and learning from, the specific and overall views of
children and young people about the difference that interventions have been
making to their lives. While advocacy arrangements are in place, again, there is
more to be done to ensure that the voices of the most vulnerable children are
promoted.
experience and expertise. There are many practitioners in their assessed and
supported year in employment (ASYE) after qualifying and they have a high
regard for the support and development given to them. The range of
development support, through mentoring and the dedicated assistant team
manager relationship, as well as the mandatory training and other development
opportunities, help them towards meeting expectations. Considerable work has
also been, and continues to be, undertaken in re-skilling more experienced
practitioners and managers.
personal, as well as professional, support provided by their managers. Formally
recorded case supervision is significantly improved in recent months, with
clearer guidance and direction being seen in an increasing number of cases. It
is primarily action-oriented with, as yet, limited evidence of reflective
supervision being undertaken. Some inconsistencies across the areas remain.
Senior managers are aware of this and are active in addressing the deficits
identified. Social workers state that less formal case consultation is also
regularly available and managers are routinely accessible. ASYEs welcome the
developmental experience, including reflective consultation, available to them
through their own specific development programme.


ensure current practice standards are understood and are being applied.
Evaluation of training takes place at various points, with a good focus on the
difference training has made to an individuals practice. Workloads for social
workers are almost universally manageable. Account is taken of numbers,
complexity and the experience and skill profile of practitioners. The ambitious
target of social worker caseloads below 20 is almost achieved, and while some
variation remains, this has been a considerable achievement by managers.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
inadequate.

Summary of findings
The LSCB is inadequate because:
 The Board does not yet have a strategic plan in place for domestic abuse and
neglect. This means that the Board cannot effectively use learning and
intelligence to improve services, coordinate activities and assure themselves that
children are safe.
 The Board does not yet have effective oversight of arrangements to understand
and prevent harm to missing children or those at risk of child sexual exploitation.
 The progress and oversight of learning from Serious Case Reviews is not
sufficiently robust, rigorous or timely.
 The Peninsula-wide Child Death Overview Panel (CDOP) is not effective in
drawing lessons from child deaths in Devon and using these to inform strategic
and public health planning to reduce incidents.
 The business support for the Board has not been strong enough to ensure the
delivery of the work plan and drive improvement in the partnership.
 The section 11 audit process is not sufficiently robust in holding agencies to
account.
 The evaluation of the effectiveness of early help is at a very early stage.
 Strategic arrangements in respect of multi-agency intervention and support to
safeguard children in Devon are not sufficiently developed. Although the Board is
emerging as a potentially influential strategic player, the Childrens Improvement
Board (CIB) is undertaking some key functions, such as ensuring effectiveness of
safeguarding services, and there is no agreed transition date.
 The Board is not currently working to promote safeguarding in faith communities
and more needs to be done to strengthen awareness and understanding of
safeguarding in the voluntary sector, particularly section 11 responsibilities.
 The Board does not yet have a clear data profile of safeguarding needs in its area
to inform strategy and planning.
 The Boards use of the childs voice and understanding of the childs experience is
at an early stage and needs further development to inform and shape operational
and strategic planning.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Development of key functions
effective safeguarding practice for children at risk from domestic abuse,
neglect, and adult mental ill-health, adult substance misuse or as a result of
disability.
to inform safeguarding, disruption and prevention and to support work
strategically and operationally.
management, accountability and urgency in learning and implementing lessons.
The Board must ensure that all decisions not to carry out a Serious Case
Review (SCR) since March 2013 have been sent to the National Panel of
Experts. More needs to be done to raise awareness across the childrens
workforce of lessons learnt.
these forums meet statutory requirements, and ensure that learning from child
deaths is used to inform public health strategy and prevention effectively.
safeguarding meetings to ensure that planning and review for children is
informed by all relevant information.
has the right skills and resources available to deliver its programme.

Data and Performance
missing from home, care or education, to identify those children about whom
the local authority and Police are most concerned, and monitor progress and
performance closely.
Areas for improvement

Development of key functions
coordinated approach between childrens and adults services.
thresholds are well understood and that lead professional roles are taken up by
all partners as appropriate.


voluntary sector.
inform Board priorities, strategy, planning and scrutiny.

Data and Performance
and to inform priorities and planning.
agencies to account effectively for safeguarding performance, including the
police and adult services.

Governance
begin resuming responsibilities from the CIB.
oversees work with children in public and private law proceedings.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
amount of ground to make up. The Board Chair is proactive in providing
leadership; he has evaluated the weaknesses of the Board and set an
appropriate direction of improvement based on an accurate assessment of its
weaknesses. Significant progress has been made in setting up necessary
strategic and operational changes, but these are almost all very new and not
yet demonstrating impact in a number of key areas. Progress has been
impeded in part by insufficient skills, support and resource in the LSCB back
office. This has been addressed by the creation of a new post of Safeguarding
Lead for the Board, but the Board Manager post is currently vacant.
safeguard children in Devon are weak. However, the Board is showing signs
that it can be a potentially strong strategic driver within the partnership. It has
not yet, however, secured enough influence with partners to improve the
coordination of provision and hold them to account, and further progress needs
to be made. Domestic abuse, mental ill-health, substance misuse and neglect
are significant issues that place children at risk. The approach of Devons LSCB
needs significant, further development in all of them.


place to enable the LSCB to effectively monitor and hold partners to account for
the delivery of early help and therapeutic support for children, support for adult
victims, and intervention and prevention with perpetrators. The Board has plans
to develop a neglect strategy, but this is not yet in place.
partnership between adults and childrens services but this is still at an early
stage of implementation. Two joint adults and childrens training events
occurred in November 2014, a risk assessment tool for mental health services
has been implemented, an Adult Mental Health worker joined the MASH in
January, and a guidance document on drug testing has been developed to
improve joint work. Think Family is incorporated into the induction of Adult
Mental Health services. The Think Family toolkit has been written, but not yet
rolled out. These changes are recent and it is too early to demonstrate the
impact.
childrens workforce is not sufficiently knowledgeable about the lessons from
these reviews. There have been a number of delays in progressing reviews and
actions. SCR action plans are not robust or SMART, nor sufficiently evidenced.
Whilst there have been some areas of progress, for example, developing
planning around Think Family and training on the assessment of sex offenders,
the progress and implementation of other areas of key learning has been too
slow. Following one recommendation from a child death two years ago, limited
progress has been made to find a mechanism to monitor the risk posed by
adults with fluctuating mental health needs who have the care of children and
who discharge themselves from treatment. A tighter governance process for
SCRs has recently been agreed to address some of these issues.
not challenged agencies sufficiently to provide evidence around the basis for
these declarations. The Board recognises that more needs to be done to
strengthen the cross-referencing of these declarations through audit, staff
survey and scrutiny. Board agencies need to be more robust in driving through
improvements at frontline level. A section 175 audit has been completed by all
schools and shows evidence of much stronger compliance with safeguarding
standards.


from the staff survey in 2013, multi-agency audits and learning reviews show
that many staff were unsure about information sharing, that multi-agency
partnership work was not robust, and that agencies did not challenge well.
Some agencies did not understand that safeguarding was everyones
responsibility and did not know when or how to make safeguarding referrals.
There is variable attendance and contribution from GPs and the police at
childrens safeguarding meetings, low take-up of the lead professional role by
some agencies, and low attendance at multi-agency training. Although adult
services have made recent progress, they remain behind the pace in fully
embracing the safeguarding agenda.
auditing and monitoring performance of Childrens Social Care. There are no
firm plans currently in place to guide transition from the CIB to the LSCB. This
needs to be reviewed to provide the Board the opportunity to take back more
of its statutory responsibilities.
thresholds were launched in April 2014, but they are still bedding in and
thresholds are not yet understood well by the partnership. Training for Lead
Professionals has been limited and more work is needed to equip the work
force to undertake this role. There are difficulties engaging some health and
adults services to take up the Lead Professional role. Monitoring of DAFs by the
LSCB is very recent and learning from this is yet to inform practice.
place to raise awareness of safeguarding in faith communities. This means that
the LSCB is not monitoring the effectiveness of policies, practice, and
awareness in these settings that safeguard children. The work with the
voluntary sector is stronger, but there has been limited work to ensure that the
voluntary sector is working in line with their section 11 responsibilities. This
would include robust safer recruitment and ensuring that the voluntary sector
knows how to identify and report cases of suspected child abuse. The Board
does not have a Lay Member, with the associated benefits they would bring.
yet have a strong enough understanding of how to manage allegations against
professionals in their agencies, and there is a need for more training and
support. The Board has set out a plan to increase resource to the LADO
function and to address this following its review of the last LADO report.


effective in drawing lessons from child deaths in Devon and using these to
inform prevention in strategic and public health planning. The CDOP report
shows that modifiable factors are found in 31% fewer cases in Devon than in
the rest of England, which suggests that some modifiable factors are being
missed. The Rapid Response service is not meeting statutory requirements
because it only convenes a full Rapid Response meeting in half of unexpected
child deaths. This means that the causes of these childrens deaths are not
thoroughly investigated at the time of death and a coroner inquiry is not
necessarily triggered. This potentially limits the agencies capacity to
understand the causes of these deaths correctly and consequently reduce the
risks to other children. The Chair is addressing this with partners as part of a
review of commissioning arrangements.
address risk to children who go missing or are being sexually exploited.
However, these arrangements have not been fully effective. The terms of
reference have recently been reviewed for the MACSE panels, to clarify the
extent of their role and ensure that the risks to children who go missing and are
open to early help are thoroughly considered. REACH provides return home
interviews to children missing from home and those placed by other local
authorities and undertakes direct work with children at risk of sexual
exploitation. Social workers undertake return home interviews with children
who have an allocated social worker. The LSCB has not yet undertaken an
assessment of the effectiveness of this work. The Learning and Improvement
subgroup monitors data around children missing. It has also developed a data
set to monitor and evaluate the impact of activity around children at risk of
sexual exploitation, but this is currently unpopulated, so it is not yet used to
understand performance.
place in its area, or of children going missing, in order to identify trends,
patterns, and hotspots. It has not yet analysed return home interviews to
understand the reasons why children go missing. In addition, there has not
been a process in place to systematically consider the group of children open to
childrens social care services who are at the highest risk of child sexual
exploitation. The LSCB and its partners also do not yet share information on the
children about whom they are concerned, including children at risk of sexual
exploitation, or missing from home, care or education. These factors together
mean that the partnership is not yet able to identify prevalence or coordinate
prevention and disruption work to full effectiveness.


those at risk of sexual exploitation, and is making a number of changes to
improve their effectiveness. A Vulnerability Panel has just been established to
ensure that children at risk of sexual exploitation open to social care receive a
multi-agency review. However, there is more work to do to ensure that
information from the MACSE panels, Vulnerability Panels and Missing Monday
Meetings (which considers those children missing education) is joined together
to form a strategic overview of themes, issues, risks and hotspots to fully
inform development and planning. Last year there were 17 Child Sexual
Exploitation training courses which reached 291 participants, and 2 conferences
attended by 92 members of staff. The Board is aware that there is more to be
done.
schools for the prevention of child sexual exploitation. However, every school
has received at least some briefing, training or publicity around the issue.
Chelseas Choice is being delivered across all secondary schools to help children
recognise potentially abusive relationships and to understand issues of control
and consent. There has been no awareness raising undertaken yet in the wider
community, or with taxi companies, licensed premises or local businesses. This
will be taken forward within future planning.
at the right level and the partnership is developing confidence. The Board is led
by an effective and visible Chair who provides clear direction and challenge to
partners. He is held to account by the Chief Executive, and lines of
accountability are clear. There is appropriate oversight of the MARAC and
MAPPA, and there are links with the Health and Wellbeing Board in place, the
Adults Safeguarding Board and the emerging Children and Families Alliance.
However the Board does not work with the Family Justice Board, which is a
statutory requirement, and this means that the Board does not oversee children
in public or private proceedings.
number of key areas. These include challenge to commissioners and providers
of CAMHS over their services at tiers 3 and 4, and agency attendance at
conferences and core groups. The Board also challenges agencies around the
take up of the Lead Professional role in Early Help. Robust cross-agency
challenge needs to become stronger and more embedded in the culture and
practice of the Board.


around multi-agency audit. It runs a number of thematic multi-agency audits
which are used to inform Board reviews of key areas. These include Early Help,
Sexual Abuse, Self-Harm, and Child Sexual Exploitation, and there is one
planned for Neglect. These reviews consider the strategic and operational
arrangements and develop an action plan to drive improvement. This is
beginning to lead to some tangible improvements in these areas (for example,
early help, sexual abuse work, self-harm) but many of these improvements are
still emerging or are very new and will need time to bed in.
performance in key areas, such as MARAC and MAPPA attendance, young
peoples waiting times for tier 3 and 4 CAMHS services and case loads in
childrens social care. This is a recent development, but sufficiently embedded
to provide evidence of challenge to partners, and the challenge is becoming
increasingly robust. The data set needs to be developed to include police data,
and used to monitor the effectiveness of adult mental health and substance
misuse services more effectively.
uses to inform strategy, and to identify need or priorities. This limits the Boards
capacity to understand its population and changing trends, to prioritise and
challenge the effectiveness of strategic arrangements and partners. A detailed
Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA), developed by the H&WBB, is now in
place which considers safeguarding.
rigorous and challenging. However, its evaluation of safeguarding in Devon is
limited because it is not informed by multi-agency data or the JSNA and does
not draw on lessons from serious case reviews. The Business Plan focuses the
work of the Board on key priorities, and addresses a number of the issues
raised in this report as areas for development.
too many courses cancelled, a significant overspend on budget, poor agency
take-up and poor quality content. The Board has reviewed and re-launched the
training programme and quality assurance arrangements are now in place.
There has been better agency take up of training and the new programme is
more effective in targeting skills development. Lessons from SCRs are
incorporated into the training, and the new programme meets the needs of the
work force better. There is, however, still a gap in the training programme
about disabled children, and the offer about mental health and the toxic trio
remains low at 70 places each for the year.


their manager. This gives more credible independent verification of impact and
is good practice. Although there needs to be much greater co-operation by
managers with this process, it provides some early independent evidence of
impact, and therefore meets statutory requirements. However, it could be
strengthened further by expanding the number of managers who engage and
by developing this process routinely within the supervision arrangements in the
partnership.
of children is not yet well understood by the Board and more work is needed to
ensure that this is strengthened. The Board currently incorporates childrens
views in its multi-agency audits, and this has informed planning. For example,
the strategy now includes a focus on training staff to speak to children.
Although the Board has a set of procedures in place which cover the basic
requirements of safeguarding, further development is required in some areas.
Guidance with greater detail and direction for staff is needed in relation to
domestic abuse, neglect and children who go missing.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted and two additional inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Jansy Kelly HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Brendan Parkinson HMI
Team inspectors (all HMI unless otherwise stated): Dominic Stevens, Karen Wareing,
Louise Hocking, Donna Marriott, Robert Pyner, Deane Jennings (Associate Inspector)
and Teresa Lavelle-Hill (Associate Inspector)
Quality assurance manager: Christopher Sands, Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


