Dorset
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection dates: 22 February 2016 to 17 March 2016
Report published: 23 May 2016

Childrens services in Dorset require improvement to be good

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
The director of childrens services and her senior team provide strong leadership. They
know which areas of the service need to be better and are taking steps to improve
these. However, many of the improvement measures they have planned are not yet in
place or have been too recently implemented to have made a sustained difference.
Consequently, children and young people in Dorset do not receive a consistently good
enough service. Referrals about childrens welfare are not always dealt with quickly or
well enough. Such drift and delay generally stem from poor management oversight and
decision making at this important early point of involvement with children and their
families.
On appointment two years ago, the director inherited a staffing structure in which
social work team managers had just been replaced with practice managers. As
individuals, many are capable managers but, as a whole, they lack the depth of
experience of more established team managers. Plans are in place to strengthen firstline management later in the year. In the interim, the director has added extra
management capacity to one of the busiest area offices. While inspectors found no
children left at immediate risk of significant harm, this lack of consistency means that
some wait longer than they should to see a social worker, to have their needs assessed
and to receive services. However, most referrals are dealt with effectively and the work
of the Multi-Agency Information Sharing Team (MAIST), which handles police and
domestic abuse referrals, is strong.
Most social workers know the children they are working with well, but this is not
always reflected in assessments. Some assessments are good, but many lack a strong
enough sense of childrens wishes and feelings or a clear analysis of the issues
affecting children. This means that plans arising from these assessments do not always
make the difference they could, because they are often vague about what needs to
change, who is going to do what, by when and how progress will be measured. This is
true for child in need and child protection plans, care plans, personal education plans
and care leavers pathway plans. Specialist assessments for children at risk of sexual
exploitation or living in homes where there is domestic abuse are not completed often
enough. For some children, this limits social workers ability to understand risk and to
plan to reduce it. Steps have been taken to improve work with children who are at risk
of sexual exploitation or from going missing, but this work remains weak. In particular,
children do not always receive return home interviews. When these do take place,
learning from them is not used well to support planning for individual children, nor is it
analysed to identify themes that could inform prevention work and service
development. Work to identify and assess the welfare of privately fostered children is
poor and requires significant improvement.


The number of children looked after by Dorset council has risen significantly over the
past 12 months. This rise stems from a sharper focus on identifying those children and
young people whose welfare can only be secured by becoming looked after. Although
some children looked after experienced delay at the point they entered care, the large
majority of recent decisions to take children into care are timely, and care proceedings
are completed quickly. Most children benefit from stable placements. The local
authority does well at placing children with extended family members and at placing
brothers and sisters together. The virtual school makes good use of the pupil premium,
but attainment and progress of children looked after at key stages 1, 2 and 4 is low in
comparison to national rates, and fixed-term exclusions are high. The number of
children looked after who receive a conviction, final warning or reprimand is high.
Permanence planning is stronger for younger children, particularly those for whom
adoption is the best option, but lacks rigour and pace for older children. Early
consideration is given as to whether adoption is in a childs best interests. When it is,
swift action is taken to secure the necessary legal status and a good match. However,
the quality of life story work could be improved. Social workers and personal advisers
provide strong, responsive support to care leavers, but longer term planning is weaker.
A high number of care leavers are not in education, employment or training. They do
not always receive information about their health histories or their rights and
entitlements.
Childrens and young peoples engagement in the Children in Care Council, Dorset Kidz,
is limited and is not sufficiently representative of all children looked after. Although
some young people have been very effectively involved in the local authoritys
commissioning of services, opportunities to contribute to service development through
the corporate parenting board are limited. Advocacy is not used enough to help involve
children in their looked after reviews or, particularly, in their child protection
conferences. Scrutiny arrangements provide insufficient challenge. Additional funding
has been provided to strengthen scrutiny by independent reviewing officers and chairs
of child protection case conferences and there are plans to improve member scrutiny,
but these measures are yet to have an impact. The analysis of complaints, and thus
the processes for using learning that arises from these to improve practice, is also
weak.
While there are examples of good multi-agency coordination in the commissioning of
services, such as Dorset Families Matter or the newly commissioned child and
adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) transformation programme, strategic
planning and commissioning across agencies are not strong. They are not driven by a
shared, multi-agency set of priorities and plan against which services can be
commissioned and progress measured. This has a particular impact on early help,
which is underdeveloped. Some services, such the local authority early intervention


teams, are strong but, overall, services are poorly coordinated and most are not of this
standard. The local authoritys Forward Together for Children vision has a focus on
early help and prevention, but the lack of a mature, multi-agency plan limits agencies
abilities to provide a cohesive early help offer and to maximise the difference they
make for children.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)



Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  The Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates three childrens homes. One was judged to be good
and one was outstanding at their most recent Ofsted inspections.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in September 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in September 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services has been in post since January 2014.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since December 2015.
 The LSCB is not shared, but there are shared sub-groups and other working
arrangements with Bournemouth and Poole LSCB.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 77,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Dorset. This is 18.5% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 11.7% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 12.5% (the national level is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 9.9% (the national level is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 3.8% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
mixed White and Asian and mixed White and Black Caribbean.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 3% (the national average is 19.4%).
 in secondary schools is 2.4% (the national average is 15%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local, unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 January 2016, 2,439 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 January 2016, 406 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 372 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 March 2015, 12 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from seven at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection, seven serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and six serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at
the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 January 2016, 466 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 60.5 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 385 (50 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015. Of this number:
authority area
authority area
area
 no children were unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 16 adoptions
returned to be looked after


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


to independent living
in houses of in multiple occupation.

Recommendations

Prioritise the implementation of measures to strengthen management oversight
and decision making, to ensure that when children are referred to childrens
services they are seen, their circumstances are assessed and services that
match their needs are provided in a consistently prompt and effective manner.


Improve the quality of analysis and the focus on childrens and young peoples
wishes in assessments, so that the plans they give rise to are more sharply
focused on their needs.


Improve how plans are used to achieve better outcomes for children by making
sure that they are clear about what needs to be achieved, who will complete
what actions, in what timescale and how progress will be measured.


Complete the implementation of plans to improve the scrutiny and challenge of
child protection and care plans by the independent conference and review
service.


Ensure that specialist risk assessments are completed when this is relevant and
will support better understanding of childrens and young peoples
circumstances, particularly those for children at risk of child sexual exploitation
or living in homes where there is domestic abuse.


Take action to ensure that all children living in private fostering arrangements
are identified and receive a timely and thorough assessment of their needs.


Improve the use of return interviews' for children who have been missing from
home or care, to protect them better individually and through the identification
of any patterns or themes that can inform prevention work and service
development, particularly when these relate to child sexual exploitation.


Help children and young people to be more actively involved in their child
protection case conferences and looked after reviews through strengthening the
use of advocacy.



Take action to reduce the high number of short-term exclusions of children
looked after, particularly those in Years 9, 10 and 11.

the Children in Care Council, Dorset Kidz, and improve consultation and
participation, so that their views are better reflected and used to influence
service development.
criminal justice system, to understand the issues resulting in the high
percentage receiving formal interventions and develop a strategy to reduce this.
about their health history and their rights and entitlements.
apprenticeships for care leavers, to increase the number who are in
employment, education or training.

Strengthen the quality of permanence planning for children who do not have a
plan of adoption and for older children and young people.

life letters, ensuring that they are completed by suitably skilled practitioners.
services for children by working with partner agencies to ensure that there are
shared priorities and plans against which services can be commissioned and
progress measured.
common themes and, additionally, strengthen the processes for disseminating
learning from complaints to improve practice.
childrens services by the local authoritys scrutiny function and corporate
parenting panel.


Summary for children and young people
 Childrens services in Dorset provide help that makes things better for most
children. A few wait longer than they should to see a social worker and to get the
help they need. The council know that this is not good enough. They are working
hard to make it better, but still have a lot to do for all services to be good as they
should be.
 Almost all social workers know the children they are working with well. Social
workers have a good idea of childrens wishes and feelings and can explain what
help they need. These are not always written down clearly in assessments or
plans. This means that children and families, social workers and other people
involved, like teachers, are sometimes muddled about what is expected of them.
 When children are found after they have been missing from their families or from
care, they do not always get to sit down with someone to explain why they went
missing or anything that is worrying them. Although the council is getting better
at doing this, information from these interviews is not always used to make sure
children get the help they need and make it less likely that they will go missing
again.
 Social workers do not always complete specialist assessments to help them
understand the risk to children and young people living in homes where there is
domestic violence between parents, or when they might be at risk of sexual
exploitation. Inspectors told the council that it needs to work harder at keeping
these children and young people safe.
 Children and young people only come into care when they really need to. When
this does need to happen, social workers make sure that it happens quickly,
which helps to keep children safe. They support children in care by finding them
foster homes where they can feel settled, sometimes with people like aunts,
uncles or grandparents. Brothers and sisters are placed together whenever
possible.
 When adoption is the best plan for children, social workers work very hard to find
the best families for them. Adopters told inspectors that they felt the local
authority did a good job of making sure they were properly prepared to look after
a child and that they were the right family.
 Social workers need to do better at making plans for the future of older children
and young children who are not going to be adopted. They also need to do better
at helping children and young people do well at school and make sure care
leavers have good opportunities to find a job, training or to stay in education.


 Managers and councillors have asked the young people involved in the Children in
Care Council, Dorset Kidz, what their views are about how to improve services.
However, they need to make it easier for a larger group of young people to be
involved to share their views and they need to do better at listening to what
young people say.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
The local authority does not deal consistently quickly or well enough with all the
referrals it receives about childrens and young peoples welfare. While inspectors found
no children or young people were left at immediate risk of significant harm, this lack of
consistency means that they wait longer than they should to see a social worker, to
have their needs assessed and to receive services. Drift and delay in such cases
generally stemmed from poor management oversight and decision making. Measures to
strengthen management oversight are either not yet in place or too recent to have had
a significant impact. Despite this, most referrals are dealt with effectively, and the work
of the Multi-Agency Information Sharing Team, which deals with referrals from the
police and those relating to domestic abuse, is strong.
While some early help services, such as Dorset Families Matter, are strong, overall, the
local authority and partner agencies are not working well enough together to provide a
cohesive early help offer. The common assessment framework (CAF) is not used well.
Most CAFs are not clear about what needs to change, by when or how this will be
achieved. A lack of clarity around private fostering arrangements results in a poor
service to this small but vulnerable group.
Social work assessments are of variable quality. Many lack a robust analysis or a strong
enough focus on childrens experiences. A screening tool to help assess risk to children
living with domestic abuse is not used as often as it should be. Advocacy is not being
used well to strengthen the voice of children in child protection conferences. Social
workers do well at involving a range of agencies in work with children but services do
not always make sufficient difference. This is because plans are often vague about what
needs to be achieved and, as a result, help is sometimes poorly coordinated and
progress is difficult to measure.
Services for children and young people who go missing, and those at risk of sexual
exploitation, are not robust. Return interviews are not always carried out when children
return from being missing. This limits both understanding of the reasons why they went
missing and future safety planning. Child sexual exploitation risk assessments are not
always completed, are not used well to inform planning and are rarely reviewed. A new
service to provide return interviews and therapeutic work has been commissioned from
a national charity and 15 child sexual abuse champions roles have been created within
the local authority. This has led to improvements, but services remain poorly
coordinated and improvement lacks pace.


Inspection findings
significant harm, the local authoritys response to referrals about children is
neither consistently prompt, nor of sufficient quality. In three of five locality
offices that receive referrals, a large majority of decisions are appropriate,
made within 24 hours, with assessments promptly allocated and children seen
in a timely manner. For a few children in these offices and for a significant
minority in the other two area offices, decisions are not always made within 24
hours or are consistent with referral information, assessments are not allocated
in a timely manner and there are delays in children being seen. These delays
mean that some children are left in situations of unassessed risk and wait
longer than they need to receive services. The local authority recognises these
weaknesses and measures are planned to strengthen management oversight
across these offices. However, with the exception of one of the area offices,
where additional management capacity has been added but is still too new to
have had a significant impact, these measures will not be in place until later in
the year. Parental consent to information sharing is not consistently recorded at
the point of referral (Recommendation).
abuse, are dealt with promptly and effectively by the pan-Dorset Multi-Agency
Information Sharing Team. The MAIST is staffed with social workers from
Dorset, Poole and Bournemouth, as well as police and health staff. When
referrals are received, information is quickly shared between agencies. This
means that decisions are supported by a clear rationale, and childrens cases
are quickly passed on to the relevant area office for any further assessment
needed and to receive services. Plans are in place to expand the MAIST into a
pan-Dorset Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub from September 2016. This
extended service will deal with all referrals about children and young people.
Bournemouth, is appropriately staffed with sufficient experienced qualified
workers. The OOHS provides a direct-access 24-hour social worker telephone
service, which is a real strength. It enjoys good working relationships with the
police and has extra flexibility and depth of resources due to its three-council
coverage. Decision making is timely, appropriate and clear. This leads to
effective interventions that protect children out of office hours.
making a positive difference for children. However, the quality of early help
services for children and their families is not consistent. The common


assessment framework is not used well and most CAFs seen by inspectors are
not clear about what needs to change, by when or how agencies and families
will work together to achieve change. An online CAF (e-CAF) system is being
introduced across the county to increase the use of the CAF by agencies. ECAFs identify the lead professional but do not clearly detail how activity is to be
coordinated. The impact of this is that, while an increasing number of e-CAFs
are undertaken by partner agencies, these are not consistently making a
positive difference to the well-being of children.
young people whose needs are complex or multiple, yet just below the
threshold for statutory social work services. Workers in these teams are
completing comprehensive early help assessments of childrens needs, leading
to plans of intervention that are worked through with families until either their
circumstances have improved or they are referred for a statutory social work
service.
children and families with additional support needs. Parents who met with
inspectors spoke highly about the services that they are receiving. Dorset
Families Matter, the name given in Dorset to the governments Troubled
Families programme, has successfully improved outcomes for all of the 590
families worked with up to the end of March 2015 in phase one of the
programme. As a result of this effective work, the local authority was chosen to
be an early implementer of phase two of the programme.
held very quickly. However, decisions made at these meetings do not always
take sufficient account of historical factors or make it clear how quickly children
need to be seen. In a few cases, child protection investigations do not take
place by the time of the initial child protection case conferences agreed at
strategy meetings. This results in some initial conferences taking place without
a substantive assessment to inform decision making. Decisions about whether
children may be at risk of significant harm, and how agencies should proceed,
are primarily made during telephone strategy discussions, rather than at faceto-face strategy meetings. While many discussions have to take place by
telephone due to the urgency with which decisions need to be taken, inspectors
did see a few situations in which the time available would have allowed face-toface strategy meetings to be held. In these cases, meetings would have
enabled more comprehensive information sharing to have taken place and
would have supported better planning.


protection conferences is variable. Although many are good, most are not of
this standard and a small number are very poor. In common with initial decision
making about referrals, this variability has a strong correlation with the quality
of the management oversight and direction given to social workers. Some
investigations lack rigour and focus. Social workers do not always consider
historical factors sufficiently, see children alone or consider their views and
experiences carefully enough. Better investigations are characterised by a
comprehensive analysis of childrens circumstances, based on relevant multiagency information and a stronger child focus. Work with children and young
people with disabilities balances attention to the needs arising from their
disability with a clear focus on any needs for help and protection they may
have. Between 1 April 2014 and 31 March 2015, 91% of conferences took place
within 15 days of the strategy discussion. This means that children and young
people have a stronger chance of receiving coordinated help sooner and is
significantly better than the 75% average for similar local authorities. However,
the involvement of children in conferences is weak, whether through
attendance, meeting with independent chairs beforehand, or by submitting
letters or recordings. Between July and October 2015, advocates only attended
six conferences out of the 223 held. Although the local authority has plans to
move from an opt in to an opt out approach to providing advocates for
children, current use of advocacy to support their engagement in conferences is
minimal (Recommendation).
are either not shared with parents prior to conferences or are only shared at
the last minute. This hinders parents ability to understand concerns relating to
their children by giving them too little time to consider reports, or to query
points that they either do not understand or disagree with. While the
attendance of agencies at conferences is generally good, and this ensures that
conferences have up-to-date information on which to base decisions, police and
GP involvement is noticeably weaker. Local authority monitoring data between
July and October 2015 showed that only half of conferences received a
contribution from a GP and that only 65% of conferences were attended by the
police.
risen significantly. At the time of the inspection, 426 were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a rise from 372 at 31 March 2015 and, representing a
rate of 55 per 10,000 of the population under 18 years of age, is much higher
than the most recently recorded average rate of 39 per 10,000 for similar local
authorities at 31 March 2015. Although high, inspectors saw no examples of


children subject to plans for whom this was not an appropriate and
proportionate response to their needs and levels of risk. However, inspectors
did see examples of children for whom there had previously been delay in
identifying and responding to long-standing chronic concerns and who had only
more recently become the subject of a child protection plan. This rise in the
number of children subject to child protection plans is consistent with a parallel
rise in the rate of care proceedings, and in the number and age of children
coming into care.
most requiring some improvement to be good. Delay in seeing children is a
frequent weakness and, in most assessments, they are seen only once during
the course of the assessment process. In poorer assessments, the wishes and
feelings of children and family members are not clear, analysis is weak and
what needs to happen to improve things for children is not made clear. In most
assessments, insufficient attention is paid to understanding the views of
fathers, particularly when they were not living with their children. Research
evidence is rarely used to inform assessments and there is little evidence that
direct work tools are used to engage with children and elicit their views. Better
assessments are completed in a timely manner, clearly reflect the wishes and
feelings of children, contain fuller analysis and make clear recommendations for
further work. Some good assessments were seen that were completed by a
specialist assessment and intervention service. The greater clarity and focus of
these assessments support more effective interventions. This is reflected in the
very positive feedback received from 116 parents and carers in a survey in
November 2015 (Recommendation).
took place between August 2015 and February 2016 shows that domestic abuse
was a significant concern in almost all cases, parental mental ill health in half of
cases and parental alcohol misuse and drug misuse in a third of cases each.
The toxic trio of domestic abuse, parental mental ill health and parental drug,
alcohol or substance abuse was present in combination in 44% of cases.
Despite this high prevalence, screening tools designed to help assess the level
of risk to children living in homes where domestic violence is present are not
routinely completed by social workers. This means that the level of risk which
some children may face may not have been correctly identified, reducing the
likelihood that they will receive the help they need. Arrangements are in place
to share information between professionals and to coordinate support to victims
of domestic violence at multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARAC).
However, the number of referrals from childrens services is low. This may be
linked to the underuse of domestic abuse screening tools, but does mean that


MARACs are not generally being used to enhance and complement support to
children from existing child in need and child protection plans
(Recommendation).
of children and young people living with domestic abuse, parental mental ill
health and parental drug, alcohol or substance misuse. This document
recognises that there is more work to be done on information sharing and data
recording to understand better the issues relating to the toxic trio. While there
is information about activity levels of adult service provision aimed at improving
parenting capacity, there is very limited information about the outcome of these
interventions. This means that the local authority is not able to plan service
delivery effectively to address such issues. Social workers spoken to by
inspectors particularly highlighted a lack of service provision to tackle the
impact of parental mental ill health on children and a lack of programmes for
perpetrators of domestic violence.
be achieved, but lack clarity about what needs to be done, who will do it, by
when and how progress will be measured. This is also true for child protection
core groups and children in need planning meetings. This means that, although
these meetings are generally well attended and clearly recorded, there is delay
in achieving change for some children and, for others, professionals are
sometimes slow to recognise the need to step up to a child protection plan or
legal proceedings. This is particularly the case for children experiencing chronic
neglect or when there has been a series of incidents, each of which on its own
may not be significantly concerning but which, taken together, should give rise
to significant concern for a child. For a very few children, an over-optimism
about the extent or permanence of progress achieved leads to premature
decisions to step down from child protection to child in need, or from child in
need to early help services (Recommendation).
consistently good enough. Although the local authority is developing this work
and has improved identification of children at risk of sexual exploitation, this
work lacks rigour and depth of analysis, and is not well coordinated. Child
sexual exploitation risk assessments are completed for a very large majority of
children who may be at risk. However, when risk assessments are completed,
they are often completed in a tick-box manner, rather than as an aid to
professional social work judgement. As a result, for a few children and young
people, the full extent of the risks are not being recognised. The number of
children who are assessed to be at a significant risk is low, with numbers


considerably below those in neighbouring local authorities. Only three young
people from Dorset, assessed to be at high risk of child sexual exploitation,
were discussed at the pan-Dorset child sexual exploitation meeting in January
are not regularly reviewed to help understand if risks have increased or
decreased. This means that the local authority does not have a clear picture of
the difference it is making for children. This makes it more difficult to improve
the effectiveness of both planning for individual children and of planning
services for all children (Recommendation).
children and young people at risk of sexual exploitation. It has identified 15
child sexual exploitation champions across childrens services. These
champions provide advice and support to social workers working with children
or young people who are at risk of sexual exploitation. A new service, providing
return home interviews to children and young people who have been missing
and therapeutic work with those at risk of child sexual exploitation, was
commissioned in 2015 from a national charity experienced in this work. This
new service has been phased in from June 2015 to February 2016. While the
additional capacity and expertise offered by this new service is clearly positive,
it is too soon for it to have had a significant impact. Although no cases have
been referred to the local authority, clear safeguarding policies, good
communication with partner agencies and substantial training for staff show
that the local authority has taken a thorough approach to the risks of female
genital mutilation and radicalisation (Recommendation).
number of children and young people who have been missing are neither
offered nor receive a return interview, or do not receive one within 72 hours of
their return from being missing. Between October 2015 and February 2016, 31
children went missing on a total of 72 occasions, but return interviews were
only completed for 60% of these missing episodes. While this is an
improvement on the 52% achieved between April and July 2015, it still leaves a
large number of children without return interviews and with the circumstances
surrounding their missing episode unassessed. The failure to carry out return
interviews for this minority of children and young people limits the local
authoritys ability to assess risk fully and put in place plans that are likely to
reduce the risk of their going missing again. It also limits their ability to make
any connections that may exist between going missing and a risk of sexual
exploitation for individual children and young people. Intelligence from return
interviews is not aggregated to help identify particular themes, such as what
children are running from or to, that could helpfully inform service development


and prevention and disruption work in relation to child sexual exploitation
(Recommendation).
educated in Dorset; this is broadly in line with national averages. The local
authority has a team of four designated visiting officers to monitor the
education and welfare of these children and young people by making at least
one annual monitoring visit to those families who agree to meet with them.
However, the local authoritys ability to monitor their education and welfare is
limited because, in the year 201415, only 57% were visited. Safeguarding
concerns identified by visiting officers are dealt with promptly. In the last year,
this has resulted in four children returning to mainstream education.
mental health problems has resulted in some being placed in one of Dorsets
five learning centres instead of mainstream provision. The learning centres
cater for a wider cohort than would be present in a pupil referral unit and
include some long-term specialist placements. Recent data for all learners in
learning centres shows often very low attendance by a significant minority, and
low attainment compared with their peers by the small number of children
looked after in centres. A low proportion of pupils in learning centres was
reintegrated back into mainstream education or specialist provision between
September 2015 and January 2016, varying between 10% and 23%.
or specialist setting are not strong. The vast majority of the cohort are longterm non-attenders at school, but there is no clarity as to when persistently low
or non-attendance translates into a child being defined as missing education
and referred to the children missing education team. In too many cases, visits
did not take place when planned or follow-up actions were delayed. This not
only slows childrens reintegration into full-time education, but limits the local
authoritys knowledge about their welfare when they are not in school. Of the
least three months.
cases, recording does not identify whether children were seen alone and it is
difficult to gain a clear sense of their wishes, feelings, fears and hopes.
Recording does not always show when or if direct work has been undertaken
with children to understand their world. Even when it was apparent from other


case recording, or it was clear from inspectors conversations with social
workers that it took place, management decision making, oversight and
direction is not consistently recorded on childrens case files. When
management decisions and oversight are recorded, they often lack sufficient
frequency or clarity to ensure that work with children is progressed with
enough pace or focus.
quality work. A comprehensive procedure identifies the legal and procedural
framework and helps to ensure that the needs of this group are addressed.
Assessments are timely, and both the provision identified and decisions about
whether young people need to become looked after are appropriate and are
made on the basis of need. Effective mediation work is undertaken with some
young people, enabling them to return home with packages of support.
poor. Little has been done to raise the awareness of either the public or other
agencies, particularly schools and GPs. The authority does not have an accurate
picture of the numbers of young people in private fostering arrangements in
Dorset. Work with the small number of children who are known to be privately
fostered is mostly weak, lacking focus or timeliness. This means that the local
authority cannot be sure about the welfare of these children and young people
(Recommendation).
thorough and the arrangements that support his work are sound. The creation
of a dedicated post has enabled a clear focus to be sustained on the
management of allegations against staff to ensure that children are
safeguarded. The work of the designated officer is clearly recorded and
enquiries are responded to appropriately and, almost always, promptly.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
The number of children looked after by Dorset has risen significantly over the last 12
months. This rise stems from a sharper focus on identifying those children and young
people whose welfare can only be secured by becoming looked after. Although some
children looked after experienced delay at the point they entered care, the large
majority of recent decisions to take children into care are timely. Most benefit from
positive placements. Plans to further improve placement choice through improved
commissioning and increasing foster carer numbers are in place. Permanence planning is
strong for younger children, particularly those for whom adoption is the best option, but
is less rigorous or timely for older children.
Social workers know most children and young people well, but do not always complete
up-to-date assessments and plans that reflect childrens current needs. The local
authority has taken action to improve the independent conference and review service,
but challenge and scrutiny of childrens plans remains limited. The virtual school makes
good use of the pupil premium and provides strong support to children in primary
schools, but the attainment and progress of children at key stages 1, 2 and 4 is low in
comparison to national rates. Risks to children and young people associated with either
being missing from care or sexual exploitation are reported and tracked. However, the
quality of return interviews is variable and information gathered is not used well to
inform childrens care plans to reduce the likelihood of future missing episodes.
The local authority has engaged a limited number of children looked after in Dorsets
Children in Care Council, Dorset Kidz. The number and age range of children and young
people involved are not sufficiently representative of all children looked after.
Opportunities to participate and contribute to service developments through the
corporate parenting board are limited and the pace of change is slow.
The local authoritys use and provision of adoption are good. It considers at an early
stage whether adoption is in a childs best interests and, when it is, acts swiftly to
secure the necessary legal status and a good match. Responses to prospective adopters
are welcoming and assessments are thorough and sensitively conducted.
Care leavers receive strong support when they need immediate help, but planning needs
to be much better and to start earlier to provide effective longer-term support. Their
health needs are poorly considered and the number of 19- to 21-year-old care leavers
who are not in education, employment or training is high.


Inspection findings
children looked after, at 60 per 10,000 of the population under 18 years of age
(January 2016) has increased from the rate of 50 per 10,000 at 31 March 2015
and is higher than the average for similar local authorities of 53 per 10,000 (31
March 2015). This rise in numbers is appropriate, and stems from a sharper
focus by the local authority on identifying those children and young people
whose welfare can only be secured by becoming looked after and on ensuring
that this is achieved in a timely manner. Although some children currently
looked after experienced delays in decision making and action at the point they
entered care, the large majority of recent decisions to take children into care
are timely and based on clear reasons. This means that children are protected
more quickly and are less likely to be at risk of further harm.
young people. Most children are receiving appropriate care, are well matched in
a timely way with carers, and their life chances are enhanced. However, for a
minority, outcomes are not so positive because childrens and young peoples
care is not effectively assessed and planned. This means that they do not
always receive the support and services that they need to help them make
sense of their past life experiences, to get the best out of being in care and to
settle in permanent homes.
have appropriate plans to support them and risks are clearly understood and
minimised. However, for a small minority of children and young people, support
is not as strong. Since November 2015, action has been taken to improve
systems, and a pilot project in Weymouth has been providing more intensive,
flexible help and support to ensure that children on the edge of care are safe to
return or remain at home. While impact is necessarily limited, due to the pilot
project only operating in Weymouth, plans are in place to expand this service
across the whole county from September 2016.
care proceedings has risen appropriately. In the 10 months from April 2015 to
January 2015, 168 care orders had already been made, compared with 127 for
the whole 12 months up to April 2015. This increase is in line with the local
authoritys sharper focus on identifying those children and young people whose
welfare can only be secured by becoming looked after, and where it has sought
to reduce the inappropriately high percentage of children looked after in
voluntary arrangements under section 20 of the Children Act 1989. Where


children have been placed under such voluntary arrangements and parents
have not worked in partnership with the local authority, it has lacked the legal
capacity to drive planning for these children and discharge its obligations fully
as a corporate parent. While significant progress has been made over the last
year, the local authority still has a higher percentage of children placed under
such arrangements than the average for similar councils.
and progression of care proceedings. With an average duration of 27 weeks
between April and December 2015, the timeliness of care proceedings is better
than the national average of 30 weeks for the same period. Feedback from the
Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service and the Local Family
Justice Board describes ongoing improvement in the quality of assessments and
in the timeliness of applications to court, particularly for babies and young
children and in situations where children have experienced chronic neglect.
planning for children within care proceedings is appropriately applied, and
thorough assessments to approve connected persons carers are in place,
although the timeliness of Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) checks requires
improvement. However, this means that children can be placed safely and
permanently with family members, where it is in their best interests to do so.
older children. Most children looked after do not have clear permanence plans
in place or, if they do, those plans are not being systematically implemented or
tracked. This means that arrangements about important parts of their lives,
such as their education and health, are not secured as quickly or effectively as
they could be. Practice is more positive for younger children, particularly those
in adoptive placements, for whom robust tracking systems are in place.
systematic. Measures to improve staff understanding and to embed effective
permanence planning include: a permanence panel to oversee and drive
planning for children and young people; clear new procedures, which include a
requirement to hold permanence planning meetings; staff training; and
additional resourcing of the independent reviewing service to provide stronger
oversight and scrutiny. However, many of these measures are either relatively
new or not yet fully in place and so have not had sufficient impact to embed
consistent good practice and improve outcomes (Recommendation).


consulted and listened to, and have good relationships with their social
workers. Case recording, in electronic case files of children looked after,
accurately reflects the work done with them in almost all cases. Assessments of
childrens needs are not always in place and are not regularly updated. This
means that changes in their circumstances do not always inform care planning.
The quality of care plans is variable. Most are not clear and lack sufficient
focus, detail or clarity about desired outcomes. This means that neither
involved professionals, nor children and their families can always check that
actions are completed or progress is being made. Inspectors saw many
examples of positive multi-agency working involving services such as the
specialist CAMHS for children looked after, the virtual school, youth support
workers, alcohol and drugs workers and the police. However, the lack of
consistently strong and up-to-date assessments or clear and effectively
monitored plans means that this positive work is often lacking in focus or is
reactive and so does not achieve the best outcomes possible for children
(Recommendation).
friends are good. They are well considered and facilitated. Regular sessional
staff are used to provide continuity of transport arrangements and familiarity
and consistent supervision of contact sessions. When childrens identity needs
are well considered in care planning, diversity issues, such as race, religion and
language, are usually well considered too. However, for a significant minority of
children and young people, diversity issues are not sufficiently taken into
account. This is particularly the case when broader issues of identity, such as
the emotional impact of past life events, have lacked attention or consideration.
in consultation with young people, and is overseen by the corporate parenting
board. Advocacy services for children are available and, although not limited by
capacity, are under-used in supporting young peoples engagement in statutory
reviews. An independent visitor service is available for children, with 11
currently linked to the service. Complaints for children looked after are well
managed. However, there is more work to do to ensure that the learning
arising is used to inform practice development.
and the large majority benefit from positive, stable placements. In the 12
months preceding the inspection, 11% of children looked after experienced
more than two changes of placement. This compares well with the most up-todate average figure available for similar local authorities of 12% for the year


and supported to remain with carers unless this is no longer suitable.
activities. In some cases, activities arranged through schools have been
supported by the pupil premium. Foster carers exercise delegated authority on
an individual child-led basis. However, foster carers told inspectors that they
were unclear about where delegated authority was set out, and what they can
and cannot do (Recommendation).
from care is clear, and that they are reported missing promptly. However, the
quality of return interviews is variable. They are not always offered, held, or
held within 72 hours. Information gathered is not used well to inform childrens
and young peoples care plans to reduce the likelihood of further missing
episodes (Recommendation).
undertakes individual work to prevent custodial sentences and to limit offences
committed in residential childrens homes. However, the number of children
looked after who receive a conviction, final warning or reprimand is high, at 20
over the age of 10 between April 2014 and March 2015. At 10% of all children
looked after, this is double the 5% national average for the same period. Drug
and alcohol services are currently provided via a commissioned service, and
trained outreach workers are also available to work with young people
(Recommendation).
provision of initial and review health assessments for children looked after. This
means that childrens health needs have not always been properly identified or
progressed. An increase in resources since November 2015, combined with
significant improvements to systems, has led to rapid yet very recent progress.
For example, January 2016 figures for initial health assessments increased from
looked after are receiving more timely health assessments to address their
health needs.
continuity of care. Where this is not possible, arrangements are put in place
and tracked by the care and support panel to ensure that young peoples health
needs will be met. A small but dedicated CAMHS team for children looked after
offers helpful expertise and consultation to social workers, carers and


residential staff, in and out of county, which assists and promotes placement
stability.
provide a good level of support to all children looked after. The team is well
managed and stable. Working relationships between the virtual school team,
schools and specialist agencies are generally productive. The virtual school
team provides some good direct interventions and support for children looked
after, particularly in English and mathematics. The virtual school also provides
well-received training for teachers, foster carers and school governors on
attachment issues and how they affect pupils learning and behaviours.
However, individual caseloads for virtual school advisers are now high due to
the increase in the number of children and young people who have entered
care. In response to this, the virtual school service is developing new ways to
maintain the quality of delivery.
targeted and effective support to children looked after, including one-to-one
support and specialist teaching. Achievements of children looked after are
celebrated in a high-profile annual awards event. Attendance at schools,
learning centres and special schools is high, and has improved to a current
average of 95% across all year groups. No child looked after has been
permanently excluded in the past year, but short-term exclusions are high, at
prompt interventions. However, no data is generated identifying their
attainment or progress by cohorts such as ethnicity, gender, geographical
location or adviser. The vast majority of children looked after are placed in
schools in Dorset and out of county which are judged good or outstanding.
Those who are not remain at their school when it is in their best interests.
good quality, and are helping children and the professionals working with them
to focus on improvement, particularly at primary level. The other half of PEPs
were mostly poor and some have little content or value. The quality and impact
of post-16 PEPs is similarly variable (Recommendation).
in the past three years and present particular challenges, notably poor
behaviours and acceptance of low attainment, which the virtual school has not
resolved. In 2015, the attainment of young people looked after with GCSEs at
A* to C with or without English and mathematics was low. Although in line with


national rates for this cohort, this level of attainment has not improved over the
past three years.
better picture than previous academic years. However, the proportion making
expected levels of progress between key stages 1 and 2 in reading, writing and
mathematics was well below national rates for children in care. The number of
Year 11 pupils progressing to Year 12 also improved, yet a fifth of Year 11s still
ended up not in education, employment of training (NEET), or entered
employment without training. Opportunities for work experience, traineeships
and apprenticeships for children looked after are underdeveloped. A new
initiative to increase the provision in these areas is positive, but has only just
been approved by the council.
demand for children needing foster carers by expanding the use of connected
persons and independent fostering agencies (IFAs). Plans include a new
placements team to rationalise the commissioning of all placements, to engage
more fully with existing IFAs and residential frameworks, and to recruit and
retain more local foster carers for older and more challenging young people.
analysis of relevant information which enables sound decision making about
approval. Delays in processing DBS checks by the police has caused difficulties
in some connected persons carers being approved. Foster carers, including
connected persons, benefit from good initial training and a range of good
quality further training, on themes including child sexual exploitation and
attachment. However, not all carers receive information about training
opportunities. They say they are dependent on their supervising social worker
for information and that not all supervising social workers are efficient in
alerting them to what is available (Recommendation).
receiving significant financial investment to improve effectiveness. This is aimed
at providing greater challenge and scrutiny of childrens care plans, particularly
around plans for permanence and to create more capacity and focus for
children looked after. Although recently recruited, independent conference and
reviewing managers met by inspectors had manageable caseloads. The average
for the service is 77 (January 2016). This figure is slightly higher than the
maximum of 70 recommended in the independent reviewing officers handbook.
example, December 2015 data shows a range from 73% to 95% regarding the


number of childrens care plans that have been regularly reviewed. This means
that the local authority does not have a clear picture of how well this service is
performing on which to base performance management and service
improvement activity. Mid-way monitoring of plans is not fully embedded and,
at the time of the inspection, was only in place for 17% of children and young
people. At 3%, the number of children and young people chairing their own
reviews is low. This means that all children and young people do not have the
opportunity to get to know their ICRM well or to engage and participate fully in
their review process (Recommendation).
representative of all children and young people looked after. For example, there
is currently no juniors group. Participation processes for children and young
people to be consulted and contribute their views to the corporate parenting
board are underdeveloped and progress is slow. Some actions have been
completed, for example the use of the MOMO app to improve childrens and
young peoples participation, but others have stalled, such as the proposal to
have elected member champions. The slow pace of change regarding
corporate parenting priorities is acknowledged by corporate parenting
members, and proposed changes to the functioning of the board are being
progressed (Recommendation).

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

right time for those children for whom adoption is the best permanence option.
The last twelve months have seen a substantial increase, from 24 to 47, in the
number of decisions to place children for adoption. Inspectors judged that
these decisions were well founded. As well as children who have entered care
more recently, this improvement also benefits a group of children whose entry
to care was delayed because of historic shortcomings in effective assessment
and decision making. These children experienced drift in their early care
planning but, where appropriate, now have plans for adoption that their social
workers are actively progressing.
planning with appropriate urgency and makes early decisions to seek
permanent homes for children through adoption. Care and placement orders


are made within reasonable time frames. The local authority has consistently
met the adoption scorecard thresholds.
regional or national resources whenever necessary. For a minority of children,
progress towards adoption is impaired by delays in the completion of key tasks,
such as good quality child permanence reports. This is due to expertise being
spread too thinly and some workers and managers lacking skills, experience
and confidence in this area of work. The local authority is aware of this deficit
and has clear plans to address it. Despite this weakness, overall timeliness is
good and improving, with over 75% of children placed for adoption within 18
months of entering care. While there have been delays in securing adoption
orders in a minority of cases because of a lack of capacity, in the large majority
of cases adoption orders are made in good time.
This enables managers to identify and address potential problems quickly and
to combat drift. At the time of inspection, 19 children had an adoption decision,
not placed and 20 were in adoption placements but had not yet had final
orders. This represents a substantial increase in adoption activity from previous
years and none of these children had been waiting for an unreasonable period.
necessary, change plans away from adoption for a small number of children. In
a few of these cases, there were delays in rescinding the placement orders
after the decision to use another form of permanent placement. However, the
impact of this on children was minimal, because the local authority was clear
about the decision and they all lived in other stable, long-term placements.
adopters who were awaiting placements. Ten of these were already linked to
specific children. Only in exceptional circumstances do adopters wait long
periods without being matched.
ensure timely and good quality matching. Workers undertaking adopter
assessments are well informed about children waiting for adoption. They use
this knowledge effectively to identify potential matches, which can be swiftly
pursued once adopters have been approved. Adopters told inspectors that this
had been both reassuring and of great help in making the right matches. The
local authority has also become better at securing good matches for harder to
place children through its use of regional and national family-finding processes.


life appreciation days. The transition from foster care to adoption placements
is well planned and managed. In recent years, a few children have experienced
adoption disruptions, but the local authority has good processes in place to
learn from these disruptions and has used these to improve practice. For
example, it has reinforced the critical role of foster carers in the transition
process and ensured that carers are now better trained and supported to help
children and adopters with this transition. Adopters reported that the improved
involvement of foster carers in managing successful transitions had been
invaluable.
and enabling the local authority to place young children with their potential
adopters early in their lives and, in some cases, immediately after birth. This
means that children are given the best possible chance to form good
attachments with their future parents. The local authority promotes fostering to
adopt well with potential adopters and provides good preparation, including
specific training for this role. At the time of the inspection, the local authority
had seven fostering to adopt placements approved and ready for matching.
when this is in their best interests, and decisions to separate are based on
robust assessments. However, in a small number of cases, brothers and sisters
were separated primarily because the authority was unable to identify a
suitable placement. Similarly, where brothers and/or sisters had been
separated, plans to ensure continued contact were not always clear enough.
support informed by post-adoption support plans. The authoritys post-adoption
support team is highly skilled and passionate about its work. However, support
plans are limited in scope and tend to put the onus on adopters to ask for help.
Some new adopters told inspectors that they were not aware of whether they
had a support plan. A particularly good and innovative feature of the postadoption service is the work to support the education of adopted children. This
includes improving the understanding and skills of teachers and other
educational staff in meeting the needs of adopted children, promoting more
effective use of the pupil premium and providing individually tailored
programmes of support. Continuing contact arrangements are supported by an
effective letterbox scheme.
examples of good quality work. However, books are not always completed in


good time and some adopters who spoke to inspectors said that their children
had not yet received them. Later life letters have some good features, but
some also demonstrate a lack of understanding about the age of the reader at
whom they are aimed (Recommendation).
strong commitment to the role. This ensures that key decisions are subject to
proper scrutiny and challenge. The adoption panel is appropriately constituted
and chaired by an experienced practitioner. It provides a valuable quality
assurance process and promotes good practice. Workers generally value the
challenge and scrutiny it provides. The panel reports regularly to the corporate
parenting panel on its work and on wider adoption performance and practice.
authority was welcoming and informative. Assessments are thorough and
contribute to preparing potential adopters. They are completed promptly,
though in some cases time was lost due to delays in the police processing DBS
checks. Adopters are supported to expand the range of children they might
consider caring for, but are not pushed to make unrealistic commitments.
Support and guidance for adults, such as birth relatives, is good and ensures
that the local authority meets its statutory duties in this area.
training offered to workers. This is often provided by national experts and
enables workers to stay up to date regarding good practice and to develop
specialist skills in, for example, understanding and managing attachment
problems.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement

from social workers and personal advisers are prompt and characterised by a
dogged approach to solving problems, with generally positive outcomes. The
provision of such reactive help and support by social workers and personal
advisers is a strength. Social workers and personal advisers generally have a
good knowledge of the concerns and circumstances of the individual care
leavers with whom they are working. They intervene promptly to maintain or
improve care leavers health and safety. Those care leavers interviewed felt


safe in their lives generally and in their current accommodation particularly.
Feeling unsafe had never been a key concern for any of them.
then to a personal adviser at 18, do not work well. Care leavers find this
disruptive and it makes it difficult for them to build effective long-term working
relationships. Managers recognise how this lack of continuity has also hindered
individual medium- and long-term progressive planning. A new structure
designed to build sustained relationships between care leavers, from the age of
planned, but will not be implemented until September 2016.
decisions have often been made without recourse to professional support. All
care leavers interviewed stated that family and friends had been the key
catalysts in selecting a career path, not their social worker or personal adviser.
No care leaver said that they felt they had received sufficient support or
guidance to help them to develop basic life and coping skills, for example the
need for a television licence, how to operate a washing machine or cooking.
However, they all said that they very much appreciated timely practical
interventions, such as organising new white goods, or assistance with getting
repairs and maintenance completed in their accommodation.
more to record formal contact and updates than to identify and plan for the
achievement of specific individualised goals. The majority of pathway plans do
not record care leavers special interests or talents, which might in turn provide
a realistic starting point from which to shape their vocational or academic
pathways. Caseloads in the care leavers team are mostly in the mid-twenties.
Although not particularly high, this is added to by the rapid changes in staffing
and the logistical challenge posed by the size of the county, which reduces the
amount of time available to spend with care leavers (Recommendation).
entitlements before leaving care. There is no brochure currently available and
the web-based information available is incomplete and under review.
Nevertheless, most are receiving the benefits and financial support to which
they are entitled. The care leavers team provides prompt financial assistance
on a needs basis, for example for carpeting or new white goods in independent
accommodation, which care leavers appreciate (Recommendation).


employment or training in 2015. This compares unfavourably to the national
rate of 39%. Formal arrangements for care leavers to benefit from work
experience, access to traineeships or apprenticeships are underdeveloped. The
local authority has only very recently approved a proposal to improve
opportunities for care leavers in these respects. A notably high percentage of
disability. The local authoritys own NEET data covering the 16 to 25 age range
shows that up to 60% of NEETs in this broader cohort have mental health or
broadly related problems that are identified as hindering them from entering
employment, education or training. The local authority is implementing a
strategy to improve the early identification and effectiveness of its responses to
social, emotional and mental health issues. This is at a very early stage,
although a pilot programme has had some early success (Recommendation).
accommodation. At the time of the inspection, 101 care leavers were in formal
tenancies. A very small number of 16- to 17-year-olds in unsuitable
accommodation chose to leave care and returned to live with their own families
in circumstances that the local authority judged unsuitable. These young people
receive continuing support. Dorset was an early adopter of staying put and 16
young people over the age of 18 are currently benefiting from the stability of
living with their former foster carers. The local authority has a well-developed
supported lodgings scheme, with 22 households providing accommodation for
overall, the local authority does not have access to sufficient one-bedroom
housing for 16- to 18-year-olds. The local authority is currently guarantor to a
large number of short- and long-term lets, particularly for 16- to 18-year-olds.
This is a real strength because it is helping these younger care leavers to live
more settled and secure lives. The very few care leavers living in houses of
multiple occupation (HMO) had found this accommodation on their own account
and are receiving good practical and financial support, including with deposits
and advance rental costs. The team directly assessed the quality of each HMO
and determined that it was in good condition, reasonably well maintained and
suitable for occupation.
been housed in bed and breakfast accommodation for between two and six
weeks within the last 12 months. The local authority recognises that such
accommodation should not be used for care leavers and has provided enhanced


levels of support, including daily visits in some cases. Risk assessments have
been completed in some, but not all, cases. The lack of a formal risk
assessment means that the potential negative impact of living in bed and
breakfast accommodation has not been fully understood or mitigated for all
young people.
sufficient rigour or urgency. Only five of 18 health passports planned for
completion between November 2015 and March 2016 were completed. The
designated nurse team for children looked after is not formally commissioned to
provide health advice and guidance to care leavers post-18 years. Although
staff do provide such support if requested, this support is individual and
reactive rather than part of proactive planning to identify and meet young
peoples needs (Recommendation).


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
The director of childrens services and her senior team provide strong leadership. They
understand the strengths and weaknesses of their service and take action to address
deficits. However, the local authority is not providing a good service, because many of
these measures are not consistently in place, are too new to have had a significant
impact or are yet to be implemented.
The local authority recognise that more needs to be done to ensure that social work
responses are consistently timely and that all children receive a response that matches
their needs. Although improving, inconsistent and sometimes poor management
oversight, causing drift and delay, remain central to this weakness. While inspectors
found no children left at immediate risk of significant harm, this remains an important
weakness. On appointment two years ago, the director inherited a staffing structure in
which social work team managers had just been replaced with 42 practice managers.
While many are capable managers as individuals, as a whole they lack the depth of
experience of more established team managers. Plans are in place to strengthen firstline management later in the year and, in the interim, the director has added extra
management capacity to one of the busiest area offices.
Early help is underdeveloped. Although some services are effective, such as the local
authority early intervention teams, services are poorly coordinated and most are not of
this standard. The local authoritys Forward Together for Children vision focusses on
early help and prevention, but the lack of a mature multi-agency plan limits agencies
abilities to provide a cohesive early help offer and to maximise the difference made for
children. While there are examples of strong multi-agency coordination in
commissioning services, such as Dorset Families Matter or the new CAMHS
transformation programme, strategic planning and commissioning across agencies is
underdeveloped. It is not driven by a shared, multi-agency set of priorities and plan
against which services can be commissioned and progress measured.
The corporate parenting panel is not sufficiently proactive or challenging. It lacks the
clarity of purpose and pace necessary for the local authority and its partners to be fully
effective corporate parents. Scrutiny arrangements lack focus or sufficient challenge.
Local authority performance data has a number of important omissions. For example,
data is not gathered on when children are seen following a referral. Information from
return interviews with children who have been missing is not analysed to identify
themes that could inform prevention and disruption work in relation to child sexual
exploitation. This work lacks both rigour and pace.


Inspection findings
strengths and weaknesses of their service well. They quickly identify areas for
improvement and put in place measures to address them. They have made
important progress in developing an open and positively challenging culture.
This has begun to have an impact on improving practice and outcomes for
children and young people. Their plan for improvement, Forward Together for
Children, is a whole- council approach that sets out their vision and planned
improvement journey. This is an outcome-based approach with a strong
emphasis on early help and partnership working.
are now providing effective support to the director to implement this
programme of change. This support includes additional funding in key areas,
such as strengthening the independent review officer and independent child
protection chairing services, increasing the children looked after budget and
taking a whole-council approach to improvement. However, current
arrangements to discharge the local authoritys childrens scrutiny function do
not provide sufficient focus or challenge on aspects of the service that require
improvement. New arrangement to bring together the overview and scrutiny
function, to deliver the corporate plan outcomes along with changes to the
partnership governance through the Childrens Trust Board, are aimed at
strengthening the prioritisation of childrens services and helping to ensure that
appropriate political and partnership action results in improved outcomes for
children. However, these new arrangements are not yet in place
(Recommendation).
interim independent chair for the board in December 2015 to work with
partners and to develop an improvement plan. This followed the identification
of weaknesses in the effectiveness of the board. In January 2016, the director
took further decisive action by commissioning a peer review that confirmed this
view and provided a diagnostic of areas for development.
planning services and has engaged well with partner agencies in some specific
areas, such as Dorset Families Matter, Dorsets approach to the governments
Troubled Families programme. However, strategic planning across agencies is
underdeveloped in relation to the safeguarding and non-health social care
needs of children and young people. A childrens joint strategic needs
assessment produced in December 2015 has a sharper focus on these needs


than its predecessor, but is still in draft. The Health and Well-being Strategy
issues. A new plan is under consideration, but is not yet in place. This means
that there is no shared multi-agency vision, set of priorities or plan against
which services can be planned or commissioned, progress measured and
partner agencies held to account for their delivery (Recommendation).
supports good practice in involving children and young people in
commissioning. The recent involvement of 'young inspectors' in
recommissioning the childrens and young peoples drug, alcohol and substance
abuse service is an example of good practice. There is a clear, systematic 'how
to' guide to good practice in involving children and young people. Although
there are individual examples of effective multi-agency working in
commissioning services, because commissioning at a strategic level is not
driven by an agreed multi-agency set of priorities and plans against which
services can be organised, commissioned and progress measured, the overall
coordination and effectiveness of services is limited (Recommendation).
services, such as Dorset Families Matter and the local authoritys own early
intervention teams, most are not of this standard, with services being poorly
coordinated. The local authority has a focus on early help in its Forward
Together for Children vision, but the lack of a mature multi-agency strategy
limits agencies ability to provide a cohesive early help offer and to maximise
the difference they are making for children. Although an e-CAF system is being
rolled out across the county to support use of the CAF and an increasing
number of professionals from other agencies are taking on the role of lead
professional, the CAF is not used well to improve childrens well-being.
Assessments do not routinely or clearly identify desired outcomes and services
are poorly coordinated. Without a system in place to track the timeliness of
CAFs, of meetings with families and whether planned outcomes are being
achieved, the local authority and partners cannot fully understand or effectively
improve performance (Recommendation).
know the issues facing young people, but the panel is not sufficiently proactive
and challenging. The panel lacks the clarity of purpose and pace it requires to
understand how and if it is making a positive difference for children and young
people, and to ensure that agreed actions are implemented, such as the
delayed establishment of member champions. The Children in Care Council,


Dorset Kidz, is not representative enough of the wider group of young people
looked after and there is currently no forum for younger children looked after to
share their views and experiences (Recommendation).
various subjects important to children and young people who are looked after.
This work includes information for young people coming into care, champions
for children looked after and developing exit interviews for young people when
leaving a foster placement. Young people spoken to expressed frustration about
not receiving feedback from the corporate parenting panel about how issues
they raise are addressed or their suggestions used. The impact of this is that
they do not feel sufficiently listened to or clear about how they are able to
influence or make changes to practice that may benefit young people in care.
Progress is slow and the local authority is late in embracing its corporate
parenting responsibilities. For example, while a new apprenticeship scheme is a
very positive development, along with the care leavers charter it was only
agreed by the local authority during the course of the inspection and has not
yet made a positive difference for young people (Recommendation).
and hold the headteacher closely to account for the running of the school.
Although governors have a good range of expertise and experience, they
currently include too few senior teaching professionals. Formal virtual school
reports to governors and the corporate parenting board are thorough and
detailed, but are not focused sufficiently on identifying specific priority areas for
improvement, such as improving attainment, or identifying clear action plans to
address them. The virtual school development plan for 201516 includes input
from a range of partners and identifies a number of key areas for improvement.
However, the plan contains no clear and specific impact measures or success
criteria, making it difficult for virtual school managers and governors to gauge
progress or achievement.
of data and to identify performance and practice concerns at a team level. This
progress is supported by a reporting and analysis manager. The local authority
knows that this work is at an early stage and so is not consistently supporting
the application of good practice across all areas, but it is helping to identify
areas for priority action. Monthly outcome-focused performance reports identify
the story behind the data and include actions to address practice concerns and
improve performance. This is beginning to help senior managers to understand
the quality of social work practice and its impact on improving outcomes for
children and young people (Recommendation).


omissions. For example, no data is gathered on when children are seen
following a referral or whether they have been seen alone. The local authority
is not routinely tracking and aggregating other key performance data effectively
to identify priority areas for action, for example children who are at risk of
sexual exploitation. Work in relation to child sexual exploitation and children
and young people who are at risk as a result of going missing, is
underdeveloped and lacks both rigour and urgency. In cases where children go
missing, return interviews are not completed in all cases and there are no clear
aggregated reports to identify themes and particular areas of concern to inform
and plan future service delivery and interventions. This means that the local
authority is not in a position to identify its own performance accurately or to
implement remedial action (Recommendation).
often absent. When it is recorded in childrens case notes, the quality of
decision making and guidance is also mixed, with a significant minority being
poor. This lack of robust oversight by practice managers has led to drift and
delay in progressing work with children and their families. Where it falls short,
social work practice is weakest and assessments and plans lack rigour and
purpose. Where inspectors saw management oversight of a higher standard,
this helped support clear assessments, plans and interventions that are making
a positive difference for children and young people. The level of scrutiny and
challenge by the independent chairs of child protection case conferences is
limited and lacks purposeful oversight and decision making, failing to identify or
remedy weaknesses in cases. This adds to delays for children in receiving the
right support for their help and protection needs (Recommendation).
and recording of these are varied. Better examples seen provided clear analysis
and direction with specific actions and some were linked to personal
development reviews and contained case reflection. However, this is not a
consistent picture and the majority of supervision is not of this standard. This
means that social workers are less likely to receive the best support to develop
their knowledge and skills to improve outcomes for children. Case notes do not
always accurately reflect the level of management oversight that may have
been given verbally. The result of this is that important detail or decisions about
children may not available in the absence of a manager, in the event of a
change of social worker, or if it should be needed out of hours. Social workers
report good access to training, but say that they are frustrated by uncertainty
about the proposed new structure.


inform assessment and planning, but this is quite recent and limited in scope.
There is little evidence in work with children and their families of any impact of
the outcome-focused approach that the local authority has adopted. Despite
some examples of good practice, such as young peoples involvement in
commissioning, feedback, including that from children looked after, is not
generally used well to inform practice. The annual report for complaints in
at 69. However, the report lacks information about the reasons behind the
increase. Learning from complaints is identified and recorded, but it is not clear
how and if it informs practice development (Recommendation).
improvement in childrens services and taken some important and necessary
steps to ensure that social workers have the right skills, knowledge and
attitudes to deliver this and to improve outcomes for children and young
people. A skills audit of the workforce has informed the integrated workforce
strategy 201517, which appropriately focuses on culture change, collaboration,
early help and protection, leadership and management, safeguarding
knowledge and skills. A set of core skills and behaviours, informed by young
people, is included in revised job descriptions. The structural proposals,
currently in the consultation stage, are supported by a clear narrative and
rationale about how the changes should improve practice. These planned
changes have been risk assessed to make sure that service delivery is not
negatively affected. Staff do not fully understand the detail and rationale for the
plans. Most staff spoken to by inspectors were unable to explain the wider
vision, despite a series of consultation and engagement events.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
Executive summary
The Dorset Safeguarding Children Board (DSCB) is inadequate because it does not
fully discharge its statutory responsibilities. The board is failing to adequately
monitor the effectiveness of help being provided to children, young people and their
families, including early help. It is not providing sufficient challenge and leadership at
a strategic level, working with the Health and Well-being Board, as statutory
guidance directs, or with partner agencies through the Dorset Childrens Trust. This
limits the boards ability to understand the key issues affecting children and young
people, to assess whether DSCB partners are fulfilling their statutory obligations and
to influence their practice.
The appointment of an experienced interim chair, who has provided leadership and
helped focus the board, is an important step forward. This appointment is too recent
to have made a demonstrable difference to the boards ability to fulfil its statutory
functions. However, there is now a shared commitment from partners to make
necessary improvements in the rigour with which the DSCB discharges its role as a
critical friend to agencies and provides leadership in key areas of practice, such as
with children who go missing or are at risk of sexual exploitation. The active
engagement of three capable lay members is a strength.
A lack of involvement from some agencies in the three multi-agency audits in 2015
limits the boards ability to understand the quality of frontline practice. The boards
performance management framework lacks rigour and depth of analysis. It does not
support shared partnership understanding and there is insufficient alignment to the
business plan and annual report. This means that it cannot be confident that it knows
about the seriousness or scale of any poor practice, areas of good practice, or
understands the impact that these are having on children. As a result, and despite this
being identified as a weakness in the 201415 annual report, the board remains
unable to provide sufficient informed or effective challenge to agencies.
The DSCBs sub-groups are largely joint arrangements with the Poole and
Bournemouth Local Safeguarding Children Board and these demonstrate some
effective activity. However, a lack of consistent and appropriate Dorset membership
of some sub-groups limits effectiveness. Up-to-date policies and procedures, an
appropriate range of training and a process for the dissemination of learning from
serious case reviews (SCRs) are all in place. A lack of evaluation means that the
board does not consistently understand their effectiveness.


Recommendations
to children, to hold agencies to account for their effectiveness and to inform the
DSCBs annual report and business plan.
the Health and Well-being Board, to provide leadership and challenge,
particularly in areas where services are weak or inconsistent, including those for
children who may be at risk of sexual exploitation or from going missing and
early help services.
appropriate agencies are involved, that audits are linked to key areas of
performance and that recommendations arising are tracked for completion and
the impact they have on outcomes for children.
agencies, included in multi-agency training and that that the DSCB has a
mechanism for evidencing that learning has positively effected changes in
practice.
attendance by the full range of relevant agencies.
evaluated to inform its development, and that it links to priorities identified
within the boards business plan and by SCRs.

Inspection findings  The Local Safeguarding Children Board
statutory functions. These include failing to adequately monitor the
effectiveness of help being provided to children, young people and their
families, including early help. This is a serious failure because it restricts the
boards ability to understand the key issues affecting local operational practice,
whether DSCB partners are fulfilling their statutory obligations and the
difference agencies are making for children and young people.


challenge and leadership. It is not working with the Health and Well-being
Board, as statutory guidance directs, or with partner agencies in the Dorset
Childrens Trust. Agencies also report that they have struggled to fulfil board
responsibilities due to a lack of capacity across the partnership. However,
partners now express a shared commitment to drive forward improvements in
the boards efficacy. Additional capacity has recently been added to the boards
business support to help this focus on improvement and the future work of the
DSCB (Recommendation).
strengthening the voice and influence of children, ensuring consistent
membership of the board, developing a system to measure the effectiveness of
training and improving the understanding of the profile of children at risk of
sexual exploitation and those who go missing. The business plan for 201516
aligns with the outcome areas detailed in the 201415 annual report, but does
not focus sufficiently on the activity required by partners to address these
issues or how progress will be measured.
of the effectiveness of the board. This diagnostic report echoes the challenges
highlighted by the 201415 annual report and identifies further significant
deficits in the functioning and effectiveness of the board. These deficits include
a lack of evidence of constructive challenge leading to change and
improvement, and a failure to ensure that the safeguarding needs of children
looked after and children with disabilities are clearly visible as a priority.
his arrival in December 2015, he has demonstrated a clear understanding of
strengths and development areas required of the agencies and individual
members of the board. His approach of focusing on a small number of key
areas has brought greater clarity and sense of purpose to the board, but is at
too early a stage to have made a demonstrable difference to the efficacy with
which the board discharges its statutory functions.
DSCB business manager supports them to participate fully in board discussions
and to have the confidence to contribute and offer challenge in meetings.
weakness, which was identified in the boards 201415 annual report, means
that the board does not have a clear understanding of the strengths and
weaknesses of frontline practice, to inform both the challenge and leadership it


provides to agencies. The framework has not been used by the DSCB to inform
challenge to agencies or to drive service improvement. A lack of alignment
between the performance management framework, the DSCB business plan
and annual report limits the boards ability to monitor if agencies are making
progress against identified priorities. The performance management framework
is not actively used, alongside the annual report and business plan, to identify
and shine a light on practice concerns, to challenge agencies to improve and
then to monitor progress (Recommendation).
underdeveloped. A report to the DSCB on children who go missing contains a
warning that the data may not be entirely accurate as work is ongoing,
encouraging the accurate reporting of missing episodes. This means that the
board cannot be confident that it knows about the seriousness or scale of the
problem, or the effect on children and young people. Despite this, and a lack of
alignment between this work and that with children at risk of child sexual
exploitation, the board has provided limited challenge or leadership to agencies
(Recommendation).
Bournemouth Local Safeguarding Children Board. Both boards benefit from the
well-established nature of these pan-Dorset sub-groups which demonstrate
some effective activity. Such activity includes a refresh and revision of policies
and procedures, the appointment of a training coordinator, and the
development of a tracking system to monitor numbers of children at risk of
sexual exploitation. Representatives from different agencies across the three
local authority areas chair the sub-groups. This arrangement supports improved
communication and cooperation between agencies and across local authority
boundaries within the greater Dorset area. However, a lack of consistent and
appropriate attendance at some sub-groups limits effectiveness in these areas.
For example, the absence of a police representative at the last two meetings of
the domestic abuse sub-group is unhelpful in this area of shared ground
between the criminal justice and social care systems (Recommendation).
discusses key safeguarding issues. However the difference this group makes to
the quality of agencies practice is limited by the fact that audits and reports do
not always give rise to clear actions and that when they do, these are not
always accompanied by measures and processes for ensuring the
implementation and for testing the impact of actions. The lack of involvement
from some agencies in the three multi-agency audits in 2015 compounds the
weaknesses in the performance management framework by adding a deficit in


the gathering and analysis of qualitative information to that in quantitative
data. An audit of children at risk of child sexual exploitation did not have
appropriate health involvement and did not sufficiently involve practitioners.
Despite this, the report does make clear recommendations linked to
accountable organisations or individuals with timescales for achievement.
However, it lacks clear processes for measuring completion and impact. An
audit of domestic abuse had limited police and out of area schools
engagement, meaning that the understanding and monitoring of multi-agency
practice in these areas is limited. Despite the boards annual report noting the
need for a stronger strategic approach and an improved early help offer from
agencies, the board has exercised little scrutiny of practice or strategic
challenge in this important area (Recommendation).
membership of sufficient seniority to ensure that actions agreed can be
followed up in individual agencies. An effective rapid response process provides
a coordinated approach to unexpected deaths. There is clear evidence of how
learning from the analysis of incidents drives improved practice. For example,
an analysis of the deaths of children with life-limiting conditions led to a review
of palliative care, which in turn shaped the recommissioning of services,
improving the experience of families in these very difficult circumstances.
brought to their attention. This open approach has the positive impact of
maximising opportunities to identify learning that could be used to improve
future practice. However, the volume of work arising from the high number of
referrals to the panel also results in some partner agencies having limited
capacity to participate in audits and sub-group activity. Meetings of the panel in
October and December 2015 lacked sufficient multi-agency representation to be
quorate. This means that, although meetings clearly highlight important issues
and attribute remedial actions to agencies, the quality of discussion and
analysis is necessarily limited by the reduced attendance. The SCR
Overarching, Outstanding Action Plan from SCRs, Serious Case Audits and
Domestic Homicide Reviews is used to collate and monitor the completion of
agreed actions arising from SCRs, serious case audits and domestic homicide
reviews. However, actions are not prioritised according to importance or risk
and the tool is poorly used to track implementation in agencies and to
understand the impact on practice (Recommendation).
partnership through a synopsis of learning. A recent review carried out by the
local authority to measure the effectiveness of this approach found limited


evidence that social workers practice was altered or improved as a result.
Social workers spoken to by inspectors were not consistently aware of either
the synopsis of learning or key messages from local SCRs (Recommendation).
children in Dorset. This provides a positive opportunity for shared learning. The
multi-agency training strategy, housing agreement for care leavers and
threshold document all stem from the helpful coordination and overview role of
this group.
at multi-agency training is kept, but the lack of analysis and evaluation means
that the board is not able to assess the effectiveness of the training on
improving practice. A recently appointed coordinator now provides the capacity
for better coordination and monitoring, but this is new and not sufficiently
established to have had a significant impact (Recommendation).
effective challenge. The boards challenge log records 21 challenges between
January and October 2015, but little evidence of follow-up action demonstrating
how challenge has improved practice, or childrens outcomes. For example,
challenge to partner agencies to provide data for the new performance
management framework lacked specific actions, time-scales, or any monitoring
process. A difficult issue, escalated to the board by CDOP about how to engage
more closely with a bereaved family, did not receive any response from the
board. The chair of CDOP reports that, since the recent appointment of the new
independent chair of the DSCB, both the quality and promptness of
communication between the board and CDOP have improved markedly.
resources. Although these risks do have a place in the register, there is a lack
of focus on outcomes for children and a consequent failure to attach sufficient
weight to areas of importance, such as the risks arising from child sexual
exploitation, going missing and the inconsistent early help offer in Dorset.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted and two additional inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Dominic Stevens HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Marcie Taylor HMI
Team inspectors (all HMI unless otherwise stated): Andy Whippey, Emmy Tomsett,
Louise Warren, Nicholas McMullen, Simon Rushall, Nick Crombie and Claire
Humerstone (additional inspector)
Shadow inspector: Sue Westcott (additional inspector)
Senior data analyst: Donna Neill
Quality assurance manager: Christopher Sands (Senior HMI)


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W:
 Crown copyright 2016


