Durham County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 22 February 201618 March 2016
Report published: 16 May 2016

Childrens services in Durham require improvement to be good

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Good


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Durham require improvement to be good. The consistently high
quality of services identified at the last inspection in 2011 has not been maintained.
Some services and a number of outcomes have improved, for example through the
development of early help services, for children and young people at risk of sexual
exploitation, for care leavers and for children whose plan is for adoption. However,
assessments and plans for children in need of help and protection and children
looked after are of variable quality and require improvement.
During the past two years, there have been significant changes to childrens services.
The reorganisation of childrens services in June 2014 was followed by the
establishment of a Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH) in March 2015. As part of
the wider transformation programme, the local authority is co-locating early help and
social work teams. These changes have had a substantial impact on service delivery
in Durham. There is some positive impact across early help services, but some other
frontline services have not received sufficient attention.
Performance information is extensive and has resulted in some improved outcomes.
However, some reports provided to senior managers and elected members are not
sufficiently analytical, and do not assist in scrutinising frontline services. Some issues
concerning the quality of social work practice and recording remain, and reports on
the quality of case file audits are not routinely provided to elected members.
The early help offer is good and offers wide-ranging services to all children and
young people aged 0 to 19 years and their families. Key strategic policies align
closely with multi-agency working, especially within early help and in responses to
child sexual exploitation. Services to address issues of drug and alcohol misuse,
domestic abuse and mental health are in place and well established.
Information sharing on referrals is not always detailed enough to progress concerns
about children and young people and there are delays when workers have to obtain
additional information and consents from parents. Systems for case recording
currently require the use of both electronic and paper systems. The local authority
has plans in place to improve these arrangements.
As a result of recent staff shortages, two out of the three child protection teams
have been unable to accept any new childrens cases. Consequently, caseloads in
Families First teams have increased. This has resulted in delays in assessment and
the provision of services for some children with lower levels of need and risk. The
reorganisation of services and staff shortages mean that some children and young
people have had too many changes of social worker. Managers have identified these
issues and have plans in place to improve workforce stability.
The quality of assessments for children is not consistently good. Analysis is of
variable quality and does not sufficiently inform care planning. In addition, care
planning is not always robust. Many plans are not sufficiently outcome focused, do
not have clear timescales for actions to be completed and do not assist in improving
outcomes for children. The quality of strategy discussions and child protection


enquiries is inconsistent.
Recording of management oversight on childrens files is not always present and
lacks sufficient detail to demonstrate the reasons for decisions or to progress
planning. This results in drift and delay for some children. For children looked after,
this means that childrens cases do not always progress through to the preproceedings phase of the Public Law Outline (PLO) or to special guardianship order
(SGO) arrangements as quickly as they should.
The arrangements for children and young people who go missing and those at risk of
child sexual exploitation are good. The local authority is working effectively with
partners to implement strategies and raise awareness through the Educate and Raise
Awareness of Sexual Exploitation (ERASE) team. As a result, the number of children
and young people who go missing has decreased. However, more work is needed to
use the analysis from return home interviews to further strengthen practice.
Political and senior leaders as corporate parents demonstrate passion and
commitment to children and young people. Placements for children are of good or
better quality and meet childrens needs. Out-of-area placements are rarely used.
When used, outcomes for those children, who often have very complex needs, are
good.
A well-resourced and effectively managed Looked After Children Education Support
(LACES) team ensures that every young person is seen regularly by their LACES key
worker, to actively promote their education and provide ongoing emotional support.
However, more work is required to improve attainment across all key stages.
The adoption service is a strength within the authority. Work is child focused to
ensure that a lifelong placement for children and young people is at the heart of all
practice. Childrens progress through care proceedings and planning is effectively
tracked to avoid unnecessary delay. However, further work is needed to ensure that
the recruitment of adopters is informed by a clear analysis of need.
The majority of care leavers develop trusting and long-standing relationships with
their personal advisers or their social worker. Commissioning of accommodation for
care leavers is also good. The local authority provides a good range of emergency
accommodation for young people who present as homeless.
The number of children privately fostered is low and social work practice in respect
of private fostering does not currently meet standards set out in regulations and
guidance. Children and young people are not visited as often as they should be and
private foster carers are not subject to sufficiently robust assessments.
Consultation with children and young people to inform service development is well
embedded and effective. A national community interest company is commissioned to
deliver a wide range of opportunities for children and young people to share their
views and influence how services are provided. The local authority works well with
partners and has shared priorities based on a good understanding of local need.


Contents
The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates 10 childrens homes, including one secure unit. All
were judged to be good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspections.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding
arrangements/arrangements for the protection of children was in December
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in December 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since August 2012.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
October 2014.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 100,300 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Durham. This is 19.4% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 21.5% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 19.9% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 16.4% (the national average is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 2.5% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
mixed and Asian or Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 2.3% (the national average is 19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 1.6% (the national average is 15%).
 Durham County Council has the highest population of all local authorities in the
North East region, with 517,800 residents in 2014. The population is projected to


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


increase by a further 2.8% by 2021. The county covers a mix of large rural areas
and small urban centres, with several experiencing high levels of deprivation.
Child protection in this area
 At 22 February 2016, 3,351 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 22 February 2016, 373 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 377 at 31 March 2015.
 At 1 March 2016, eight children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from four at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, 10 serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and six serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at the
time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 22 February 2016, 665 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 66 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 620 (62 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015. Of this number:
schools that are dual registered as childrens homes), of whom 17% live
outside the authority area
 two live in residential special schools3 (excluding dual registered
childrens homes), both of which are outside the authority area
area
 one is an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 30 adoptions
returned to be looked after
to independent living


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


 no children or young people ceased to be looked after and are now living
in houses of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Continue with existing plans to ensure that there is sufficient capacity and
stability in social work teams so that caseloads are manageable and workers
are able to fully support children and young people.


Review existing arrangements to ensure that political and senior leaders have
access to improved quantitative and qualitative performance information that
enables them to have an accurate picture of the current practice delivered to
children, so that they can develop strategies to maintain and improve the
quality of frontline practice.


Continue with the plan to review existing recording systems to ensure that
childrens case records are organised in such a way that they present a
coherent, accurate and easily accessible picture of a childs journey.


Improve the quality of social work assessments for all children, young people
and care leavers by ensuring that they consistently contain comprehensive and
rigorous analysis of all relevant information.


Improve the quality of planning for all children, young people and care leavers
so that plans are clear about intended outcomes and timescales, and about
who is responsible for actions. Ensure that families receive a copy of their plan.
Ensure that key agencies participate in strategy discussions and meetings, or
provide information to them, to comply with statutory guidance.


Ensure that consent is sought from parents when enquiries are undertaken for
all cases of children and young people in need.


Improve private fostering arrangements to comply with statutory guidance
through effective awareness raising, visits to children and completion of
assessments.


Improve case file auditing to ensure robust and independent evaluation of the
quality of practice to promote learning and improvement.


Improve the oversight of casework where children are in voluntary care
arrangements, including those under the PLO process, so that plans for these
children progress without delay and within their timescales.

respect of reports prepared under The Care Planning, Placement and Case
Review (England) Regulations 2010 to make sure that these cover all relevant
information and are signed off at a suitably senior level.
that the full range of children who would benefit from the scheme are able to
do so.


put in their placements after the age of 18 years, should they so wish.
so that there is a targeted approach to ensure that sufficient carers are
recruited to meet the needs of children in Durham.
assessments for children who go missing and/or are at risk of child sexual
exploitation.


Summary for children and young people
 When children and families need help in Durham, there is a good range of early
help services available to them. This means that most children and families do
not have to wait too long to be helped.
 When things become unsafe for children, social workers, police and health
professionals work together well to make sure that children are protected.
 Some social workers have too many children and families to work with. This
means that they do not always have enough time to visit children and get to
know them.
 Some children have had too many different social workers. This makes it difficult
to make good relationships and fully understand how they and their families can
best be helped.
 When children go missing, all professionals work together to understand why and
help children to learn about the dangers of child sexual exploitation.
 Sometimes, social workers delay making decisions about childrens futures and
children remain in voluntary care arrangements for too long.
 For a small number of children looked after by the local authority, social workers
do not act quickly enough to investigate allegations made by children, though
these children have not been left at risk as a result.
 When it has been decided that a child needs an adoptive family, work is done
quickly to find a family. Children waiting for a family are prioritised and, when
adopted, get very good support.
 Children who are looked after get good support to attend school. Some children
are doing well in school, but more needs to be done by senior managers to
improve achievement for all children and young people looked after.
 Some good work has recently been done to help care leavers start
apprenticeships so that they have good career opportunities for the future.
 Senior managers, social workers and political leaders are good at listening to
children when they need help and consult with children on how services in
Durham should be changed to help them more.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
The service for children needing help and protection in Durham requires
improvement. Although some services are resulting in positive outcomes for
children, other services are not sufficiently strong. This is evident, for example, by
the variable quality of plans and assessments.
Early help services are effective and well established. The think family approach is
embedded and there is good multi-agency involvement in the planning and delivery
of early support to families, leading to them receiving the right help at the right
time.
The Durham MASH, established in March 2015, brings together professionals from
childrens services, health, education and the police. While overall this service is
working well, there are not sufficient health and police resources in the teams to
fully support and progress work.
Staff shortages have resulted in high caseloads for some teams. This potentially
increases risks as there are delays in progressing work with children and young
people. Managers have put arrangements in place to manage risk, although plans to
recruit additional staff had yet to have an impact at the time of the inspection.
The quality of referrals into the First Contact service is variable and, where
insufficient information is provided, time is spent chasing information, leading to
delays in families receiving support. Managers have taken appropriate action to
tackle this through the LSCB. Where concerns about children do not meet the
threshold for risk of significant harm, consent is not routinely sought or clearly
recorded prior to multi-agency information gathering and sharing. The quality of
strategy discussions and child protection enquiries is inconsistent.
The quality of assessments requires improvement. Most do not provide a
comprehensive analysis of a childs circumstances, taking into account their family
history, although they do contain the views of children, family members and
significant males. The majority of childrens plans are not sufficiently outcome
focused and do not have clear timescales for actions to be completed.
The local authoritys response to children who go missing, including those missing
education and those at risk of child sexual exploitation, is good and protects children
and young people. Return home interviews are conducted routinely, although
analysis of underlying issues is not completed.
Services for children and young people with disabilities are well managed and the
quality of work, including assessment planning and arrangements for the transition
to adult services, are good.


Inspection findings
Innovation Programme, aiming to increase the number of families receiving
support at an early stage and as a consequence, decrease those requiring
statutory intervention. This is part of a five-year transformation programme up
to 2020.
agencies for all children and young people aged 0 to 19 years and their
families. Multi-agency working is embedded in practice, with a range of partner
agencies routinely attending weekly allocation meetings. Services to address
drug and alcohol misuse, domestic abuse and mental health issues are well
established. There is a think family approach adopted by staff who use tools
to assess and plan appropriate direct work, for example, alcohol assessments.
The number of children registered with childrens centres is high. Centres are
aligned with One Point services and provide a wide range of preventative and
targeted services.
is no electronic system for recording the date of completed assessments. The
authority relies on notifications from partner agencies with regard to
assessments that have been undertaken. This means that the authority does
not know the actual number of assessments completed by partner agencies or
the quality of them. A tracking tool is in place to monitor the progress of
completed assessments. Early help assessments seen by inspectors were all
good, resulting in appropriate support being offered to families.
early help and social work teams. The final phase of this co-location occurred
during the inspection. All staff are positive about this change and welcome the
emphasis on intervening early with families. While it was too soon to see the
long-term impact, inspectors saw evidence of prompt information sharing and
appropriate escalation and de-escalation of childrens cases between the One
Point and Families First teams. The ability to share information, in particular
when childrens cases are stepped up to Families First teams, is impeded by
lack of a common case recording system, although the local authority is
developing its social care recording system to include early help services.
are underdeveloped and limited by the lack of a joint information technology
system within social care. The introduction of an outcomes framework tool to
demonstrate impact is not yet used across all early help services, although staff
are being trained to use it, and plans are in place for this to be embedded
across One Point and partner agencies. The impact of early help is currently
evidenced on a case-by-case basis, alongside performance scorecards and an
electronic tracking system. However, this is limited by the lack of electronic
case management.


and is integrated into the childrens services management structure. Childrens
cases are worked at a statutory level when there is an assessed need. The
local authority reports that it has achieved all of the specified outcomes for all
identified families during phase one of the project.
threshold document has recently been reviewed and refreshed to align with the
restructure of service delivery. Professionals are able to access advice and
guidance from social workers within the First Contact service.
intervention, are identified and referred appropriately to the First Contact
service by a range of partner agencies. In most childrens cases seen, referrals
were appropriate and timely and, where there was a need for social work
intervention, childrens and young peoples cases were promptly allocated.
However, the quality of referral information was variable, ranging from
inadequate to good. This means that further information often needs to be
obtained prior to a decision being made about the most appropriate response.
This results in delays for some children receiving the right help at the right
time. The local authority has made efforts to address this issue through the
LSCB and through the provision of support and guidance for referrers.
meet the threshold for risk of significant harm. Agencies within the MASH are
not clear about how consent is obtained or where this is recorded in childrens
files. For example, there is an assumption that police have obtained consent
but it is unclear if parents understand that this is for the purpose of further
information gathering (Recommendation).
qualified and experienced staff and managers. However, in the records of most
childrens cases seen, the rationale for decision making where these are
progressed to early help or Families First for assessment is not clear. Poor
record keeping hampers the progress of assessments and inspectors observed
duty social workers within Families First teams repeating information gathering,
therefore causing a delay for some families receiving a service.
reduce risks and safeguard their welfare. Strategy discussions and section 47
enquiries are routinely undertaken where risk of significant harm is identified.
The quality of recorded discussion is variable and does not always involve
health partners. Although some records detail clear actions to progress the
investigation, too many contain limited information, sometimes only including
those who contributed, with no recorded information about the risks and needs
of children and young people (Recommendation).


appropriate information gathering and all contain an analysis of risk. The
quality of the analysis is variable and in the majority of childrens cases,
requires improvement to be good. Recording of the outcome of section 47
enquiries is also limited, with little analysis or rationale evident for decision
making. Managers have recently taken action to improve the consistency of the
recording of section 47 enquiries, but it is too early to evidence impact.
appropriate in all childrens cases seen, but conferences are not consistently
held within timescales. Timeliness of ICPCs was below that of the authoritys
target of 75% for the previous quarter. High caseloads in some Families First
teams and recent structural change as part of the transformation programme
have impacted on this. In the large majority of instances, child protection core
groups demonstrate effective coordination between agencies
(Recommendation).
provides appropriate child-focused work from skilled practitioners who are
supported well by managers. The team manages child protection concerns for
childrens cases already open and receives referrals via the MASH. The
overwhelming majority of assessments considered within this team were good
and included the views of children and the wider family with appropriate multiagency input. As a result, plans for children and young people were focused
and clear.
provide a comprehensive analysis of a childs circumstances that takes into
account their family history. This means that emerging patterns are not always
recorded, considered and understood sufficiently. Most assessments were
detailed and contained evidence of consideration of the views of children,
parents and significant males within families. However, in some instances,
there was insufficient analysis to inform plans. Chronologies are not developed
or used consistently to inform assessments and planning for children
(Recommendation).
has drawn on various models in developing assessment and practice guidance.
Several practice tools are available for social workers to assist their
engagement with children and young people. Social workers spoke of tools that
they used for direct work with families, although their use and impact was not
always evident within case recording.
focused and are generalised, lacking clear timescales for actions to be
completed and clarity as to who will undertake required actions. Parents and
children are not routinely given a copy of their plan. In some childrens cases, a
written agreement with a parent was put in place to clarify an expectation and
supplement the plan. Where plans are good, they are comprehensive, regularly


reviewed and updated and identify how risks will be managed and reduced.
The local authority recognises that plans need to be improved and is
developing a new family plan, to be introduced in summer 2016
(Recommendation).
neglect has not reduced significantly over the past year, although this is a key
aim for the local authority. At the time of inspection, 67% of the 373 children
on a child protection plan were under the category of neglect. This figure is
down from 69% in March 2015. The local authority recognises that more needs
to be done and revised its early help and neglect strategy in December 2015.
Strategies to identify the early signs of neglect include implementation of the
home conditions checklist across One Point and partner agencies. Further
practice guidance for staff is also planned.
families at evenings and weekends. The team has access to the local authority
database. However, not all information is currently able to be accessed due to
some information being stored on paper files. This means that decision making
to safeguard children outside office hours may not be fully informed. The local
authority is planning to replace the current systems for record keeping.
information, identifying risks and developing appropriate responses to protect
children affected by domestic abuse. Multi-agency public protection
arrangements work effectively to keep children safe.
effective approach at strategic and operational levels to safeguard children and
young people at risk of sexual exploitation. A strategic multi-agency group
oversees the delivery of the County Durham child sexual exploitation strategy
sexual exploitation risk matrix tool is well understood by social care staff across
all tiers. Where the assessed risk is medium or high, regular reviews are carried
out at fortnightly multi-agency meetings. In all childrens cases, inspectors saw
good quality work being undertaken that resulted in risks being demonstrably
reduced or managed for children and young people who were at risk of sexual
exploitation. However, although all children who go missing from home are
offered return home interviews, there is no analysis of the underlying issues
that led to the missing episode to strengthen responses to risk
(Recommendation).
who are missing from education. Schools promptly report children through an
online central tracking database and appropriate enquiries are made with a
wide range of agencies. As a result of these effective systems, at the time of
the inspection, the authority had located the vast majority of children missing
from education. There is good information sharing with the ERASE panel,


ensuring that swift action is taken for children at additional risk of sexual
exploitation.
become homeless. Young people who present as homeless are offered
accommodation in specifically commissioned emergency placements. A robust
protocol ensures multi-agency planning between the Holistic Temporary
Accommodation and Support Service, housing, health, education and the youth
offending service, as appropriate. Plans for young people are reviewed
regularly, meaning that young people receive timely and appropriate support to
return home or move on to lodgings.
good. The designated officer has recently increased awareness and developed
the role with partners and this is resulting in an increase in referrals.
Appropriate systems are in place to manage and monitor the progress of
childrens cases, meaning that investigations are being progressed within
suitable and prescribed timescales.
fostered children and young people are poor. At the time of the inspection,
there were eight children and young people known to be living in private
fostering arrangements. Activities to raise awareness of private fostering have
had limited impact. The authority needs to do more to improve the quality of
practice and raise awareness of requirements in this area. Practice does not
currently meet standards set out in regulations and guidance, meaning that
children are not visited as often as they should be and private foster carers are
not subject to sufficiently robust assessments (Recommendation).
cases seen, with a lack of analysis on how issues children were experiencing
impacted on their identity. Inspectors saw good use of interpreters and
translation services in some casework.
protection plans from April 2016, but this is not currently offered, which means
that children and young people have not had timely access to an advocate
when they need one.
and sixty headteachers and school safeguarding leads completed a Workshop
to Raise Awareness of Prevent (WRAP) and 2,230 school staff have completed
online training. Schools use a toolkit that helps them to identify behaviour that
is concerning and appropriately share this information. About 80% of childcare
providers have also received WRAP training. Plans are in place to offer a series
of Prevent seminars through the Safer Durham Partnership in May 2016.
although, at the time of inspection, this was not on the Durham Local


Safeguarding Children Board (DLSCB) website. Strategic overview of female
genital mutilation and honour-based violence sits within a subgroup of the
Safer Durham Partnership. Inspectors saw appropriate responses, with good
use of advice and research informing planning to protect children.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
In most circumstances, children and young people become looked after
appropriately. Placements with friends and family members are used to provide a
safe place for children and young people to live. However, delays in completing
assessments of friends and family members as foster carers mean that children are
not always deemed to be looked after as quickly as they should be. There are also
delays for some children within the pre-proceedings phase of the Public Law Outline
(PLO) and where the plan is for a special guardianship order. This means that they
remain looked after under voluntary arrangements for longer than they should.
Placements are of good quality and meet childrens needs. There is a good range of
placements available for children. This means that most live near home, and
brothers and sisters can live together. Social workers visit children regularly and take
account of their wishes and feelings, though some children have had too many
changes of social worker.
The virtual school, through the LACES team, provides good-quality support for the
education of children looked after. All children looked after have a Personal
Education Plan (PEP), although these are of variable quality. Plans appropriately
include behavioural and personal, as well as academic, goals.
Children looked after have their health needs considered effectively in most cases.
There have been recent improvements in the timeliness of health assessments when
children first become looked after, though there is more work to do on this. The Full
Circle service provides timely and effective support for childrens and young peoples
emotional and mental health needs.
Childrens care plans are regularly reviewed. Where there is concern that these are
not progressing in good time, independent reviewing officers (IROs) make use of the
dispute resolution process, though this is not always effective in ensuring that
managers make improvements within timescales for children and young people.
The adoption service is child focused. Children are identified early and are found
appropriate placements without undue delay. Support is offered throughout the
process, which promotes adoption stability.
Care leavers are well supported to achieve independence and the vast majority
engage very well with leaving care services. The majority of care leavers are in
suitable accommodation. Further improvements are needed in updating written
pathway assessments to include specific targets and fully consider and collate health
histories.


Inspection findings
intensive work, which helps them to remain with their families. Other children
and young people become looked after appropriately, in response to immediate
concerns about their welfare. However, sometimes, children do not become
looked after immediately, but move to live in family arrangements supported
by the local authority before a suitable assessment of this has been
undertaken. No instances were seen by inspectors in which children had
suffered harm while in these arrangements. The local authority has recognised
that this practice is not appropriate and has revised its procedures.
children looked after. However, in a small number of cases, there were delays
in recognising the full significance of their experiences, leading to risk not being
fully considered and reduced as soon as it could have been. A small number of
childrens cases were seen where the local authority had not responded quickly
enough to investigate allegations made by children, though these children were
not left in danger as a result.
services. This represents a rate of 62 children per 10,000 of the population.
This was lower than the most recently published figures for similar local
authorities, and slightly above the figure for England overall. At the time of the
inspection, there were 665 children looked after, an increase of 7% on the
previous year.
because the plans to achieve permanence through an SGO with a family
member are not progressed quickly enough. There are also weaknesses in the
practice and oversight of the pre-proceedings phase of the PLO, although some
examples were seen where pre-proceedings work had resulted in plans moving
forward for children in good time. Overall, the process does not give sufficient
oversight to ensure timely planning. This means that some children remain in
care for longer than necessary without achieving permanence as quickly as
they should (Recommendation).
and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) reports that these are
not always as well prepared as they should be. The local authority is receptive
to feedback about this and takes remedial action quickly. The large majority of
proceedings conclude within the 26-week national target timescale. In the first
three quarters of 201516, Cafcass figures show 71% of childrens cases
concluding within the timescale, and the average duration of proceedings is
reducing over time.
undertaken to support these decisions. Once they have returned home,
ongoing plans are not always of good enough quality to identify their needs


and how these will be met. However, very few become looked after again, with
only seven of the children in care at the time of the inspection having been
looked after on a previous occasion during the last year (Recommendation).
a minority of children looked after. A lack of management oversight leads to
drift and delay on some childrens cases. Decision making is not consistently
well recorded, including gaps in supervision records and superficial recording of
supervision discussions and decisions. In better examples, there is regular
recording of management oversight, and evidence that this helps to progress
childrens cases.
good range of information, particularly information about parents histories, but
the analysis of this is weak. In some, not all important issues are adequately
considered to produce a rounded assessment. In others, there are delays in
completing assessments, or assessments are not appropriately updated to
reflect current circumstances. When children are placed with parents under
care orders, the assessments undertaken by the local authority to support this
decision are not consistently of good enough quality. They do not contain all
the information that they should, and not all are signed off at a senior enough
level (Recommendation).
have experienced a number of changes of social worker. Children are seen
alone and their views obtained. In the best examples, this includes the use of
alternative forms of communication, and the recording of observations of very
young children to gather their wishes and feelings. In weaker instances, there
is a lack of recording of an appropriate range of discussions with young people,
or it is not clear how discussions relate to the plan.
publicised and used by appropriate numbers of children. Advocates have skills
in alternative methods of communication, ensuring that children with
disabilities are able to access the service. An independent visitor service is also
available. However, the current eligibility criteria for the service are narrower
than the requirements set out in statutory guidance. As a result, take-up of this
service has been very low, with only six young people receiving a service at the
time of the inspection and two more young people waiting (Recommendation).
carefully monitored and current attendance for children looked after is good, at
(39 children) experienced school moves in 201415, which was a significant
reduction (43.5%) from the previous year.
Looked After Children Education Support (LACES) worker identifies and agrees
support strategies and interventions to ensure that children get back on track.


As a result, the vast majority of children looked after are making expected
levels of progress and a very small minority are exceeding expectations. No
child has been permanently excluded from education for the last three years.
This is because LACES workers use a range of timely interventions. However,
despite this good work, fixed-period exclusions remain too high for children
looked after. The pupil premium is used well to enhance the education
experience and opportunities for children looked after. The vast majority of the
pupil premium is used to fund one-to-one academic support and provides
opportunities for pupils to work in small groups.
Pupils attainment at key stage 1 improved well in 2015, following a fall in
For example, at key stage 2, the proportion of pupils gaining level 4 or above
in mathematics and reading has been above that of similar pupils nationally for
the last three years and the gap between their achievements and their peers
has narrowed well. However, the proportion of pupils who are looked after
gaining level 4 or above in grammar and punctuation has been below that of
similar pupils nationally for two of the past three years and gaps between
these pupils and their peers were much wider than the national gap in 2015.
variable over the past three years. The proportion of pupils gaining five GCSEs
at grades A* to C, including English and mathematics, was above that of
similar pupils nationally in 2013 but fell to well below that of similar groups in
starting points on entry into secondary school has been below that of similar
groups of pupils for the past two years, falling further in 2015. Gaps between
pupils who are looked after and their peers were wider than those found
nationally for similar groups. The quality of PEPs of tracked and sampled
childrens cases is not consistently good. Most plans demonstrated that the
views of young people are listened to and recorded. A small number of plans
lack sufficient detail and do not state how targets will be monitored or
reviewed. In addition, some young people are not fully engaged in the process
and, as a consequence, their progress is being hampered (Recommendation).
have their health needs met appropriately in most cases. The latest figures for
from the 93% rate in 201415. Performance is below that of statistical
neighbours, at 96%, and the England level of 90%.
improvements in the timely completion of initial health assessments. Sixty
three per cent were completed within the target timescale in 201516,
compared with 8% at the same point in 201415. The local authority and
partner agencies recognise that there is more to do in this area. Initial health
assessments are carried out by paediatricians, who offer dedicated clinics for


children looked after. The Full Circle service provides swift, effective support for
the emotional and mental health needs of children looked after. Looked after
reviews regularly consider childrens health needs to ensure that these are
being addressed effectively.
part of the same management structure. There are close working relationships
between youth offending workers and childrens social workers. This leads to
effective work around restorative justice and discharge from custody. At the
time of the inspection, the offending rate for children who have been looked
after for a year or more stood at 2.5% for 201516, an improving picture over
the 201415 figure of 4%. This is better than 201415 rates for England, 5%,
and statistical neighbours, 8%, and a significant improvement from 2012 when
Durham rates were 11.4%.
reviews, and they are encouraged to pursue a range of extra-curricular
activities. Contact arrangements help children to stay in touch with the people
who are important to them.
effectively, including placements that have been sustained over long periods of
time. Good communications between residential placements and social workers
help to support children remaining in placements. At the time of the inspection,
few children (5.6%) were reported as having had three or more placements in
the previous year. This figure has been improving over time as a result of
targeted improvement action, and is better than the most recently available
figures for both similar local authorities and England overall.
authority. Of those placed outside the local authority, most (92%) are placed in
a neighbouring local authority. This promotes childrens identity and ongoing
contact with their wider family. A very large majority of children (90%) are
placed with families. Thirty three children (5%) are placed with their own
parents, a figure in line with the most recently published national figures.
permanence for children and young people. There is a clear strategy to recruit
carers for permanence, as well as for teenagers and for groups of brothers and
sisters. The number of children placed with Durham foster carers has increased
over time, from 336 in March 2013 to 436 in March 2015. The fostering panel
plays a key role in the quality assurance of the service. This has meant that the
quality of matching, reports and life story work has improved.
interviews undertaken. Foster carers receive good-quality training to support
them in caring for children and young people. They particularly welcomed the
training delivered by the Full Circle service regarding attachment and the
difference it has made to their approach in handling and managing childrens


and young peoples behaviours to minimise risk. Foster carers receive good
support with regular visits from their supervising social worker, and say that
workers are responsive to their requests for information and advice.
focused outcomes and timescales and are not updated to reflect changes in
circumstances. This means that plans do not always effectively help to progress
outcomes for children. In most cases, IROs review plans regularly, with local
authority figures showing 96% of reviews are carried out on time. Where plans
for children are not progressing, IROs make appropriate use of the dispute
resolution process in most cases. However, for some children, the oversight of
IROs does not always succeed in preventing drift and delay
(Recommendation).
attend joint development events, and there is effective handover between
guardians and IROs at the end of care proceedings.
with the local authority. This includes being involved in the design of the
DLSCB website and delivering training for foster carers and other professionals.
appropriate placements that maintain their connections with their roots. There
is appropriate recognition and consideration of needs arising from disability,
including those of parents and other family members, and of needs arising
from ethnicity and religious choice.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

placement for children is at the heart of all practice. The adoption service is
stable, experienced and well led. A dedicated senior practitioner effectively
monitors and tracks the individual progress of children. Plans for children are
discussed weekly at team meetings and at fortnightly link meetings. This
ensures that children awaiting placement are known to the managers and the
team, keeping them at the forefront of the process. Progress of prospective
adopters is also tracked at the fortnightly link meetings. Since November 2015,
this new system has had a positive impact in reducing the time between
placement order and being matched. This is currently at 179 days, against a
set target of 230 days.
completed by the permanence team. This team has been in place since April


of reports has improved over the past year. Permanence reports sampled by
the inspectors were mainly good, with child-focused and reflective
assessments. All permanence reports are robustly quality assured by the ADM.
On occasion, the reports are not updated to include information requested by
the ADM or refreshed to include the childs most recent information. This does
not delay the overall processes but does mean that adopters do not always
have the up-to-date picture of a child. If no match for children can be achieved
within the adoption service, other avenues are actively explored.
timetables and information booklets to ensure that they are fully informed and
involved in their plans. The adoption service has an established letter-box
system, to coordinate indirect contact. This is sensitive to all and thorough in
its processes. The later life letters seen are written in a clear and candid way
that give a summary of the childs history. Life story work is child centred and
includes all the people involved in a childs journey. There is a designated
worker to support professionals and carers involved in a childs life to help
them contribute to life story work. Although there is a backlog following the
recent appointment of the specialist life story worker, inspectors saw good
examples that were sensitive, informative and well presented. The service is
committed to ensuring that children receive these by the time that the
Adoption Order is made, and recognise this is as an area for improvement.
service. This is a therapeutic service that is offered to all children looked after.
This service is highly commended by all professionals and adopters who spoke
with inspectors. To ensure that the right placements are requested for brothers
and sisters, Full Circle workers complete a thorough assessment of each childs
needs. All placement requests for brothers and sisters to stay together have
been achieved in the past year. The Full Circle service is also involved in the
training of prospective adopters. In addition, a clinical psychologist meets with
all adopters before matching takes place. The needs of each child are
holistically and realistically presented to the potential matched carers. This is
supported by the work of the adoption team and has resulted in only one
disruption in the past 12 months. The panel and the service reflected on this
disruption to capture learning and consider any changes to improve services.
children becoming looked after and being placed for adoption. Performance
against this indicator is an improving picture. For 201415, a sizeable reduction
of 102 days was achieved from the previous year, at 449 days. The latest
information for this year shows a further positive reduction to 421 days, which
is again below the national target.
analysis of predicted numbers, needs and profiles of children, which is an
omission. However, the service attracts a large number of enquiries, and a
broad range of recruitment activity is employed. Adopters are prepared and


trained to a good standard. This training is currently being refreshed to ensure
that it is inclusive to all potential adoptive families, reflects current practices
and presents a realistic and balanced perspective on both positive and
challenging aspects of adoption. Inspectors saw evidence of good-quality
assessment practice. Adopters confirmed to inspectors that they are positive
about the communication they had received following their initial enquiry,
subsequent assessment visits, and training and support (Recommendation).
been approved by the panel if they are unable to be considered for a match
immediately. There have been no fostering-to-adopt placements made, with
only one placement available currently. This aspect of the service is in the early
stages of development and is recognised by the authority as an area for further
development.
an accessible, timely and comprehensive range of therapeutic techniques to
support children and families. Families are also informed of the other support
organisations available. Post-adoption training updates and other relevant
information are regularly sent out by the service.
Feedback from adopters who have attended the panel is positive. It
demonstrates effective oversight of adoption decisions and the approval of
adopters. The chair of the panel and the agency decision maker, along with
other key professionals, meet quarterly to discuss issues and challenges that
have occurred. This ensures that the practice of the panel and service is
informed by research and evidence-based practice. The adoption panel plays a
key role in quality assurance, providing appropriate challenge and clear
decision making.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good

clear focus on improving their outcomes and opportunities. Care leavers are
well consulted on service developments that are important for them, for
example, the quality of their accommodation, health passports, planning a
discrete annual event to celebrate their achievements and supporting events to
encourage fellow care leavers to engage in education, employment and
learning. Care leavers are celebrated through care leavers week and specific
events, such as a recent celebration for 30 care leavers achievements in
education, employment and training.


that they receive. They are knowledgeable about their rights and entitlements
and are in receipt of their important personal documents. The local authority is
successful in engaging and keeping in touch with the vast majority of care
leavers. Workers are persistent in their attempts to keep track of those very
few young people who choose not to be in touch with the service. As a result,
the majority of care leavers develop trusting and long-standing relationships
with their personal advisers or their social workers. Care leavers are well
known within the 16-plus teams due to the stability of workers. This helps
ensure that they receive advice, support and guidance across a team of
workers who know them well.
people very well, they are attuned to changes in young peoples presentation,
emotional well-being or their known behaviour. This alerts them to when things
are not going well or there are potential risks. Workers are prompt to take any
necessary action to protect and support care leavers. For example, where risks
of child sexual exploitation are identified, there are effective and timely
arrangements for joint working with partner agencies to investigate concerns
and provide support for young people. Young peoples needs are clearly risk
assessed to support their plans and multi-agency meetings are convened to
monitor risks and target support effectively.
team and the pathway planning process is used to update young peoples
ongoing assessment and needs. This means that some assessments have been
completed three or four years ago and the updating of pathway plans is based
on the workers ongoing knowledge. Although their knowledge of individual
young people is thorough, this practice does not consistently ensure that all
current information is considered, analysed and reflected on. This is particularly
relevant for those young people presenting with challenges and chaotic
routines (Recommendation).
Those care leavers spoken with described how their workers support them to
update their plans and they describe their plans as meaningful to them. One
care leaver said, We go out and have a proper talk, then change it.
very good detailed plans were seen. Others were too brief and lacked clarity on
specific timescales. In particular, pathway plans lack clear education targets to
understand how all care leavers will achieve their goals to engage in education,
training or secure employment. Plans do not reflect the actual good-quality
work undertaken with care leavers (Recommendation).
disabilities, resulting in care leavers successfully making the transition to adult
social care services for seamless, ongoing support and services.


know how to access health services. Care leavers have their health needs
assessed annually, but some choose to opt out and independently visit their
general practitioner. Examples were seen of young people confidently
accessing services independently. Some good examples were seen of care
leavers supported to reduce drug use, manage eating disorders, receive
bereavement support, explore gender identity and follow a healthy eating and
exercise plan.
rectify this is slow. A pilot scheme is currently underway to provide 20 current
care leavers with their health passports. These meet all necessary
requirements to inform and support care leavers to meet their own health
needs independently. However, there is not enough urgency through the
consultation process to avoid the potential for delay.
increase their independence skills, for example, during direct work with social
workers, advisers and youth workers. In addition, there is a range of structured
independence programmes provided by housing and supported lodgings
providers, as well as floating support options, all offering differing levels of
support. Care leavers who become parents are well supported through family
nurse partnership interventions or by family support workers. In addition, there
are accommodation options tailored to parents.
number, quality and range of accommodation options for care leavers.
Concerted efforts to do this have resulted in 94% of young people now living in
suitable accommodation. This is an increase of 20% since 2014. There are no
young people living in multi-occupancy homes. Those 14 young people at
university are well supported to avoid excessive debts and have a consistent
place to stay during holiday periods. There are currently 11 young people in
staying put arrangements with previous foster carers, which is relatively low,
despite the local authority policy to offer staying put to all care leavers
(Recommendation).
options, known as crash pads, across the area to support care leavers at times
of crisis. Therefore, the use of hotels or guest houses is low, with these used
on two occasions for care leavers since April 2015. A protocol developed in the
last six months to reduce the risk of evictions for the most challenging young
people, although relatively new, recognises well the need to support those care
leavers presenting challenges. Workers are persistent in finding solutions and
offering support. Care leavers spoken with report that they feel safe where
they are living, although not all are happy with their accommodation location
and would prefer more choice.
with the local authoritys adult education services. All care leavers are offered a


six-month traineeship within the local authoritys services. They are then
supported to progress to an apprenticeship in their chosen field, for example,
the local authority offers mechanical maintenance, care work and
administration. Currently, six young people over 19 years old and formerly not
in education, employment or training (NEET) are being supported to progress
through this route. Care leavers were very positive about this programme, with
one stating, I got so much from the programme. I am now going to grasp the
opportunities it has offered with both hands.
Initiative, with secured funding of 17 million over the next three years to
support them into employment. Positively, 30 apprenticeships are allocated for
care leavers. This will significantly increase the current figure of six care leavers
who have completed apprenticeships over the last three years. This,
potentially, will have a dramatic impact on the high numbers of care leavers
aged 19 years and over who are NEET, which is 49%. The NEET figures for the
national and regional rates.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Childrens services in Durham require improvement to be good. The consistently
high quality of services identified at the last inspection in 2011 has not been
maintained. Work undertaken with children requiring adoption and care leavers
continues to be good. Early help services are developing well and the response to
children at risk of child sexual exploitation is good. However, other important
services require improvement. The quality of plans, assessments and case recording
is too variable and it is too soon to see the impact of the Innovation Programme on
raising the quality of social work practice.
The recent significant restructure of childrens services, funded through the
government Innovation Programme, introduced the Families First service. The last of
the Families First teams became operational in February 2016. This service aims to
work intensively with families at an early stage to prevent re-referrals and escalation
of concerns. There have been early benefits in improving joint work with early help
services, but it is too soon to see the full impact of the restructure.
The local authority demonstrates a commitment to ensuring an effective workforce
and provides good support and training for newly qualified staff. The response to
address staff shortages in some teams has not yet had impact. This currently
prevents the authority from delivering a consistent, timely or good-quality service.
There are clear and effective governance arrangements across strategic
partnerships. The local authority works well with partners and has shared priorities
based on a good understanding of local need, which inform the commissioning of
services. Consultation with children and young people to inform service development
is well embedded. This is demonstrated through the work of the Health and Wellbeing Boards commissioning of strong preventative emotional well-being services
based on young peoples feedback.
The local authority works well with partners at a strategic level to address and
develop services to meet the needs of children at risk of sexual exploitation and
those who go missing.
Performance information and quality assurance information are not analysed
effectively to consistently improve practice in all areas of service. Arrangements for
scrutiny by political and senior leaders are not sufficiently robust. The quality of
frontline practice is not routinely reported, and this aspect requires improvement.
Systems for case recording do not ensure that childrens files are consistent and
complete. Management oversight and decision making are not easily identified on
childrens records. Evidence of analysis and the rationale for decisions are not
sufficiently demonstrated.


Inspection findings
work services are provided in Durham, with the intention to offer increased
capacity and support for children. The introduction of the Families First model,
with financial support from the government Innovation Programme, has
created social work-led teams with a mixed skill base of staff who work closely
with community based third sector organisations. The changes are
appropriately targeted to reduce the numbers of children requiring statutory
intervention and improve capacity for ongoing family support.
as a long-term solution to delivering good-quality services to children has
supported the progress and development of early help services for children at
lower levels of need. Ten One Point teams are now based in locations across
the county. Impact is evident, with an increase in the take-up of early help,
reductions in re-referrals to social care and support for children and families
more appropriately provided according to their different levels of need. The last
of the Families First teams became operational in February 2016. These teams
are co-located with One Point services to deliver child in need and child
protection work. This is part of an integrated locality provision, with the aim of
meeting the future needs of children and families in the most cost-effective
way.
more fully integrate services is sustained by the strong alignment of priorities
across key strategic organisations such as the Health and Well-being Board, the
DLSCB and the Strategic Partnership Boards. These organisations work closely
with the 14 Area Action Partnerships to ensure community involvement in a
range of consultation and planning regarding service delivery. This supports
strategic objectives, including the continued development of awareness of child
sexual exploitation.
overview and analysis of relevant data, has effectively informed strategic
themes and priorities. These translate into shared strategies, targets and
coordinated action plans demonstrating a coherent approach to key issues,
such as emotional health and well-being and childhood obesity. The strong and
well-resourced Health and Well-being Board demonstrates clear governance
arrangements to the DLSCB and the Children, Young People and Families Plan.
The latter demonstrates that children and young people were consulted and
their views considered to inform planning.
partnerships, with political and senior leaders having clear lines of
accountability and responsibilities. The new chief executive, in post since
January 2016, has taken immediate steps to familiarise himself with childrens
services, ensuring the continuation of effective monitoring arrangements with


the director of childrens services (DCS) and close links with the lead member
for childrens services, the leader of the council and other elected members.
plans to address performance deficits. This has resulted in improvements in
some areas of practice such as placement stability for children looked after and
the percentage of return home interviews completed following a child or young
person going missing. However, performance reports presented to senior and
political leaders lack analysis and explanation to provide sufficient
understanding or scrutiny of frontline practice and lack information on
casework quality and audits (Recommendation).
sufficiently self-critical and does not drive improvement. Actions taken by
managers to improve the rigour and consistency of auditing have had
inconsistent impact across the service, and efforts to improve case file
recording have not resulted in consistently good practice. The quality of
practice has not substantially improved and, in some teams, has remained
static or deteriorated. The recent appointment of a dedicated improvement
manager is intended to facilitate development in the quality of auditing and
practice (Recommendation).
with children is recorded effectively. The location of case records on electronic
or paper systems is inconsistent, resulting in childrens case records not always
demonstrating a coherent picture of the childs journey. This results in staff
working in First Contact, MASH or emergency duty teams not having access to
the entirety of a childs record to inform decisions to address and manage risk.
A review of the current database is planned for September 2016, as part of a
longer term development plan to enable the creation of a single childrens
electronic record (Recommendation).
a positive impact. As a result of recent staff shortages, two out of the three
child protection teams have been unable to accept any new childrens cases.
Consequently, caseloads in Families First teams have increased. This has
resulted in delays in assessment and provision of services for some children
with lower levels of need and risk. Furthermore, the reorganisation of services
and staff sickness and changes mean that some children have had too many
changes of social worker. This means that children have not been able to
develop enduring relationships with social workers. Managers are actively
monitoring caseloads and medium and longer term plans are in place to reduce
the pressures on teams (Recommendation).
workforce and effective workforce development and overall has improved staff
turnover and vacancy rates in addition to reducing reliance on agency staff.
The retention of staff is enhanced by good support in the assessed and
supported year in employment (ASYE) and comprehensive training in addition


to opportunities for career development. Social workers describe managers as
supportive and accessible, but evidence of management oversight on childrens
files is not always present and does not demonstrate sufficient analysis or the
reasons for decisions.
need identified in the JSNA, particularly in relation to health needs of children
and young people, education of pupils excluded and parenting programmes.
Significant work has been undertaken to ensure that the recommission of
health provision is fit for purpose and feedback from young people has
informed the priority being given to emotional health and well-being. This has
led to the commission of a range of services designed to deliver effective
prevention and early intervention for children and young people. Sufficiency of
placements for children looked after is supported by the local authority being
part of an effective regional joint commissioning framework that includes
suitable arrangements to monitor the quality of providers, including visits to
provision and detailed annual reviews.
operational services across the partnership to children who are at risk of or
subject to child sexual exploitation and those who go missing.
the lives of young people through the work of the dedicated scrutiny
committee which meets regularly to review and challenge aspects of service
delivery. The committee selects its own work programme which has included
scrutiny of services for children at risk of sexual exploitation and those at risk
of self-harm. It has regular oversight and challenge of performance information
and has sought to increase the participation of young people by holding a
recent committee meeting in a local school.
demonstrating a good knowledge of corporate parenting issues. Elected
members attend CiCC meetings and regularly attend corporate parenting panel
meetings to discuss a range of topics including feedback from the CiCC about
service provision. Feedback is used to make changes in some areas of practice
but elected members do not have enough performance information about
some key areas of the quality of frontline practice, such as inefficient
management oversight resulting in delays to the PLO process and SGO
arrangements. This limits their ability to challenge and influence improvement.
of sources, including serious case reviews, complaints and feedback from
children and young people. There are clear examples of change taking place as
a result of this learning, for example, the training on completion of
assessments has recently been amended, and social workers are increasingly
aware of the importance of considering fathers and other males in
assessments. However, the impact of this learning is not embedded or always
evident in current practice.


including of child sexual exploitation and health and well-being, which have
informed and improved current practice. Complaints are well coordinated and
managed, with learning regularly identified and fed back to inform future
practice.
well embedded in Durham childrens services. A national community interest
company is commissioned to deliver a wide range of opportunities for children
and young people in the community to share their views. This has been
effective in influencing aspects of service delivery.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
Durham Local Safeguarding Children Board (DLSCB) is an ambitious and reflective
board whose effectiveness and functioning has significantly improved since the peer
review of October 2014. There is clear multi-agency ownership of board activity,
which is sighted on key issues with focused priorities. The voice and experience of
children and young people are at the heart of the boards work. There is a culture of
openness and challenge and the chair of the board has been instrumental in leading
and facilitating the developments.
DLSCB has clear governance arrangements with partner boards, with whom there
are aligned priorities. These successfully support senior management coordination
and oversight of strategic safeguarding work.
An appropriately resourced and well-managed business unit provides good support
to the board. Efficient processes underpinning board activity have been developed,
ensuring that work is coordinated, timely and in line with board priorities.
A timely and thorough section 11 audit and challenge process ensures that
safeguarding is a priority for partner agencies in Durham and that identified
improvements are implemented.
DLSCB leads on aspects of key strategic work, including early help and neglect and
responses to child sexual exploitation and missing children. The early help offer is
well resourced and embedded, with clear strategic direction. Responses to child
sexual exploitation are well coordinated at both a strategic and operational level.
Effective processes are in place for reviewing and disseminating learning from
serious, child death and other case reviews. Learning events have been particularly
well received and future evaluation will be required to assess whether there have
been embedded practice improvements.
Quality assurance processes have improved significantly over the last year and give
oversight for the board to challenge and assure itself of the quality of work, but in
some areas, the reporting and oversight is not yet sufficiently developed.
The board has effective systems for the planning, monitoring and oversight of
training activity, clearly linked to board priorities, and training requirements arising
from serious case reviews. The board delivers a well-regarded programme of
training and e-learning opportunities.


Recommendations
further developed to offer a detailed and comprehensive picture of the quality
and impact of frontline practice in all service areas to underpin strategic
understanding, challenge and development.
impact of training and the embedding of lessons learned from case reviews.
families who have received child protection services to support ongoing service
improvement.
performance and effectiveness of local services.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
since the commissioning of the peer review by the corporate director of
childrens and adult services in 2014. Good arrangements are now in place to
fulfil its statutory functions.
between the board, key partnership boards and senior officers are clearly
evident in ensuring that there is coordinated oversight of safeguarding children
work. These arrangements are underpinned by the safeguarding framework,
which details joint working arrangements and responsibilities with a clear
alignment to strategic priorities. A Chief Officers Safeguarding Group ensures
that all senior officers are sighted on safeguarding practice.
with, and by, the board has ensured that there is committed multi-agency
ownership of board activity, with clear shared priorities supported by an
appropriately detailed business plan. The engagement of education leaders
since the peer review has been significant in involving schools more effectively
with the work of the board and in developing more coordinated safeguarding
work in the sector. The chairing of the sub-groups by officers with sufficient
seniority from across the partnership has been important in embedding shared
ownership and progressing subgroup work in a timely way.
(SAB) and has been in post since October 2014. She has been instrumental in
steering the board developments, setting a culture of openness and challenge
and developing constructive working relationships across the partnership. The
chief executive has established appropriate links with the chair through which


she is held accountable and there are regular meetings with the corporate
director of children and adults services. The lead member is actively involved,
regularly briefed on childrens service information and attends the DLSCB
meetings as an observer.
support to the board. Efficient processes underpinning activity have been
developed, ensuring that work is coordinated, timely and in line with board
priorities.
engagement work is supported by a national community interest company. The
DLSCB chair chairs the childrens and young peoples reference group, which
has given presentations to the board. The young people who attend the board
are well prepared and supported. There are clear efforts to engage a wide
range of young people, with board members going to meet young people in
their local areas on a Friday night. There have been visits to lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender (LGBT) young people and their views have informed
school responses to homophobic bullying. Young people have also been
involved in website development, ensuring that it is more engaging for young
people and that information is accessible. There is a coordinated strategic
approach across the partnership to engagement with children and young
people, ensuring that key messages can be shared without subjecting children
and young people to repeated requests.
recent section 11 process was undertaken 18 months after the previous audit
in April 2014 and engaged the full range of partners, including individual
schools. Bespoke questionnaires aligned to board priorities and amended to
support effective school engagement were completed in a timely way.
Subsequent challenge clinics have ensured that the board has a clear picture of
agency safeguarding practice and an action plan is in place to achieve
improvements. Prompt responses to identified gaps were evident and there
was appropriate and effective escalation to board level where responses or
actions were not completed in a timely way.
significantly improved and are sufficient to ensure that the board has oversight
of the range of safeguarding work in Durham childrens services. A culture of
openness and challenge is evident in board activity and this is supported by the
use of a challenge log to ensure timely monitoring and resolution of challenge.
The board is appropriately supported in its oversight of key threshold and core
child protection activity through specific reports, performance information and
audit activity. The application of thresholds is supported by specific training
and dissemination of the 0 to 19 years needs document, which has been
recently revised. Current processes to gain feedback from children, young
people and families who have received child protection services do not give
sufficient information to inform service improvement (Recommendation).


development and provides key data and analysis linked to board priorities.
Minutes of the DLSCB meetings evidence discussion and challenge arising from
that data. The scorecard does not yet include robust trend analysis or the
narrative behind the data. A programme of multi-agency audits linked to board
priorities is in place and audit findings are reported to the board in a clear and
timely way. While the multi-agency audits provide recommendations for
change, further auditing of the identified issues has not yet been undertaken to
enable the DLSCB to know whether practice has actually changed or improved
as a result. The multi-agency audit processes are evaluated to support ongoing
improvement, but learning from single-agency audits is not yet included to
support the boards oversight and evaluation of practice (Recommendation).
providing challenge where necessary. A comprehensive and analytical report in
relation to restraint at the local secure childrens home evidenced effective
DLSCB oversight of, and links with, the secure childrens home in line with the
requirements of Working together to safeguard children (Department for
Education, 2015). The recent annual private fostering report identified issues in
relation to low numbers and practice adherence to procedural requirements. A
board task and finish group was set up to ensure a comprehensive response.
help and neglect strategy. The early help offer is well resourced, coordinated
and embedded, covering the 0 to 19 years age range, and further
developments are evidenced by the recently revised and updated strategy,
which has a clear action plan. Basic performance reporting has evidenced some
impact, but overall performance management and quality assurance of early
help work are underdeveloped, partly due to the lack of an effective IT system
to date, and do not yet give a sufficiently detailed picture to measure impact or
identify gaps. A draft early help scorecard has been developed and is about to
be implemented and auditing of early help case work is undertaken within
childrens services but has not been reported to the board. The embedding of
the outcomes framework across all early help practice is taking place, with
plans to support this with an IT system later on in 2016 (Recommendation).
to children at risk of sexual exploitation and children who go missing. The
missing and exploited subgroup of the board (MEG) has driven timely
implementation of the child sexual exploitation strategy and the Educate and
Raise Awareness of Sexual Exploitation (ERASE) team provides effective direct
work and support for young people at risk of child sexual exploitation. The
number of children who go missing has decreased and child sexual exploitation
training developments, including taxi driver training, have underpinned
increased intelligence to identify and support vulnerable young people. The
MEG has identified a cohort of vulnerable young people placed by other local
authorities in Durham and has instigated a robust process to ensure that
appropriate information is shared to support safety planning.


and accessed by staff, but there is insufficient capacity in the business unit to
ensure consistently timely updates. Some procedures still have track changes
evident and the level of usage in the current system cannot be audited. At the
DLSCB meeting in February 2016, a decision in principle was made to explore
the purchase of online procedures.
methods for learning from case reviews and clearly details the process for
serious case review (SCR) consideration. Suitable links to quality assurance
activity and training and development are evident in the framework. The board
has managed a significant number of SCRs and good processes are in place for
identifying learning from these and other case reviews. The reviews have been
completed in a timely way and where there are delays, the reasons are
understood and appropriate. The learning is disseminated primarily through
well-attended learning events as well as by email, newsletter and other singleagency briefings. The recent learning events received very positive feedback
from multi-agency participants and future events are planned along similar
themed lines. Inspectors found frontline staff awareness of key lessons,
although not with all staff seen. There is evidence of impact of learning from
serious case reviews on some, but not all, current casework practice. Future
auditing activity to support impact evaluation is planned (Recommendation).
improvement, particularly the need to support staff in preparing for and going
through SCRs. A thematic action plan underpins the progress monitoring of
plans arising from reviews and there are examples of effective escalation to the
full board where agency actions have not been completed.
thematic reviews with appropriate actions and challenge. In one example, the
intervention of the child death overview panel (CDOP) instigated a Care Quality
Commission (CQC) external review in relation to consultant cover in tertiary
services (the findings of which have not yet been completed). The CDOP has
contributed learning to inform and support a number of regional awarenessraising programmes, including smoking (Baby Clear), co-sleeping, alcohol and
risks around water and rivers. Factors that have negatively impacted on the
timeliness of child death reviews are well understood and changes have
underpinned reported improvements in timeliness. The annual report is not
sufficiently detailed to accurately reflect the range and impact of work
undertaken by CDOP.
strength, with a dedicated 24-hour nursing service providing timely and
effective support to parents through the whole child death review process. The
service also supports appropriate partner agency responses and, in one
example, has instigated procedural change by police to ensure a more
measured response where the child death is expected.


planning, monitoring and oversight of training activity, clearly linked to board
priorities, and includes training requirements arising from serious case reviews.
The board delivers a well-regarded programme of training and e-learning
opportunities. Scrutiny of attendance ensures an ongoing multi-agency
commitment to participation in training. Practitioners and managers spoken to
across a range of agencies, including education, reported that training was
usually of a high standard and positively impacted on their practice. Impact
evaluation has been primarily around immediate and subsequent participant
feedback and work to obtain managerial overview. Links to the quality and
performance subgroup to commission audit work to support impact evaluation
of training are not yet in place (Recommendation).
demonstrating that it is sighted on key national and local drivers. The challenge
and development evidenced in the report influences positive strategic
developments, such as early help and responses to child sexual exploitation. In
light of the significant improvements in board functioning in the current year,
the annual report for 201516 should provide a more rigorous assessment of
the performance and effectiveness of local services than was evident in the


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted
and one associate inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Fiona Millns
Deputy lead inspector: Paula Thomson-Jones
Team inspectors: Anne Waterman, Michael Ferguson, Rachel Holden, Pam
Blackman, Graham Reiter, Lolly Rascagneres, Lynn Radley
Associate inspector: Fiona Parker
Senior data analyst: Peter McLaughlin
Quality assurance managers: Carolyn Adcock, Sean Tarpey


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects
to achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for
learners of all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the
Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher
training, further education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services
for children looked after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2016


