Halton
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 18 November 2014 - 10 December 2014
Report published: 3 February 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services require
improvement
The authority is not yet delivering good protection and help for children, young
people and families. It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and
young people receive good help, care and protection.2
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires
Improvement

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Requires
Improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Halton require improvement because:
Consistency of practice
 The quality of plans, including child in need, child protection, care, pathway, and
personal education plans, is not yet consistently good. Plans are not always clear
about actions, objectives and timescales and are not always written in plain
English. This limits the local authoritys ability to drive improved outcomes and
measure progress for children and young people.
 Almost half of social work single assessments require improvement to be good.
Although risk and protective factors for children are identified, they are not
routinely analysed to consider the impact on children and young people or to help
future planning.
 Not all children who go missing from home receive a return interview and in
some cases where they do, the record of this does not influence planning and
decision making in a timely way.
 Until very recently, assessments have not consistently been completed in a timely
manner. Very recent improvements, although significant, need to be maintained.

Management capacity and oversight
 The re-shaping and re-focussing of services put in place by the Strategic Director
and his senior leadership team is not fully embedded and services are not yet
consistently good
 A lack of sufficient management capacity within the Contact, Assessment and
Referral Team (CART) has contributed to delay in a minority of cases when
progressing contacts to a referral for a social work assessment. The rationale for
management decisions taken is not always clearly recorded. This means that for
some children, assessments of need and risk are delayed and can lack focus.
 The high caseloads of the independent chairs of child protection case conferences
limit their ability to monitor the progress of child protection plans between
conferences. Independent Reviewing Managers (IRMs) have caseloads
significantly in excess of statutory guidance. This limits the quality assurance of
childrens plans.
 Management oversight of the pre-court proceedings process is not sufficiently
robust. As a consequence, a few children have experienced quite substantial
delays before agreed action has been taken.
 The fostering recruitment strategy fails to set targets for recruitment and the
local authority does not have a thorough understanding of the type of placements
it needs. This restricts the choice of placement and matching and increases the


reliance on independent fostering agencies.

Educational Outcomes
 The role of the Headteacher of the virtual school in challenging as well as
supporting schools is not fully understood. There is more work to do to ensure
that secondary schools are fully held to account for the achievements, attendance
and rates of fixed term exclusion in their schools.

Children and young peoples participation
 Young peoples involvement in the child protection process is under-developed,
including the take-up of advocacy, which has been poor. Arrangements to involve
young people in the corporate parenting partnership board are new and not yet
fully embedded or effective.

What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Improve the quality of planning for children (child in need, child protection,
care, pathway and personal education plans) to ensure that all plans are timely,
prioritise key issues and enable parents, carers, children and young people to
understand what needs to be achieved to improve childrens and young
peoples safety, well-being and educational achievement.


Ensure that all children and young people who go missing from home and care
have a return home interview, and that information is made available to
relevant professionals in a timely manner to inform risk assessment,
management and planning.


Strengthen management oversight and capacity within the CART to ensure that
referrals progress in a more timely way to childrens social care, and that
decision making with regards to thresholds is consistently clear and robust.

Areas for improvement

Consistency of practice

Ensure that single assessments consistently provide analytical evaluation of risk
and protective factors and are informed by good quality chronologies.


Strengthen the consistency of core groups in analysing the impact of actions on
intended outcomes.


Improve the quality of child permanence reports in order that matching is
robust and a childs history is clearly recorded.


Ensure that fostering records reflect thorough consideration of matching needs,
including how any gaps will be met.


Management capacity and oversight

Ensure that records of strategy discussions consistently include SMART actions
and contingencies.


Ensure that the independent chairs of child protection case conferences have
sufficient capacity to monitor the progress of plans between conferences and to
distribute the minutes of conferences in a timely fashion.

sufficiently robust to avoid unnecessary delay within this process.
that it is sufficiently resourced to meet its statutory responsibilities and revise
the escalation policy to ensure that challenge is recorded and that responses
and actions are timely.
children and adult victims of domestic abuse, focusing on the impact of
domestic abuse on children and young people.
are set to match local need and to provide a sufficient number and range of
placements.
communities and amongst those working with children and families, and that it
links to existing work on child sexual exploitation (CSE).

Educational outcomes
secondary schools are held to account fully for the attainment and progress of
their children in care, and for reducing the number subject to fixed period
exclusion.

Children and young peoples participation and access to information
and child protection processes, in particular, their attendance at child protection
core groups and conferences and their take-up of advocacy services. Gather
feedback on their experience of such processes to help make improvements in
the quality of practice.
the children in care council (CiCC) influence and inform the work of the
corporate parenting partnership board.


about themselves and to health passports.

The local authoritys strengths
families whose assessed needs fall below the threshold for social work
intervention. This is supported by a strong Inspiring Families programme
(Troubled Families), effective childrens centres (seven out of eight of which are
graded good by Ofsted) and a well-embedded common assessment framework
(CAF).
partner agencies, and provides a good foundation for understanding and
applying consistent thresholds for decision making.
and effectively when they are identified. Child protection conferences are held
promptly to tackle concerns about children at risk of significant harm.
understand their wishes and feelings and, in a large majority of cases, build
good relationships with them that support improved outcomes.
appropriate and these children go on to move in to their adoptive families
quicker than children in similar local authorities. Adopters say that they are well
prepared and supported by the local authority.
leavers, ensures that they have appropriate accommodation, and supports a
higher percentage of them into employment, education and training. This
includes six (10%) at university and four included within the local authoritys 11
traineeship posts.
Awareness-raising publicity, a well embedded risk assessment tool and strong
commissioned services are in place to support young people. Audits of practice
and a joined up front-line approach all sit under the umbrella of a pan-Cheshire
strategy. An updating review of work in this area was taken to full council on 10
December 2014, and plans for a dedicated multi-agency CSE team are well
advanced.
childrens joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA), which is focused, detailed
and up-to-date and which clearly informs the priorities within the children and
young peoples plan.


central to embedding a whole-authority approach to improving outcomes for
children in Halton.
contract specification and management ensures that services provide value and
are responsive to changing need.
with regular reflective supervision and a comprehensive package of training and
development opportunities.

Progress since the last inspection
for looked after children was in February 2011. The local authority was judged
to be good for both services. The last unannounced inspection of contact,
referral and assessment was in December 2011. Three strengths and three
areas for development were identified.
recommendations from those inspections that have not yet been fully met.
These include: ensuring that assessments and plans are consistently good;
ensuring that the minutes of child protection case conferences are distributed
promptly; ensuring that young people who have been looked after receive a
record of their health histories; and reducing high caseloads (this remains the
case for independent chairs of child protection case conferences and IRMs).
Improvement in these areas remains as a recommendation from this inspection.
improve the quality of supervision, which is now good.
judged to be good. The recommendation to implement an effective fostering
sufficiency strategy made following that inspection remains a recommendation
from this inspection because insufficient progress has been made. The lack of
sufficient local authority foster carers does not however impact negatively on
children and young people because the local authority makes up for this
shortfall through the use of agency foster carers.
judged to be adequate. The authority has made good progress against the
majority of the eight areas for improvement identified at that inspection.
However, the quality of child permanence reports remains variable, and
recommendations made in 2013 to ensure that information relating to brothers
and sisters and family health histories are in reports is still not being
consistently achieved. Improvement in this area remains as a recommendation
from this inspection.


covered by the inspection (the last 12 months). Prior to this, service
improvements and developments have been more limited in their impact, with
some of the recommendations from the last full inspection in 2011 remaining
incomplete. The Strategic Director and his senior leadership team have
provided strong leadership in re-shaping and re-focusing services to better
meet the needs of children in Halton. Although recent improvements need to be
embedded and practice is not yet consistently good, positive change is seen in
increased child protection and looked after children numbers that more
accurately reflect need within Halton. Services are increasingly timely and of
improving quality. The direction of travel towards good services is in place.


Summary for children and young people
 Senior staff in schools and health services told inspectors about positive
improvements to the system used when they report worries about a child or
young persons safety to the local authority. They usually get told quite quickly
what the local authority has done to make sure these children or young people
are safe. Occasionally there are delays by the local authority in using the
information to make decisions. This is something we have asked the local
authority to improve.
 The local authoritys plans for children in need of protection, personal education
plans, care plans and pathway plans for care leavers are usually detailed.
However, they do not always explain clearly enough the actions that will be taken
or the difference these actions will make to improving things.
 Services and agencies across Halton are working well together to help children
and families when they are just starting to have problems. This means the
problems can be tackled successfully before things get to a crisis point. They also
work well together when children or young people might be unsafe, and almost
always take action quickly.
 Social workers are very committed to helping children and protecting them from
harm and they know them well. They make sure that they visit children who are
on child protection plans and children in care regularly. They speak to them and
see them alone to help them to share their views.
 Social workers say that they enjoy working in Halton and are well supported.
They receive good training so that their skills are up to date and they know how
to offer good support to children. Managers check social workers work regularly,
but not all managers check to see how well the work with young people is going,
if it is making a difference or if they need to do anything differently.
 Adoption services are doing a good job and there is an increasing choice of
adopters for children in need of adoption.
 Children in care in primary schools attend school regularly and do well. This is not
always the case in secondary schools, and more needs to be done to make sure
that children in care in secondary schools do well too.
 Care leavers who spoke to inspectors are very positive about the support they
get, including the support to help them find the right college, training or work.
This support ensures that a high proportion of care leavers are in education,
training or jobs. However, although care leavers receive this good support, it is
not always part of their pathway plans and these plans need to be better.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area


Approximately 27,950 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Halton. This is 22% of the total population in the area.



Approximately 26% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.



The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:


in nursery and primary schools is 31% (the national figure is 17%)



in secondary schools is 29% (the national figure is 15%).



Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 3% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.



The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are White and Black Caribbean and White and Asian.



The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:


in primary schools is 1% (the national figure is 18%)



in secondary schools is 1% (the national figure is 14%).

Child protection in this area
 At 18 November 2014, 1,107 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction
from 1,146 at 31 March 2014.
 At 18 November 2014, 222 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is an increase from 164 at 31 March 2014.
 At 18 November, no children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is the same position as 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection three serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted and no serious case reviews have been completed or are
on-going at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 18 November 2014, 231 children are being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 83 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 211 (75
per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2014. Of this number:
-



The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


-

authority area; three children live in residential homes with a residential
school

-


-

area

-


 In the last 12 months (to 18 November):
-

there have been 16 adoptions

-


-

returned to be looked after

-

independent living, including one living in a house of multiple occupation.

Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates 2 childrens homes. Both were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since December 2006.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since January 2014.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement
The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Judgement grade
Requires improvement

Summary
Too many contacts within Haltons Contact, Assessment and Referral Team (CART)
take too long to progress to a referral to childrens social care, including a small
number of children who are at risk of significant harm. This is largely as a result of
insufficient management capacity and oversight within the CART. The management
rationale for decision-making within the CART is not always clearly recorded,
including some decisions which are subsequently changed as a result of the quality
assurance processes.
The quality of assessments and plans is too variable. Too many assessments lack a
clear analysis of risk and need, and too many plans lack clear objectives to help
parents and carers understand what needs to change and why.
Quality assurance via tracking and audit is yet to be fully embedded across childrens
social care. In particular, child protection chairs lack sufficient capacity to track the
progress of child protection plans and challenge drift and delay where necessary.
Most children who go missing from home quickly receive an independent return
interview that is used to help plan for their future safety. A few children do not
receive an interview, have to wait longer for it, or their interview is not used to
influence planning and decision-making.
Multi-agency responses to CSE focus well on prevention and are responsive to local
intelligence. Direct work with young people is helping to reduce risk in most cases.
The local authority cannot be assured that children who may be privately fostered
are safe and well cared for.
Early intervention in Halton is increasingly effective in supporting children and
families whose assessed needs fall below the threshold for social work intervention.
The local Levels of Need Framework provides a good foundation for all agencies to
understand and apply consistent thresholds.
The local authority has been successful in ensuring that very few children are
missing education or persistently absent from school. It provides effective support to
schools and is effective in ensuring that children and young people who are educated
at home or in alternative provision are safe and receiving an appropriate education.
Social workers know the children and families they work with well; they are
committed and are supported through regular, reflective supervision and training.


the revised Levels of Need Framework. The Contact Assessment and Referral
Team (CART) was established in September 2013. Intensive and family support
services were re-aligned to form three locality Early Intervention Teams from
September 2014. Weekly locality working together meetings take place in
Runcorn and Widnes which bring together agencies effectively to discuss
referrals for early help. The delivery of early intervention services is increasingly
successful in tackling issues before they become a crisis.
timely actions from the range of agencies needed to support children and
improve their outcomes. The quality and impact of CAFs is monitored regularly
by a multi-agency quality assurance group, and outcomes are reported to
senior managers and used to drive improvement where weaknesses are
identified. The CAF is used effectively to support children and families who have
been stepped-down from a child in need plan. The majority of cases that need
to be stepped-up to a child in need plan when more complex or serious issues
emerge are considered in a timely manner. The development of the CART has
been a positive step for Halton and is well regarded by partner agencies in
providing a single point of access to early help and childrens social care. The
more recent inclusion of CAF Support Officers within the CART has
strengthened the gathering of information on cases assessed to be in need of
early intervention.
lives of 275 out of the 375 families (73%) it has worked with. This activity has
been integrated successfully into the Early Intervention Teams.
a range of services, such as parenting interventions, supported by the colocation of health visitors. Multi-agency Team Around the Child (TAC) or CAF
meetings are regularly conducted within childrens centres, which provide a
non-threatening and child-centred environment for families. All but one of the
eight childrens centres in Halton have been judged good following their Ofsted
inspections and all are noted for their partnership working. The Childrens
Centres Improvement Plan for 201415 supports a co-ordinated approach to
their work, but does not provide sufficient clarity about how they will engage
with and improve outcomes for children subject to child in need or child
protection plans.
not progress to referral for a social care single assessment in a timely manner.
Whilst the majority of cases are appropriately progressed to a referral within 24
hours and assessed by Child in Need Teams, a significant proportion (around
that for some children, assessments of their needs and risks are delayed. In a
small minority of cases, decisions to progress to child protection investigations


did not therefore occur within 24 hours of the original concern being notified to
CART. Despite these delays, inspectors did not see any evidence that this
resulted in immediate harm to a child. The delays are mostly due to lack of
sufficient management oversight and capacity within the CART. The local
authority is aware of this shortfall and is planning to strengthen these
arrangements.
were in respect of domestic abuse. There were too many delayed notifications
by the police to the CART, and therefore some children living within households
with domestic violence are not being assessed quickly enough.
quality. Effective information sharing arrangements support decision making. A
wide range of agency checks are undertaken by social workers within the CART
and, where appropriate, consent is obtained from parents. Information
gathered within the CART, including family histories, is used to inform decisions
about levels of need and risk. All decisions within the CART are taken by an
experienced and qualified social work manager. However, the rationale for
management decisions is not always clear and well recorded. Decisions about
contacts and referrals are routinely reviewed at a weekly multi-agency referral
meeting, which provides an effective opportunity to quality assure practice and
to review thresholds. However, when original decisions are changed as a result
of assessment or new information, this has not always been recorded
appropriately or in a way that enables a transparent understanding of the
reasons. The local authority took prompt action to change this practice when
alerted to it during the course of the inspection.
the vast majority of cases, strategy discussions are timely and the majority take
place between social care, police and health. However, a third of records of
strategy discussions seen by inspectors did not include the recording of
timescales for completing actions or contingencies in the event of those actions
not being progressed. Child protection enquiries are conducted by suitably
qualified social workers and appropriate action is taken to protect children at
risk of, or who are suffering, significant harm.
by inspectors) judged to require improvement to be good. All assessments
include a list of risk and protective factors, but some are too descriptive and fail
to analyse information sufficiently or give adequate weight to the impact of
these factors upon children. A few poorer assessments do not consider the role
of fathers or other significant family members.
children were seen within five working days of the start of an assessment.
Performance in more recent months has significantly improved, but the
authority will need to make sure that this recent improvement is maintained


and that a focus is kept on completing assessments in the right timescale for
the needs of each individual child.
arrangement of child in need meetings. This results in delay in co-ordinating
the support needed to meet complex needs or reduce risks. Chronologies do
not always go back far enough to include sufficient history of significant events
and are not always kept up to date. This means that they do not inform
assessment and decision making as well as they could.
range of risk assessment tools are used to inform decision-making.
Assessments do not however always make clear how they inform decisionmaking. Young peoples views are not always recorded within such
assessments. In the majority of cases, authoritative and timely action is taken
where the risk of harm remains or intensifies.
feelings is recorded in the vast majority of cases, and includes the use of
various tools. Inspectors saw some excellent examples of how younger
childrens wishes and feelings had influenced assessment and decision making.
Most social workers know the children they work with well and demonstrate a
good understanding of the childrens needs and circumstances. They are mostly
well supported through regular, reflective supervision and training and are
highly committed to outcome-focused practice. In one team, frequent changes
of social worker have, until recently, hindered the development of more
effective and meaningful relationships with a small number of children.
example, the Positive Behaviour Support Service, which provides specialist
interventions to children, young people and adults with learning disabilities and
autistic spectrum conditions. Strong partnership working with adult services and
well-defined packages of care, including the provision of a high quality shortbreak service, enable young peoples needs to be met as they move into
adulthood.
reviews taking place within the statutory timescale. Over 50% of child
protection plans relate to neglect, which reflects the focused management
attention on this issue during the past 12 months. A significant proportion
relate to emotional harm due to domestic violence. There has been a rise in the
number of children subject to a child protection plan for a second or
subsequent time. Attendance at child protection conferences is mostly good,
but improvement to the engagement of GPs in the process has not been
effectively sustained. Core groups take place regularly and are well supported
by partner agencies. Inspectors saw some strong social work practice within a
core group, for example, difficult and challenging messages being conveyed to
parents in a sensitive manner. Core groups do not consistently evaluate the
impact of previous recommendations and actions to assess progress. The


distribution of minutes from child protection conferences and core groups is not
yet consistently timely.
need plans and child protection plans lack clear timescales and objectives, have
a tendency to be formulaic and are not always written in plain English. Child
protection plans, in particular, do not routinely explain for parents what
professionals are concerned about, what needs to change and how this change
will be measured. The local authority has recognised this and, from September
for parents. This is a very new development and its impact is yet to be
evaluated.
Very few young people attend child protection conferences. The local authority
has recently changed arrangements for advocacy. It is now to be opted out of
rather than opted into, but it is too early to evaluate the impact of this.
protection plans where domestic violence, parental drug or alcohol misuse or
mental ill-health is a risk factor. In November 2014, 101 child protection plans
out of 222 had one or more of these features. The local authority uses this data
to inform commissioning and service planning, for example, the commissioning
of a service to support victims of domestic abuse. However, the capacity of this
well-regarded service is increasingly under pressure, which means that the
service is not able to effectively engage in all review processes concerning
children and adults with whom they are working.
increased in the last 12 months, from a comparatively low baseline, due in part
to the impact of the neglect strategy. This has placed considerable pressure on
the Safeguarding & Quality Assurance Team, which has led to an additional
child protection chair being appointed. However, child protection chairs
continue to have very high caseloads, which exceed 100 cases. This
significantly restricts their capacity to track and monitor the progress of child
protection plans between reviews. An escalation process is in place and this has
led to Child Protection Chairs effectively challenging delays in the timely
progression of actions, but this is not consistently leading to the prevention of
drift and delay in all cases. For example, a lack of effective tracking has meant
that a small number of children subject to child protection plans have
experienced significant delays when decisions have been made to escalate
cases to the pre-court proceedings process.
persistently absent from school. According to local authority data, this has
significantly reduced to 6.3% from 21% in 2012/13. The proportion of children
identified with special educational needs is reported to have risen to 30%,
which is now in line with similar local authorities. Work to narrow the gap in
terms of the educational achievement of children in need at Key Stage 4 has


not had sufficient impact to date. Good, well-established partnership
arrangements are in place to identify, track and meet the needs of pupils at risk
of exclusion from mainstream education provision. Currently, there are 81
young people in alternative provision, the vast majority of whom are placed
within provision which has been quality assured by the local authority. There
are currently only 6 children missing out on a school place, all of whom have
been missing for a very short period and have plans in place to address this.
The local authority and its partners proactively monitor and review these
arrangements. Good systems are in place to track, and check the safety and
achievements of 41 children currently home educated. The designated local
authority teacher ensures that families are visited as soon as possible following
their request, and no child is taken off the school roll until the teacher has
checked the safety and educational arrangements.
home or care are mostly effective. The local authority works closely with the
police and a voluntary sector organisation (Catch 22) to ensure that there is
good understanding of the push and pull factors associated with missing
episodes. Safe and well checks are conducted by the police and information
sharing with schools is proactively managed through Operation Encompass.
Staff demonstrate a good understanding of the relationship between going
missing and child sexual exploitation, and this is managed well at a strategic
level under the leadership of the LSCB. Targeted work has been successfully
undertaken with local childrens homes through Operation Arundel, which
ensures a co-ordinated approach to young people who are more vulnerable to
going missing. In October 2014, there were 19 missing episodes from care
involving 11 young people, and 18 missing episodes from home involving 14
young people. At the time of the inspection, there were no young people
missing for more than 24 hours. Good collaborative working and the use of a
tracking system lead to risk management meetings being convened when a
child is missing more than five times within a 90-day period. However, these
meetings are not always informed by a documented return home interview and
some social workers are not able to clearly explain how information from these
interviews is used to plan how children will be kept safe in the future.
developed, supported by a pan-Cheshire strategy; this is actioned, planned and
driven by the LSCB to tackle the recognition and prevention of CSE, and ensure
a co-ordinated response to young people assessed to be at most risk.
Preventative awareness-raising has taken place within schools and a
communication campaign, the more you know, the more you see, has
successfully raised awareness of CSE. Targeted work aimed at disrupting
potential offending activity has taken place in response to local intelligence. An
operations group meets regularly to discuss children who have been referred
following the completion of a CSE screening tool, and to share local intelligence.
Commissioning arrangements with Catch 22 have been extended to include
direct work, consultancy to practitioners and training to the childrens workforce
and other groups, such as hoteliers and licenced premises. An audit of practice


across partners has recently been undertaken, with a further deep-dive audit
planned in early 2015. The outcome of a strategic review in the light of
Professor Jays Report (on CSE in Rotherham) was presented to a meeting of
the full council on 10 December 2014, and plans to establish a multi-agency
dedicated CSE team in 2015 are well advanced. Currently, no children are
assessed as being sexually exploited, although active risk management plans
are in place for 12 young people deemed to be at risk of CSE.
Conference (MARAC) for medium and high risk victims of domestic violence.
Monitoring of the performance of MARAC indicates that a low proportion of
referrals (28% between 1 July 2013 and 30 June 2014) were from agencies
other than the police, which is well below regional, comparator and national
averages. The consistency of the local authoritys involvement has significantly
improved since January 2014; MARAC is now supported by two practice leads
from the child in need teams. Risks to victims and children are appropriately
assessed and this informs decisions about actions needed to ensure their
safety. However, greater rigour and management oversight is required to
ensure that all information is acted upon in a timely manner by social workers.
as homeless to services in Halton, and no young people are placed in bed and
breakfast provision.
fostered in Halton, and historically numbers have been low. Awareness-raising
activity has not had sufficient impact during the last 12 months. This raises
concerns that there are more children whose circumstances are not known, and
who are therefore potentially vulnerable. The local authority is aware of this
issue and has recently taken steps to re-invigorate the work of the private
fostering group under new leadership, and plans to refresh its action plan.
Designated Officer (LADO) are effective and well regarded by partners such as
schools, which also benefit from good support from the Safeguarding Children
in Education Officer. Timely meetings are arranged in the majority of cases to
respond to concerns or allegations about people who work with children; these
include representatives from appropriate agencies including the employment
sector in which the subject of the concern or allegation works or volunteers.
Actions are SMART, with clear timescales and the majority are progressed in a
timely way. The LADO is supported by a bespoke database which helps to
monitor and track the progress of cases and convene reviews where necessary.
In 2013-14, a total of 32 cases progressed to a LADO meeting, and 100% of
those cases that concluded during the year were resolved with 3 months.
participation in helping Halton to continuously improve its services, through
groups such as Halton Childrens Trust Advisory Group (INVOLVE), Halton
Family Voice, which provides a forum for parents to influence services, and


Halton Speak Out  Bright Sparks Project, which supports young people with
additional needs to share their views and ideas about the services provided to
them and to be involved in decision making. However, collating feedback from
children, young people and families who have been involved in child protection
processes is less embedded, and is an area for development acknowledged by
the local authority.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Good

Summary
The local authority is a committed corporate parent to the children and young people
in its care. The large majority are visited regularly by dedicated social workers who
know their children and young people well and understand their needs. Social
workers in the children in care and care leavers teams have manageable caseloads
and are supported by regular supervision and good training. Staffing pressures in
one team led to an unacceptable number of changes of worker for a small number of
children. The local authority knows this and has taken to steps to improve the
situation.
All of the children and young peoples case files seen by inspectors had care plans.
They are regularly reviewed by Independent Reviewing Managers (IRMs) and the
records of review meetings are written in a child-friendly manner.
Court proceedings in Halton are completed quicker than in other local authorities so
that children have permanent plans for their future agreed in a timely manner.
Improvements have been made in the timelines of initial health assessments when
children first become looked after, and the vast majority of children and young
people are registered with a dentist and have had their immunisations.
The attainment, attendance and progress of primary school-aged children in care is
good. Positive action is taken to ensure that children in care attend good or better
schools. Although improving, the attainment of children in care at the end of Key
Stage 4 is still not good enough.
The large majority of foster carers spoken to by inspectors are very positive about
the experience of fostering for Halton. However, the authority fails to set targets for
recruitment and does not have a thorough understanding of the type of placements
it needs. This restricts the choice of both placement and matching options and
increases the authoritys reliance on independent fostering agencies (IFAs).
Adoption performance is good due to the thorough preparation, assessment and
support of adopters, effective family finding for children waiting for adoption and
collaborative working with neighbouring authorities.
Personal advisers have strong relationships with care leavers. The majority of who
are well prepared for, and successfully move on to, independent living. Good support
ensures a higher proportion of care leavers successfully access education, training or
the world of work.


people looked after in Halton. In November 2014 there were 231 children and
young people looked after, compared with 145 at 31 March 2013 and 124 in
or young people entering care who should not have done so. The number of
children looked after is now in line with similar local authorities. This situation is
indicative of the improvements made in the past year by the senior
management team.
being looked after become looked after for a second time. Only seven out of
these children are under the age of 11.
Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), both report that the threshold for
issuing care proceedings in Halton is appropriate. In 201213 the average time
taken for court proceedings was 40 weeks, reducing to 32 weeks in 201314.
In August to October of 2014, the average time was 24 weeks, which compares
well with the national average of 30 weeks. Communication between family
court advisors and IRMs on individual cases is good.
experience three or more placements remains slightly better than the most
recent published figure for similar local authorities (11% in 201213).
(SGOs) to secure children and young peoples future. Of the 35 children who
ceased to be looked after in the six months prior to the inspection, more than a
third (13) were made the subject of a SGO. This is a significant increase on five
children (13.2%) in 201213. In four cases seen by inspectors, assessments
and decision making in relation to seeking SGOs was timely and had led to
good outcomes for children who are able to stay in the care of their extended
family. However, in two cases there was some delay, as foster carers were not
initially asked whether they would wish to continue caring for the children in
their care when the plan for adoption was changed. Practice has since changed
to ensure that foster carers are now considered at an early stage in these
circumstances.
seen regularly by their social worker and, when talking to inspectors, social
workers clearly knew and understood the needs of the children they work with.
caseloads which ranged from 15 to 23. However, staffing pressures in one team
have led to a very small minority of children experiencing an unacceptably high
number of changes of social worker. This has had a negative impact on their


ability to develop a relationship with their social worker and on the planning
and progress of their care.
lack sufficient clarity about actions, objectives and timescales. Children and
young peoples contact arrangements, together with health and leisure needs
are considered in looked after childrens reviews and are reflected in childrens
plans. Not all children, especially older children in foster care, receive life story
work as soon as they need it.
looked after in Halton has put pressure on the IRM service. Currently IRM
caseloads are in the high seventies, which is higher than that recommended
within statutory guidance. Capacity problems have not yet had a negative effect
on the IRMs ability to conduct reviews and track progress, but have
contributed to a backlog in distributing notes of review meetings. The local
authority is aware that if caseloads continue to increase, the IRMs will have
insufficient capacity to meet their responsibilities fully. Inspectors have seen
evidence on children and young peoples files of IRMs tracking progress and
challenging decisions. However, the escalation policy needs to be revised to
ensure that challenge is accurately recorded and that responses and actions
always happen in a timely manner.
Ofsted to be good or better, and 87% of children in care attend such schools,
compared to just fewer than 80% of children in Halton as a whole. Careful preplacement work between the headteacher of the virtual school and social
workers ensures that the best provision is secured. This is also the case for
children in out of borough placements. When children are already placed in
schools that do not maintain their good grade at inspection, the headteacher of
the virtual school visits the school and evaluates the quality of provision for the
child and makes a balanced risk assessment as to whether it is in their best
interests to move them. This is good practice.
the past three years. Eighty per cent of pupils gained Level 4 or above in
reading and mathematics tests in 2014. The gap between their achievements
and other pupils in Halton is lower than that of similar pupils and their peers
nationally: the gap in Halton is 19% whilst the most recent data indicates the
gap between children in care and their peers nationally is 31%. Year 6 children
in care make better than average progress from their starting points at the age
of seven than other pupils in Halton, and than similar pupils nationally. This is
not the case in secondary schools, where progress is below average from their
starting points at the beginning of Key Stage 3.
enough. The proportion gaining five good GCSEs including English and
mathematics for the three year average from 2011 to 2013 was 29%, much


higher than the national average of 15%. However, no children in care
achieved this in 2013 and only 11% in 2014. Every effort is taken to meet the
complex needs of some pupils who enter the care system in Year 10 or 11, but
actions taken have not always had enough time to help pupils catch up from a
very poor starting point.
officers and schools are helping to ensure that children in care attend school
regularly. The most recent local authority data shows that over 98% of
primary-aged pupils attend regularly; above that of all pupils in Halton and the
national average. There has been a slight dip in the attendance rate in
secondary schools to 86%, which is lower than the Halton and national
averages. The overall absence rate of 4% for children in care compares
favourably to that found nationally at 5%.
Significant individual work and support is carried out by the headteacher of the
virtual school and her team, alongside support services in the local authority, to
help pupils to remain in school and learning. The proportion subject to fixed
term exclusion remains broadly average. No children in care are missing from
education and all attend their full entitlement. Eight are in alternative provision
that is quality assured by the local authority and schools, whilst an additional
five are in good quality out of borough placements, four of whom have been
placed at short notice after coming into care in an emergency.
and interventions to schools, and are particularly commended by headteachers
for their direct or commissioned work for children in times of acute need. The
local authority provides an extra personal education allowance for children in
care, in addition to that provided by the governments pupil premium fund, and
this is used to provide direct one-to-one support, activities or equipment to
children in school. Detailed recording of this work shows the rich variety of
support provided. However, current tracking does not always measure the
impact of such interventions.
improvement to be good, and has developed a new process that is rolling out
from September 2014. Those seen by inspectors were of variable quality, with
just three out of 14 being good. Academic targets are not often specific enough
about what children need to do to move on and some targets are not
challenging enough; two were seen where the target for the end of the year
had already been met in the autumn term review, with no further stretch target
for the end of the year having been added. Headteachers report that the
system is cumbersome, and a consultative group has recently been set up to
make sure that PEPs are fit for purpose.
role in challenging as well as supporting schools in not fully understood. There
is more work to do to ensure that secondary schools are fully held to account


for the achievements, attendance and fixed term exclusion of looked after
children in their schools. There has been little recent training for designated
teachers but this is being re-instigated with a conference shortly to help ensure
that designated teachers are accountable to the headteacher of the virtual
school for the schools work with children in care.
their home when compared with other similar local authorities. Secure
arrangements are in place for sign-off of decisions to place children and young
people out of the local authority area. Detailed forms are completed by social
workers and signed off by the Operational Director or Strategic Director.
immediate access to education and health services to meet their needs.
Placement agreement documents signed off by senior managers describe how
needs will be met. Staff in three childrens homes out of the area confirmed to
inspectors that relevant information was provided to them in a timely manner in
almost all cases to ensure that there is no delay in meeting childrens
educational and health needs. However, in one case, where the child had had a
number of changes of social worker, not all documents were provided in a
timely way.
independent advocates. Twenty-eight looked after children contacted the
advocacy service between April and October 2014. An example was seen by
inspectors where a young person contacted the advocacy service directly and
the problem they raised was quickly resolved. In another case, a young person
placed outside the local authority area is using the advocacy service to
challenge contact arrangements about which they are unhappy. Ten young
people are currently being visited by an independent visitor and three young
people are waiting to be matched. Thirteen volunteers are currently completing
training as independent visitors before being available to be matched with
children.
to access a range of leisure activities, including cubs, drama, sports, a music
project and the canal boat project (a social inclusion project). The recent
introduction of a free swimming pass for all carers and looked after children
was initiated by the children in care council (CiCC) and is welcomed by young
people and carers. The local authority is currently piloting a gym membership
scheme for young people.
Review health assessments are still not sufficiently timely, at 72%.
have emerging mental health needs. The service is run by Barnardos and
works directly with children and young people and their carers. Until recently


there was no waiting list for this service, but the increase in the number of
children and young people looked after has increased the pressure on the
service. The local authority is aware of this and substantial investment has been
made in the new contract, which is currently out to tender, to increase the
capacity and extend the offer.
one example seen by inspectors, thorough consideration was given as to how
to reduce risk from missing episodes, including the consideration of secure
accommodation. Catch 22 has continued to work with that young person,
despite them being placed away from the local area and beyond the 30 mile
catchment area serviced by Catch 22. Although return interviews are almost
always carried out records of these interviews are not always received by social
workers or copied into case files. This limits the extent to which they can inform
planning to keep children and young people safe in the future.
the experience of fostering for Halton. They value the support and training
provided and they have delegated authority for the children they care for.
foster carers were received, with 32 people attending information sessions and
nine new households have been approved but six households have had their
approval terminated, which gives only a slight increase to the overall availability
of placements. The fostering recruitment strategy fails to set targets for
recruitment, and the local authority does not have a thorough understanding of
the type of placements it needs. This restricts the choice of placement and
matching and increases reliance on independent fostering agencies.
takes place within the fostering team.
inspectors had a good understanding of the local authoritys pledge for looked
after children, and most reported experiencing the effect of the pledge in their
lives. This provides evidence that the pledge is a live document and children
and young people in the care of Halton benefit from it.
involved in topic-specific sub-groups such as anti-bullying, Involve and website
design. Work is underway, but not fully developed, to involve young people
placed outside the local area, using technology such as Skype. The CiCC has
developed a welcome pack which the participation officer delivers to newly
accommodated children, including those placed out of area. This includes a
range of information, such as how to complain and details of the local authority
pledge and the CiCC. Eight young people have been trained to participate in


interviewing staff, and young people are also involved in the selection of
providers through the commissioning process.

An awards ceremony was held in May which was attended by 70 children and
young people; the CiCC is involved in planning next years event, which is
planned to have an Oscars theme. Recent arrangements have been made to
involve young people in the corporate parenting partnership board but these
are not yet fully embedded and effective.

The graded judgment for adoption performance is that it is good
looked after review. A tracking system for children for who adoption may be the
plan ensures that the childs journey is monitored from legal advice meetings
onwards and delays are minimised. The adoption team manager or agency
adviser oversees adoption plans and is a point of contact for all adoption work.
improving. The data shows that the average time between a child entering care
and moving in with an adoptive family was 538 days for the three-year average
both similar local authorities and the England average. The scorecard data for
average number of days now recorded as 521.
a child and deciding on a match to an adoptive family was 134 days for the
three-year average 2010 to 2013. This met the national threshold and was
again better than both similar local authorities and the England average. But
the scorecard information for the three-year average 2011 to 2014 is 155 days,
and does not meet the threshold by three days. Halton has a small number of
children subject to adoption plans, and the matching and placement of a few
children can affect the scorecard figures significantly. The recent dip in this
scorecard figure is attributed to the delay in matching a sibling group where
there was a complex medical history in the family background. These children
are now successfully placed due to the determined efforts of the local authority
in family finding.
authority was above the England average for the past five years until 2013
Six adoption orders were granted last year; there have been twelve made to
date this year, with a potential for a further seven to be made. This represents
good progress.
the time of the inspection had a match or potential match. The small


geographical size of the borough creates challenges in matching children with
in-house adopters, but good collaborative working between Halton, Knowsley,
Cheshire West and Chester in Together4adoption ensures that matches in a
wider area can be considered. The local authority is also a member of Adoption
agencies in the North West of England. Adoption 22 maintains a database and
search facility for children and adopters waiting for a match; children and
adopters are referred to the database and to the National Adoption Register.
Children are also featured in publications such as Be My Parent, and profiles
are added to Adopt Northwest, which maintains a secure website for adopters.
assessment process well embedded. Adopters describe the preparation course
as brilliant and value the contributions from foster carers and adopters.
Prospective adopter reports are of a good quality, with evidence of attachment
style interviews, research and analysis. Inspectors saw evidence of, and spoke
to adopters, who had broadened their offer during the assessment process,
thus providing a wider choice of placements for siblings and children from
different ethnicities.
activities with other authorities through Together4adoption. The marketing plan
covers a range of activities such as advertising, updates to websites and
attendance at exchange days and community events. The recruitment target
for 20132014 is the approval of 15 adoptive households. Between April and
November 2014, there have been 42 adoption enquiries and 12 applications.
Seven adoptive households are in assessment and there have been eight
approvals this year. There are no Fostering to Adopt carers, but all prospective
adopters are consulted about this during the assessment. Two voluntary
agencies in the North West have been commissioned for this service and one
has a Halton child placed under a concurrent arrangement.
backgrounds in adoption, an educational psychologist, medical advisers and has
access to legal advice. The panel provides robust examination of cases, with
clear recording of reasons for recommendations. Panel minutes also reflect that
the panel is fulfilling its quality assurance role and is checking timescales.
Matching is thorough, with management oversight and scrutiny through the
panel chair and agency decision maker. There is only one potential disruption
recorded this year, which confirms that matching is effective.
contain complete information regarding brothers or sisters or the health history
of birth family members. The local authority is aware of this as an area in need
of greater consistency.
adviser twice a year to discuss panel activity and practice issues. These
meetings also inform the production of the six-monthly quality assurance


report. The panel chair completes the first section of the report, covering panel
activity, quality assurance and membership, which is combined with statistical
information from the panel adviser regarding children subject to an adoption
plan. The meetings and quality assurance reports demonstrate good working
relationships and opportunities for reflection on the work undertaken.
training that the panel receive. For example, case law updates have been
provided and there has been recent training on safeguarding. Training has
taken place with adoption team members, which is conducive to good shared
learning and development of adoption practice.
exchanges are supported. Inspectors have seen letter box exchanges being
reviewed and direct work done to assist families to draft letters. There has been
one request for a post-adoption assessment for support during the year, which
was appropriately declined. All adopters spoken to have been aware of postadoption support and have received newsletters and information regarding
post-approval training. The adoption team also offers support groups, family
activity events, general advice and guidance. The local authority commissions a
service from After Adoption Yorkshire to offer support and counselling to birth
parents whose children have been adopted.
The graded judgment about the experience and progress of care leavers is
that it is good
leavers. The personal advisers workforce is stable; they receive regular
supervision and have manageable caseloads of approximately 20 young people.
When young people reach the age of 17 years, a personal adviser works
alongside their social worker. This ensures smooth transition arrangements and
enables young people to establish a relationship with their personal adviser
prior to case transfer at their 18th birthdays. Transition planning for care leavers
with disabilities is also effective in Halton, and begins at an early stage. This
ensures timely transfers to adult services and reduces uncertainty for young
people.
people, and support them in making decisions about their future aspirations.
Personal advisers make active efforts to stay in contact with all care leavers,
and to trace those with who contact is lost. In the majority of cases, young
people are visited according to their individual needs or at a minimum
frequency of eight-weekly. This ensures that personal advisers really know
where young people are, that they are all right, and that their circumstances
are not putting them at risk. At the time of the inspection the local authority
was in touch with the vast majority (97%) of care leavers. One young person
spoken to during the inspection stated, 'I am very happy and pleased with


Halton. He reported that there was nothing the social worker or personal
adviser could have done differently for him.
promote skills necessary for independent living. Life skills include practical skills
(such as personal care, healthy eating, cooking, cleaning, shopping, budgeting),
relationship skills and lifestyle skills (such as physical exercise, contraception,
alcohol and drugs) to ensure successful transitions to independent living. Care
leavers spoken to say that they have developed social skills required to live
independently and make choices, but felt further support with budgeting would
be of benefit to them.
traineeships for care leavers in Halton. The Halton People Plan 20122015 sets
out the authoritys approach and four of the local authoritys 11 traineeships are
currently held by care leavers. Traineeships result in employment opportunities
and there has been recent success for two care leavers who are now employed
by the local authority and one in the private sector.
accommodation. Most care leavers (six out of seven spoken to) told inspectors
that they felt safe where they were living and were satisfied with their
accommodation. Young people are benefiting from Staying Put arrangements;
four continue to live with their foster carers after the age of 18 years. Staying
put arrangements are considered within the local authoritys commissioning
arrangements and this ensures that young people placed with independent
fostering agencies have similar access to that of young people placed in house.
Eleven (17%) out of 62 young people are living in houses of multiple occupancy
(HMO). The majority of these are purpose-built units, similar to halls of
residence, are appropriate and meet the young persons needs, and are not
considered as permanent housing options. At the time of the inspection no
young people were placed in bed and breakfast accommodation.
housing provided by Halton Housing Trust, private rentals and supported living
accommodation. In partnership with Halton Housing Trust, the housing needs
of care leavers are prioritised. All care leavers have access to Band A social
housing, the highest category of need. Tailor-made packages of support are
commissioned to provide floating support, and two trainer flats are available to
ensure that care leavers are prepared and ready to take on their own
tenancies. Care leavers spoken to by inspectors reported that their personal
advisers work with them effectively to help find appropriate housing solutions
that best meet their needs and preferences, but said they felt that the choice of
housing is limited.
meaningful relationships with their personal advisers. The local authority
celebrates the achievements of its young people, running an annual award
ceremony that includes care leavers.


tier two commissioned services that work solely with children in care and care
leavers. Although young people spoken to were positive about the support to
be healthy from their personal advisers, two of the seven expressed concern at
the time it had taken to identify and support their mental health needs. The
local authority is aware of this service need and is in the process of very
significantly increasing investment in these services. Transition arrangements
are in place and ensure that young people receiving a service from child and
adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) are transferred to adult services in
a planned manner.
education, employment and training (EET) worker has ensured a consistently
higher proportion of care leavers move into education, employment or training
than that found nationally; tracking shows that the current figure is 71%.
Those in colleges are supported appropriately through bursaries, and child care
is supported for young parents who want to continue their education. There
has been a significant improvement in the number of care leavers entering
university. Only one went to university in 2013, well below average, but six
(9.7%) have started at university this year which is above the level for similar
young people nationally.
improvement. Seven (47%) out of a sample of 15 seen, do not demonstrate
what difference the actions make to the young persons skills and opportunities
as they move into independence, employment or training. The local authority
recognises this and recently commissioned and delivered pathway plan training
to social workers and personal advisers. Personal advisers undertake regular
reviews and update pathway plans. However, this does not afford young people
an independent examination of their plans nor challenge to ensure that plans
are making progress. In discussion, a small number (two) of young people were
unaware that their pathway plans had even been reviewed.
out of date and does not provide clear information about legal entitlements
such as financial support, how to complain and rights to health histories. The
local authority has adopted the DfE charter for care leavers, but the majority of
care leavers spoken to were not aware of the charter or the Moving on in
Halton booklet, and were over-reliant on their personal advisers for
information. In speaking with care leavers it was apparent that they had
received financial support, but not all were clear about or could articulate their
entitlement to services.
only 50% have a dentist. The looked after childrens nurse prepares health
information prior to the young persons 18th birthday. As the system is relatively
new it is not yet fully embedded, and 42 care leavers (68%) do not yet have
access to important information about their health histories. Care leavers
spoken to by inspectors had limited knowledge of their entitlement to their


health information and some care leavers do not have health passports. This
means they may be unaware of important details of their health history when
seeking or requiring medical treatment.
and works closely with personal advisers. For those care leavers (13) who are
parents, support is offered through local childrens centres and teenage
parenting groups. Commissioned services such as teens to tots are delivered in
partnership with local secondary schools and nurseries over an 18-week period,
twice a year. This enables young people to develop awareness and life skills to
take responsibility for their lives and to make choices that are constructive and
to their benefit.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Front line practice, management oversight and outcomes for children receiving early
help and protection are not yet consistently good. Although the senior leadership
team has taken action to improve services for children and young people by reorganising the way childrens services are delivered these changes have not yet had
sufficient impact for services to be uniformly good.
Based on an analysis of unmet need carried out in 2013, with a focus on children
and young people suffering neglect, the local authority launched a new Levels of
Need Framework with partners and the LSCB, and has undertaken a major service
review and redesign. This followed the appointment of a new Operational Director
for Children and Families Services in early 2013. At the time of the inspection, key
elements of the new structure had only just been established (September 2014).
This new structure for service delivery is not yet embedded, and further work is
needed to ensure that the quality of practice in the new teams is consistently good.
The local authoritys more robust approach to need and partner agencies awareness
of the Levels of Need Framework, have resulted in significantly increased numbers of
children and young people becoming the subject of child protection plans and
coming into care. The local authority has responded to this increase in identified
need, and the subsequent additional pressure on services, but it has not been able to
respond swiftly enough in some cases. A lack of management capacity has led to
inconsistent management oversight and delay in progressing contacts for some
children within the CART, and to high caseloads for IRMs and some social workers.
This means that not all children and young people receive good services.
Systems to monitor performance are in place, and provide a good range of up-todate performance data to front line and senior managers. Analysis of the quality of
practice carried out through audits is used to help drive improvement, but is not
routinely brought together with performance data to create a more rounded analysis
of the effectiveness of services.
The local authority has a strong track record of delivering good services to some key
groups of vulnerable children. It has been particularly proactive in developing
awareness of, and services for, children at risk of CSE and has developed strong
early intervention services based around effective use of the CAF.
Elected members and partners are all fully committed to the local authority's plans
and are working together to deliver the change required.
The leadership in Halton has a clear view of development and improvement needs
and continue to implement plans to strengthen services. Some of the changes to
how services are structured and delivered are still relatively new and have not yet
had sufficient impact to ensure that services are of a consistently good quality.


responsibility for childrens services in both Halton and in Cheshire West and
Chester, a neighbouring local authority. Political leaders in Halton state that
these arrangements are working well and that there have been benefits for the
local authority. They are confident about the capacity of the Strategic Director
to undertake his dual role effectively and they report that he has been
influential in bringing back learning from Cheshire West to improve and
strengthen services in Halton. The Strategic Director is supported in his dual
role by a well-established and well-informed senior leadership team in Halton.
the local authoritys critical friend, an advisory group that is made up of young
people, parents and carers. The Investing in Children and Young Peoples
Board, chaired by the Chief Executive, the Health and Wellbeing Board and the
Childrens Corporate Parenting Board all provide additional oversight and
challenge to the local authority. Through these boards young people are
engaged in helping to shape services that meet their needs, and they know that
the contribution they make is respected. They are passionate about their
participation in key strategic activities and know that they bring added value to
the governance arrangements of the local authority.
authority are held to account for delivering services are good. The Children,
Young People and Families Policy and Performance Board receives a wide range
of reports on childrens services to enable it to monitor and effectively challenge
senior managers about the quality of services being provided. Although senior
officers say that the discussions are challenging, the level of scrutiny is not
always reflected in the minutes; this compromises the effectiveness and
transparency of the process.
Safeguarding Children Board (HSCB) meet regularly, providing an additional
level of scrutiny and challenge to the performance of the local authority. These
meetings have seen senior managers across the range of local authority
services challenged to ensure that they contribute effectively to the
safeguarding agenda. For example, the Chief Executive was proactive in
ensuring that Public Health became a participating member of the local multiagency child sexual exploitation (CSE) group.
families services in early 2013, concerns emerged that the low numbers of child
protection plans and looked after children were not proportionate to the level of
need of children and young people in Halton. A review of services for children
suffering neglect reinforced the view that service delivery needed to be more
sharply targeted to achieve the best outcomes for children and young people.
This has led to a major reorganisation of the way childrens services are
delivered in Halton. Although some changes were put in place in late 2013,


some are much more recent (September 2014), and improvements made in the
quality of practice and outcomes for children are not yet fully embedded.
Childrens Assessment and Referral Team (CART), was established in
September 2013. Further changes were implemented in September 2014 to
create separate Children in Need teams and a Children in Care and Care
Leavers team. This has been a significant change of direction for the local
authority. Progress to establish an organisational structure that focuses on the
needs of children and reduces transition between services has been well
managed and is increasingly effective. Social workers and partner agencies say
that it is a step in the right direction for the service and for children. Apart from
the CART, these changes are very recent and planned improvements, such as
building greater capacity in the workforce, reducing caseloads, ensuring that
children experience fewer changes of social workers and strengthening
management oversight, have not yet been consistently achieved. This presents
political leaders and senior managers in Halton with a significant number of
challenges to ensure that the progress achieved so far leads to permanent and
sustained improvement for children and young people.
Assessment and Halton Children and Young Peoples Plan, clearly identify local
need and set out the local authoritys priorities for children and young people.
These are being used effectively to drive improvement. Through these welldefined priorities, the partnership is responding well to the prevalence of
neglect, domestic violence and mental ill-health. Presenting needs at the point
of referral shows domestic violence to be the most prevalent factor, and
services have been commissioned to support children and young people. For
example, Core Assets provides support for non-violent partners with children
living in the household.
understood by partner agencies and applied well by social workers. Processes
to step up work with children and their families from early intervention to
statutory intervention, or step down when needs are reduced, are applied well.
plans) and domestic violence (24% of plans) are key factors, and a rising
looked after children population, demonstrate that social work practice is now
targeted more effectively and reaching the most vulnerable children. However,
the Fostering Recruitment Strategy is not robust, and fails to set targets for
recruitment of carers. Given the rising looked after population and the increase
in the number of children requiring a placement, this restricts the choice of
placements available for children without using agency foster caters and
residential units.
managed. Contract arrangements ensure a good join-up between
commissioned and statutory services, for example by including an expectation


of use of the CAF within contract specifications. The local authority proactively
manages commissioned services to ensure that they are providing good quality
and good value services; providers describe the authority as a responsive
commissioner. Additional investment has been targeted on key areas when
necessary, for example, investment in community mental health services for
looked after children and care leavers has seen a three-fold increase to ensure
a more timely response for children and young people.
drive to improve services and outcomes for children and young people. For
example, good systems and arrangements are in place to track and check the
safety and achievements of home educated children and children missing
education. Partnership working with local authority-wide services and the
private sector has led to a higher than average proportion of care leavers
moving into education, employment and training than that found nationally.
children missing from care, home and education to ensure a greater
triangulation of information across the partnership. The implementation of panCheshire CSE policies and procedures provide a consistent approach to the
issue across the partnership and across neighbouring local authorities. Children
at risk and potential risk of exploitation are known and tracked. Whilst the local
authority knows it has some children at risk, it is confident that the early
identification of risk reduces the danger of organised activity. Police operations
have taken place to disrupt activities and, although no criminal charges have
yet been brought, harbouring notices have been effectively issued. A panCheshire publicity campaign was launched in January 2014 to raise awareness
amongst children and young people, their families and carers. Catch 22, a
commissioned service in Halton, has been used to raise awareness of the issue
amongst local businesses and the night time economy. The learning outcomes
from recent national child sexual exploitation serious case reviews have been
used well to support learning across the partnership.
managers in focusing their energy on delivering the right services to the right
children. Managers at all levels of the service receive performance data and a
short narrative to help identify where practice is falling short and enable them
to performance manage more effectively. However, quantitative performance
data and the information about quality from audits and other sources, such as
complaints and feedback from young people, are not routinely brought together
to create a more holistic analysis of practice that could better support
improvement.
oversight of compliance. Overview reports to senior managers identify themes
emerging from the audit programme. Weaknesses in case work activity are
shared with line managers and taken forward into supervision to support
individual learning. Recent audits show that, overall, there are good examples


of effective inter-agency working. Areas for development identified have
included the timeliness of assessments and the inclusion of the voice of the
child in case records.
within the leadership and management team to ensure that the workforce is
skilled and able to deliver services that have a positive impact on children and
young people. The Divisional Manager for Children in Need Services leads on
the strategy and is well placed to understand the demands on the frontline
service, shortfalls in capacity and where performance issues are affecting
service delivery. Increasing the capacity in the workforce has seen an overreliance on the use of agency staff, with 16 posts being filled by agency
workers at the time of the inspection. The local authority is working hard to
reduce its dependency on agency staff, and some agency staff told inspectors
that they are considering contracts with the authority. Rising numbers of looked
after children and children subject to child protection plans have meant that
there is currently insufficient capacity in the child protection conference chair
and IRM service.
career structure and provides regular reflective supervision and learning
opportunities to enable social work to flourish. The Assessed and Supported
Year in Employment (ASYE) is valued and supervision records show that newly
qualified social workers benefit from protected caseloads, increased levels of
supervision and joint working with more experienced colleagues. Social workers
are skilled and experienced and are able to talk about the impact their practice
has on improving outcomes for children. They are enthusiastic and positive
about working in Halton, and report feeling supported by managers who are
visible and accessible. Managers deal with poor performance effectively,
including when they consider that the work of agency staff falls short of the
authoritys expected standards of practice.
range of opportunities are in place to develop social workers skills and
knowledge, including performance review days, big conversation days, and
development days. A significant level of training to support social workers to
understand the impact of neglect on outcomes for children and young people
has been well received. Social workers are well aware of learning from recent
high profile serious case reviews, the Munroe review into social work practice
and outcomes from thematic reviews. They use their learning to inform their
own practice. For example, the domestic abuse risk matrix is used well to
identify threats to childrens safety.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the local
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.

Summary of findings
The LSCB requires improvement because:
Partnership working


Tracking the outcomes of actions set at Board meetings is not robust. There has
been significant delay in the findings from one task and finish group being
reported back to the main Board.

 The annual report for 201314 has not been published. The delay in publication
limits its impact on informing and shaping practice across the partnership, and
means it is not accessible to the general public, children and young people,
parents and carers. It prevents them from understanding how safe children are in
Halton and how effective the Board is in carrying out its statutory duties.
 Attendance by some partner agencies at the main Board meetings has been
inconsistent.
 Internal processes in some partner agencies have caused delay and limited the
timeliness of information sharing with the Board.

Awareness raising and learning
 Work with local faith-based organisations is under developed. Raising awareness
across the partnership to promote private fostering arrangements through the
multi-agency group established by the Safeguarding Board has stalled.
 Attendance at multi-agency training days by some agencies is poor.

Participation
 The Boards engagement with children and young people is at an early stage of
development.

What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
participants in the work of the Halton Safeguarding Children Board.


Areas for improvement

Partnership Working
Pan-Cheshire Child Death Overview Panel is appointed as soon as possible to
ensure that the panels work does not lose momentum.
ensure that their own internal processes do not create delays in the work of the
Board.
systematically to hold all partners to account for the work they do on behalf of
the Board.

Awareness raising and learning
utilising the role of the appropriate Board members to engage with the wider
community.
training events to maximise opportunities for learning to support professional
development.
arrangements and that effective processes are in place to promote the
notification and understanding of private fostering arrangements across the
partnership.

Participation
the Board.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
has been in post for just under 12 months. As a former senior local police
officer with extensive safeguarding experience, he is well placed to satisfy
himself and the Board that all agencies are fulfilling their statutory duties to
safeguard children. He provides effective oversight of the Boards business. The
chair came into post at the point that the HSCB was implementing a new
streamlined membership of the main Board and was able to oversee the initial
stages of implementation. Membership is now is at a sufficiently senior and
strategic level to enable change and promote the safeguarding agenda across
the partnership. Board members speak positively about the impact the new
chair has had. The Boards development has been supported by a thematic day


on the Way we Work which helped to reaffirm the Boards role and business
agenda.
of work across the region, a pan-Cheshire Policy and Procedures sub-group was
established in January2014. This followed the establishment of a pan-Cheshire
Child Death Overview Panel (CDOP) in April 2013 and a Pan-Cheshire Strategic
CSE, Missing & Trafficked Children Sub Group in September 2012. Each subgroup reports to all four LSCBs in Cheshire, with the pan-Cheshire CDOP annual
report reflecting the business of the region. These groups are good examples of
the effective multi-agency arrangements in place across the Cheshire region.
relation to health and although in its early stages of development, has
established a number of work streams to enable a greater focus on health
issues. For example, improving attendance at multi-agency safeguarding
training for doctors, ensuring each of the 17 GP practices in Halton has a
designated safeguarding lead to support better attendance at child protection
conferences. The board and the health sub group have effective oversight of
performance data. This has been used to challenge health and social care
partners on the conducting of health assessments for children in care which
resulted in swift action and significant improvements in performance and
services children and young people.
Health and Wellbeing Board are in place. How these bodies interact and work
alongside each other whilst retaining their independence is clearly outlined in
the protocol. The procedure supports clear governance arrangements across
the borough.
Board, the development of the new sub-groups to reflect the Boards business
and the development of pan-Cheshire sub-groups have been swift. However,
these developments need to be embedded and progress maintained to achieve
the increased effectiveness that the HSCB aspires to.
priorities and actions set in the business plan that have been drawn from the
draft annual report, and a clearer identification of the most vulnerable groups in
Halton to help focus the work of the Board. However, difficulties in bringing key
strategic partners together to jointly consider the supporting narrative for the
annual report have contributed to the delay in publication. This prevents the
report from fully informing and shaping practice across the partnership. It also
means it is not accessible to the general public, children and young people,
parents and carers, and prevents them from understanding how safe children
are in Halton and how effective the Board is in carrying out its statutory duties.


within the safeguarding board core team has contributed to some delays in the
Boards business. Tracking the outcome of actions agreed at Board meetings is
not robust. There has been significant delay in the findings from the task and
finish group on Managing Risky Adolescence being reported back to the main
Board. This was first raised in January 2014; meetings have been cancelled
and, to date, their findings have not been presented to Board.
arrangements has not progressed as well as it should have. A multi-agency
group established to raise awareness and promote the notification of private
fostering arrangements in the borough has stalled. This work needs to be
refreshed and strengthened to ensure that it progresses and is joined up with
other work areas such as CSE and missing children.
to be more focused to ensure that the needs of the wider community are
considered in the Boards business.
enables the Chair to provide effective challenge across the partnership. In his
meetings with the Chief Executive and the Director of Childrens Services the
HSCB Chair has raised concerns regarding the churn in social work resources
and recruitment of additional staff. Reports show that the Board has been
monitoring the effectiveness of early help and, in particular, the local authoritys
heavy reliance on agency staff in one team. The Board undertook additional
scrutiny by auditing a random selection of 30 cases across the two children in
need teams. Through this work the Board was able to satisfy itself that no
children were identified as being at immediate risk.
four local safeguarding boards across the Cheshire region and are required to
provide an audit to each board. The template is completed on-line and
submitted to the respective business managers of each board, thus avoiding
duplication of work. Cheshire Police said that the new template has saved time
and was an effective example of the four local boards working well together.
responsibilities. Returns were as low as 60%. This low return was reported to
the Boards Executive, following which the HSCB chair wrote to all schools
outlining the expectation to complete the audits. Following discussion between
the Chair and Strategic Director, the Strategic Director also challenged schools
at a meeting with Head Teachers. This improved the return significantly. The
Local Authoritys Link Officers then followed up with the remaining schools. The
Safeguarding Children in Education Officer provides support to all schools in the
Section 175/157 process. This action led to an increase in returns to 93%.
Outcomes from the Section 11 and Section 175 audits are being collated and
are planned to be reported on at the main Board in January 2015.


improvement. Lead officers from a range of agencies are involved in auditing
case work. An overview report by the Scrutiny and Performance sub-group is
detailed, and highlights learning from the audits. It also provides evidence and
advises the Chair to challenge agencies where aspects of practice are not good
enough. Themes emerging from 201314 audit days show that in cases where
children were subject to a CAF, multi-agency working is strength, with good
challenge across agencies. The HSCB challenged the local authority to improve
practice after drift was identified in the early stages of care planning
arrangements in some cases where there had been a significant number of
changes of social worker.
many referrals to social care, the Halton Childrens Trust in partnership with the
HSCB developed the Neglect Strategy. The Board is responsible for its
implementation and for monitoring the impact of the strategy. The delivery plan
is well structured. Significant levels of training are supporting professionals in
identifying and responding to child neglect. As a consequence, through
effective practice, the number of children safeguarded through a child
protection plan where neglect is the key factor rose from 33% in 2012-13 to
practice to support schools in helping children when domestic abuse is a
concern. Operation Encompass is led by the police and education. Schools are
notified by the police when incidents of domestic abuse have occurred when
children may have been present. This enables school staff to provide an
immediate response to support vulnerable children at risk.
from care, home and education and provides a forum for the triangulation of
information across the partnership. The implementation of pan-Cheshire CSE
policies and procedures provides a consistent approach across the partnership
and neighbouring authorities. Children at risk of exploitation are known and
tracked locally and regionally. A pan-Cheshire publicity campaign launched in
January 2014 has helped to raise awareness amongst children and young
people, their families and carers. The learning outcomes from recent national
child sexual exploitation serious case reviews have been used to support
learning across the partnership.
social work practice. The need for continuous learning is recognised and this is
achieved through a range of activities including multi-agency audits, single
agency audits and Section 11 audits. A quarterly newsletter on the HSCB
website is used to share good practice across the partnership and is accessible
for all practitioners. Board members have access to a secure members area
section of the HSCBs website. All other sections of the website are open to all,
so the public as well as practitioners can access the professionals section of the
LSCB website where they can find safeguarding policies and procedures and
learning from practice.


the Cheshire Fire and Rescue, Community Rehabilitation Company and the
National Probation Service. The learning and development officer is meeting
with the service heads to discuss attendance and encourage participation in the
multi-agency learning opportunities available. The Board has reviewed its online training needs analysis process for all professionals across the partnership
and launched a new model in early November. This seeks to better inform the
development and delivery of training provision to meet the demands of the
workforce. E-Learning courses have been increased to add variety to learning
styles.
The Critical Incident Panel (CIP) has appropriately commissioned an
independent review to identify learning in one particular situation and has
secured the services of an appropriately qualified and experienced individual to
undertake this work. All deaths and life threatening events are appropriately
referred to the safeguarding business manager, HSCB Chair and the Chair of
CIP. The panel was established in January 2014 and a new chair appointed.
She is keen to maximise the impact of the panel by broadening the panels brief
to include lessons to learn from a number of complex cases that do not reach
the threshold for a serious case review (SCR). She is working across the
partnership to support learning, including reviewing instances of good practice
in complex case work. Learning from national SCRs is used to improve practice;
for example, the panel sent letters to local GPs highlighting the
recommendations in a recent national SCR regarding the risk of de-registering
families who are hard to engage with.
currently operating without a chair. The four regional chairs of each LSCB are
working closely to appoint a new chair to the panel to ensure that the work
proceeds. The CDOP report to HSCB focused on local concerns, including five
child death notifications, which is significantly lower than the national average.
Emerging themes are used to inform public health campaigns, such as an
imminent safer sleeping campaign with Merseyside CDOP, and to provide
challenge to agencies, for example inconsistent health engagement in the rapid
response provision. Working across regional boarders, panel chairs have
highlighted the absence of a national system to collate information from all
CDOPs. Cheshire and Merseyside CDOP chairs have written to NHS England
recommending a national programme of awareness raising.
local event on how best they can engage them in the work of the Board and is
also looking at how other LSCBs engage children and young people. This is
aimed at enabling children and young people to be effective participants in
borough-wide business. Young people have helped to design the HSCB E-safety
leaflet.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Dominic Stevens
Deputy lead inspector: Helen Cawston
Team inspectors: Graham Tilby, Janet Fraser, Karen Wareing, Linda Steele, Margaret
Farrow
Quality assurance manager: Simone White


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


