London Borough of Haringey
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 20 May 2014  11 June 2014
Report published: 18 July 2014
The overall judgement is requires improvement
There are no widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being
harmed or at risk of harm. The welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and
promoted. However, the authority is not yet delivering good protection and help and
care for children, young people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is requires
improvement
The LSCB is not yet demonstrating the characteristics of good.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of the Education and
Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local authority functions carried out under section 136
of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out
under the Local Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority requires improvement and is not yet good because

Haringey does not yet have a comprehensive and co-ordinated early help
offer that meets the needs of children, young people and their families.
The number of families receiving early help via the common assessment
framework has remained low for the last three years.


Strategy discussions within the First Response team do not routinely
involve agencies other than childrens social care services and the police.


Although childrens social care services have significantly improved the
number of initial child protection conferences held within 15 working days
of the decision to undertake a child protection investigation, performance
is below expectations, resulting in some children not receiving coordinated help and support via a child protection plan as quickly as they
should.


Some children who are referred to childrens social care services where
concerns relate to chronic neglect may not always receive timely or
thorough assessments; this leads to delays in receiving a service and in
fully exploring risks and needs.


The sufficiency and quality of the in-house fostering service provision are
under-developed. Foster carers are not adequately supported through
training and by their supervising social workers, so they do not have the
necessary skills to deal with the challenging behaviours and complex
needs of some looked after children and young people.


There is insufficient understanding of the impact of risky behaviour in
assessments and plans for older looked after children. Their vulnerability
and susceptibility to involvement in gangs, child sexual exploitation (CSE)
and offending behaviour, and the subsequent impact on their life chances,
are not always fully explored.


Although timescales for placing children for adoption have improved, the
authority currently takes an average of 39 weeks to match a child to an
adoptive family, following the making of a Placement Order. This is
outside the 26 week statutory timescale.


Long term planning arrangements for some children are under-developed.
This means that some children will experience more placements, because
opportunities are missed to place them early with the foster families that
will go on to adopt them. For others, suitable contingency plans are not in
place, so they could experience delay or an unnecessary additional move.



Insufficient priority is given to life story work to support children who are
subject to adoption. Some children have important gaps in their
knowledge about their past, leading to difficulties in developing their
sense of identity and in their emotional and behavioural development.

or how to access the leaving care grant. Care leavers have very limited
choice of supplier when making use of their grant to set up home. All care
leavers have a pathway plan, but the quality of these is variable. The
plans are not specific, measurable, achievable, relevant and time limited
(SMART), and are not used effectively to take account of young peoples
aspirations or to shape and map out their future.
For example, the proportion of care leavers in education, training and
employment has deteriorated from 63% in March 2013 to 47% in March
The local authority has the following strengths
services. The senior leadership team has a good understanding of the
strengths and weaknesses of the service and is clear about its priorities.
high rate in 200910. The rates of children subject to a child protection
plan and the number of children entering the looked after care system
have stabilised and numbers are now beginning to reduce safely. The
majority of casework seen by inspectors was of good quality.
leading to earlier and more effective interventions and to improving
outcomes for children, young people and families.
and assessments. This is supported by the structure of a single
assessment report which is enabling social workers to focus more sharply
on the presenting needs of children and to shape plans and interventions
to safely reduce risk.
screening team and Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH) arrangements
promote good information sharing to inform effective investigations and
ensure that the most vulnerable children who need protection are
safeguarded in a timely way. In most cases seen by inspectors, parental
consent was obtained prior to information sharing if appropriate.


Outline are ensuring that children remain with their families whenever
possible and that they do not enter the care system unnecessarily.
with their social workers, who know them well; this is leading to
improvements in the quality of recent assessments and plans.
feature of the looked after children service. Children who are looked after
do well in their education at all key stages. A good proportion remain in
education post-16 and good support is provided for young people who
aspire to higher education.
service has been increased, and better targeting and matching are leading
to more children achieving permanence and leaving care through this
route.
includes good use of Special Guardianship Orders and long term foster
care.
the adoption process, from the initial enquiry to post-adoption support.
features of the service. Currently 65 care leavers are at university and 106
are in further education. Young people are encouraged to take up places
at college and university, and they are supported effectively while they are
there.
on housing, education, independent living skills and employment to guide
them into adulthood.
accommodation has declined this year from 79% in March 2013 to 74% in
March 2014, there is a good and increasing range of housing options
available. This is underpinned by strong partnership work to ensure that
care leavers know and understand the importance of maintaining their
tenancy. No young person is currently placed in bed and breakfast
accommodation.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Areas for improvement
working. This should include shared commissioning arrangements which
maximise resources, so that the needs of children and young people
across the borough are met.
support that they need at an early stage to safely reduce risk.
childrens social care where concerns relate to chronic neglect, so that
they fully consider historical concerns, particularly where these include
concerns relating to domestic violence, drug or alcohol abuse and adult
mental ill health.
fostered children in the borough, and that children who are privately
fostered receive a timely, high quality assessment and the support that
they need.
completions of initial child protection conferences held within 15 working
days, so that children do not experience delay in receiving co-ordinated
support to address risk and needs through the use of a child protection
plan.
Authority Designated Officer, and know what to do if they have any
concerns.
that more looked after children and young people can live nearer to their
communities, if appropriate.
produced jointly with them, so that they know and understand their plan
and recognise its relevance in supporting their progression into
independence and adulthood.
looked after children understand their life journey in the care system.


comprehensively assessed, documented and reviewed, taking into account
the changing age and stage of their lives, and that managers and social
workers consider the life histories of children and relevant research when
making medium- and long-term plans for children.
enhanced so that they properly challenge drift and delay in plans and
escalate concerns about the quality of service provision, so that risks
posed to specific groups of children and young people are known and
understood and action is taken.
including to those involved in the criminal justice system, so that risk can
be better assessed and well-targeted services provided to support them to
improve their life chances.
employment, education and training, suitable accommodation for care
leavers and dental health checks for all looked after children so that the
recent dip in performance is quickly rectified.
understand their rights and entitlements and know how to make a
complaint, to ensure that their needs are fully understood and acted on.
they know and understand the arrangements to access their health
records should they need to in later life.
systems are robust, and that quantitative data and qualitative data are
used to better inform management decisions and drive improvement.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Gary Lamb HMI
Team inspectors: Linda Steele HMI, Dominic Stevens HMI, Karen McKeown HMI,
Susan Myers HMI, Jon Bowman HMI and Peter McEntee HMI.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area



Approximately 58,200 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Haringey. This is 22.5% of the total population in the area.




Approximately 31.9% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 26.4% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 32.6% (the national average is 15.1%).



Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 70% of
all children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a
whole.



The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are White Other 29.2%, White British 18.7%, Black African 16.6% and Black
Caribbean 9.2%.



The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 54.2% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 47.7% (the national average is 13.6%).



Haringeys Children and Young Peoples Plan 20132015 shows that:
borough
employment (14.8% in Northumberland Park compared to 1.6% in
Crouch End) (2011 Census ONS)
Northumberland Park
accommodation (July 2013)
 there are 11,445 households with children living in accommodation
classified as overcrowded (2011 Census ONS).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area



At 31 March 2014, 2,469 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a
reduction from 3,074 at 31 March 2013.



At 31 March 2014, 201 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is a reduction from 268 at 31 March 2013.



At 31 March 2014, 13 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from 12 at 31 March 2013.

Children looked after in this area



At 31 March 2014, 507 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 88 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 540
(93.8 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2013. Of this number:
authority area
authority area
area



In the last 12 months:
 there have been 38 adoptions
subsequently returned to be looked after
have moved on to independent living
now living in houses of multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Other Ofsted inspections



The local authority operates one childrens home. It was judged to be
satisfactory at its most recent Ofsted full inspection.



The previous inspection of Haringeys safeguarding arrangements for
children was in February 2011. The local authority was judged to be
adequate.



The previous inspection of Haringeys services for looked after children was
in February 2011. The local authority was judged to be adequate.

Other information about this area




The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since April 2014.
The chair of the LSCB has been in post since May 2014.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
require improvement
children whose needs are below the threshold for statutory social work
intervention, services are not well co-ordinated. This means that some
children in Haringey do not currently receive an appropriate range of coordinated early help services when they need them. The local authority is
currently developing early help service delivery through the use of three
pilots, focusing on different age groups. One pilot is located in a childrens
centre, one in a primary school and another in a high school; the pilots
have helpfully targeted children across all age ranges to learn and help
shape plans for future service delivery. The three early help pilot schemes
do not include the full range of relevant agencies. The local authority is
aware of the gap in early help services, and firm plans are in place with
partner agencies to improve the scale and range of the early help service
offer.
framework (CAF) has remained low for the last three years, and agencies
do not have a common approach to assessing need and co-ordinating
help. Children do not always receive help early enough when complex or
more serious needs are emerging; the help that is provided is not always
built on a clear assessment or developed in response to their changing
needs.
agencies involved, the three early help pilots have had a positive impact
on improving outcomes for some Haringey children, and inspectors saw
examples of good early help to support children and families. Haringeys
response to the governments Troubled Families programme, Haringey
Families First (April 2013 to March 2014), has resulted in some good joint
agency working. Within its first seven months of operation, 390 families
were targeted, and improved outcomes have already been achieved for
children in 125 of those families.
years, and in 201213 were below similar authorities and England. Most
contacts and referrals to childrens social care services are dealt with in a
timely manner by the local authoritys screening team, the multi-agency
safeguarding hub (MASH) and the out-of-hours emergency duty team.
However, some contacts are held in the screening team for three days
and occasionally longer, which leads to delays in seeing children and
obtaining parents consent to share information.


experienced workers. The range of agencies involved in the MASH,
including health and the police child abuse investigation team, mean that
it is a particularly effective arena for sharing information and taking multiagency decisions about protecting children.
appropriately applied. Decisions are supported by a clear and detailed
threshold document which includes the identification of children at risk of
significant harm, children in need and guidance on when it is appropriate
to step-down support to an early help level. In almost all cases seen by
inspectors, children who are assessed as meeting the threshold of
significant harm at the point of referral are swiftly passed to one of the
local authoritys First Response teams for intervention and further
assessment.
neglect were seen in many cases examined by inspectors. In a few cases
where there are concerns about chronic neglect, the risks arising from
longstanding patterns of behaviour, including those relating to domestic
violence, mental ill-health and drug and alcohol abuse, are not identified
quickly enough. This leads to a failure to escalate some cases to a child
protection investigation, or to provide relevant services in a timely way.
The local authority has recognised this issue; it has appointed four
additional staff and has begun a review of child in need work.
attendance and information from partner agencies to inform effective
decision making. Meetings are clearly recorded and authorised by a
manager; responsibilities and timescales for action are agreed. Although
appropriate decisions are being made based on the perceived risks posed
to children, strategy discussions held within First Response teams do not
always include all relevant agencies, resulting in decisions about risk and
necessary actions being less well informed.
working with. They see them regularly and see them alone. Inspectors
saw good examples of effective and creative direct work to enhance
workers understanding of the childs world. This helps to build meaningful
relationships with children. Social workers case records are up to date and
some demonstrate good analysis and a focus on the voice of the child.
Although chronologies are being maintained in most of the cases seen,
and some recent chronologies are of good quality, practice is not
consistent.
within 45 working days between July 2013 and March 2014 and current
performance is at 86%. Most assessments are comprehensive, consider


historical information, have a strong sense of the childs voice and contain
clear analysis which helps shape appropriate plans. The quality of
assessments has improved since the introduction of the new single
assessment format in July 2013.
has reduced and is now in line with similar areas. The percentage held
within the statutory 15 working day timescale has improved significantly,
from 16% in March 2013 to 45% March 2014 and 68% for April to May
identified as being inadequately risk assessed or in immediate risk of
significant harm, some children are not receiving co-ordinated help via a
child protection plan as quickly as they should.
level of risk, and children are not subjected to child protection plans
unnecessarily. Almost all child protection and child in need plans are
reviewed regularly by well-attended review conferences, core groups and
child in need meetings. Most plans are clear about the outcomes needed
for children and the actions necessary to achieve them. However, in a
minority of plans this is not the case. This does not help families to
understand what is expected of them or promote effective joint working.
well understood. Specialist support services are quickly identified and
information about high risk cases is shared with the Multi-Agency Risk
Assessment Conference (MARAC) so that safety plans can be put into
place. Work to engage perpetrators of domestic violence has been
strengthened recently through the commissioning of a 26-week
programme which is now being offered to some perpetrators of domestic
violence; the early analysis of impact and outcomes shows that social
workers are increasingly confident in engaging perpetrators, determining
where improvement has been made and making case work decisions
where change has not occurred.
are offered to them with a worker from the independent Miss-U service.
The Council recorded 120 instances of children going missing during the
preceding year in its April 2012 scrutiny report. This figure is in line with
other London Boroughs. However, information is not analysed regularly or
in sufficient depth for trends or outcomes for children, and this makes it
difficult to assess impact or identify possible service improvements. In May
cases children successfully re-engage in education, there is notable delay
in more complex cases. Opportunities are being missed to tackle the
presenting issues early to prevent a pattern of absence developing.


sexual exploitation receive a tailored assessment and support. Ten cases
have been referred in the six months prior to the inspection. However, this
work is still in its early stages of development. Information is not used to
develop an understanding of trends, or how perpetrators operate to abuse
children. For example, information gathered from return interviews when
children go missing is not analysed or used to link to intelligence and
information on gangs or to map risks.
fostering arrangements is low and efforts to raise awareness have been
unsuccessful.
Authority Designated Officer (LADO) in investigating allegations against
professionals; in particular, there are low numbers of referrals from health
agencies and early years settings. The most recent LADO annual report
lacks clear analysis, so the local authority cannot be assured that all
agencies know and understand their roles and responsibilities and what to
do if they have a concern.
based on good assessments of their needs and risks to ensure that they
are protected and their welfare enhanced. This work is underpinned by a
detailed disabled childrens threshold document covering a full range of
work with disabled children and giving helpful guidance to workers. This is
supporting good practice and improving responses to this vulnerable
group of children.
ethnicity, language and culture of children and their families; good use is
made of interpreters and other resources, for example, a Romanian
project worker. The local authority has a dedicated team providing
specialist support to children and families who have no recourse to public
funds. This teams work is enhanced by a worker sponsored by the Home
Office, and has demonstrably improved the welfare of children through
practical and specialist support with issues such as housing and
determining immigration status.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence require improvement
better application of the thresholds for care, supported by effective preproceedings work. A small number of children enter the system through
emergency powers, so the vast majority of children and young people
who become looked after do so in a properly assessed and planned way.
Effective use of the Public Law Outline, improvements in the quality of
court work and liaison with Childrens Guardians have resulted in a
significant reduction in the time spent by children in achieving
permanence through the courts. This has reduced from 67 weeks in
national average. Inspectors saw some good examples of the use of
family group conferences to establish potential carers early, but delays
have occurred in making permanent arrangements, largely due to family
members wishing to be assessed as carers late in proceedings. The quality
of letters sent to parents or carers before proceedings is too variable.
Some letters miss important details, for example the date of the letter,
and others lack clarity in the detail of what is required from parents to
address the concerns of the local authority.
enter court proceedings are not to return to their birth families, where
there is a plan for them to return home, a range of specialist interventions
is used to support them. Multi-systemic therapy with 12 to 17 years olds is
used successfully for families, both where care is being considered and for
those children who are returning home. The Family Intervention Project is
used well to provide intensive individual help and parenting support as
part of assessment and rehabilitation plans. In cases seen by inspectors,
sensitive work was undertaken to re-integrate children with their families,
including increasing contact to meet the needs of the children and good
links with community groups to support the family. In 201314, 104
looked after children returned home. During the same year, 27 children
returned to care after being at home for less than 12 months.
experienced and many have worked for the local authority for a long time.
As a result, many children and young people have longstanding
relationships with workers who understand them well and have aspirations
for their future. Almost all statutory visits are undertaken within
timescales, despite a number of children being placed at a distance from
the local authority area. On visits, children are routinely seen and seen on
their own. Social workers talk to them about their lives and their views
about their placements, and help them celebrate their successes.
However, some children are visited within school settings and, in
arranging these visits, there is insufficient thought about whether this is in
the interests of the child or young person.


and there is appropriate management oversight. Care plans reflect the
immediate needs of the child or young person. However, there is
insufficient consideration of life histories of children and young people,
and of the use of research findings in making plans for their medium and
long term future. Life story work is not prioritised for children where the
plan for permanence is not for them to return home, meaning that some
children do not have a clear view of their life history.
not sufficiently consider potential risks that they may be exposed to in
their lives, for example that of sexual exploitation or the influence of gang
culture. Where children are involved in the criminal justice system,
communication occurs between the relevant youth offending teams and
social workers, but there is insufficient co-ordination of work to ensure
that these children and young people remain engaged and their needs are
met. Children who go missing from care are offered an interview with a
member of the participation team within the local authority, who will visit
them at their placement. Where these interviews occur, children and
young people are offered support to address any problems that they have
highlighted. Most children live in long-term, stable foster placements.
Processes to find suitable placements for children are sensitive to the
individual needs of the child, including their cultural identity and their
need for a long-term placement with families who can support them as
they grow up. The authoritys sufficiency strategy is clear that residential
placements are not considered permanent placements for children. As a
result, the vast majority of children benefit from a placement with a
family, with just 21 children of the 507 looked after who are placed in
childrens homes.
brothers and sisters, where this is in their best interests. Where this is not
the case, arrangements for contact are well considered, and inspectors
saw some good examples of work with foster carers so that siblings can
share time positively together. Special Guardianship Orders are used well
as a way to ensure permanence and where children have specific needs;
carers continue to be well supported by the local authority. The local
authority has a policy of placing children in provision judged good or
better, and the vast majority of children are placed in good or better
placements. Two children living in childrens homes more than 20 miles
from their home who were visited by inspectors for this inspection are
making good progress. A review system is in place to consider the impact
on the individual child of a placement judgement being reduced following
an inspection. At the time of the inspection, two young people were
placed in semi-independent settings that were judged as inadequate. The
local authority has undertaken visits and is proactive in its efforts to
ensure that the individual young people concerned are safe, and it is
actively supporting progress to make improvements in these situations.


Effective and timely responses are made to meet the needs of homeless
under the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.
relevant skills and experience. This means that too many children and
young people live more than 20 miles from the borough. The local
authority has begun to take action to improve this. An external social work
provider has been commissioned to recruit and train new foster carers and
to improve the quality of in-house provision through a range of strategies,
including ensuring better support and training for existing carers.
However, at the time of the inspection, foster carers did not feel properly
engaged with the improvement process. They reported to inspectors that
they received variable levels of supervision and support from their
supervising social worker. Some foster carers had not been allocated a
supervising social worker to support them for long periods of time, or they
had experienced a succession of agency social workers who did not give
them consistent advice. There are no systems in place within the local
authority to celebrate the achievements of existing foster carers or
recognise their contribution to services for looked after children. Although
a scheme for delegated responsibility for foster carers is in place so that
they can make some decisions about the lives of the children who live
with them, children, young people and foster carers seen by inspectors
were not clear about the decisions that they could make.
and children are invited to contribute to these meetings. Children and
young people are encouraged to attend, and Independent Reviewing
Officers (IROs) routinely see children before their review. There is an
under use of the provision made for children and young people to have
access to an independent advocate, with only a small number of examples
where this has taken place, so opportunities are missed for them to
benefit from this service. Children and young people seen by inspectors
said that they did not feel that they were fully involved in the decisions
made for them. Reviews do not routinely consider whether children can
benefit from the use of an independent visitor. The local authority is
aware that access to independent advocacy and independent visitors is
under-utilised and is taking action to rectify this, but it is too early to see
the impact of this. The role of the IRO in challenging drift and delay in the
cases seen by inspectors is not yet fully developed, particularly in ensuring
that cases are returned to court when care plans have been changed, or
in escalating concerns about the quality of services and support provided
to children and young people.
However, performance on the percentage of looked after children who
had their teeth checked by a dentist during the year ending 31 March


previous year. The looked after children nurses offer age-appropriate
medical screening, with specialist nurses for younger children and those
aged over 12. First Step, which provides psychological health screening for
looked after children and young people in Haringey, offers an effective
range of therapeutic support for children and young people who have
emotional and mental health issues. The service also offers consultation
and training to social workers. Where children are placed away from the
local area, access to appropriate health services is monitored well and,
where necessary, specialist services are commissioned locally.
support for looked after childrens education so that looked after children
achieve well. Comprehensive tracking and the good use of data ensures
that the virtual school maintains good oversight of the progress of looked
after children. Workers are tenacious in their approach and tailor support
very effectively to meet the individual needs of children and young people.
As a result, children and young people get the type of support and help
that they need, when they need it. Looked after children achieve well at
all key stages and they make good progress relative to their starting
points. The attainment gap between looked after children and the nonlooked after children population at Key Stage 4, including English and
maths has been closing well for the last three years, reducing the gap
from 44% to 30%. A good proportion (87%) of looked after young people
stay in education after the age of 16.
education. Attendance at school is good, with nearly 80% of looked after
children achieving over 95% attendance. Most young people attend
mainstream schools, with just 10% in alternative provision and very few
refusing to engage in education. Almost all of these children and young
people engage in the educational opportunities provided. The proportion
of fixed term exclusions is lower than in similar areas, and a very small
proportion of children and young people become permanently excluded
from their school. The virtual school has excellent knowledge of the
whereabouts of all looked after children, their educational status and
circumstances. Of the 330 looked after children of school age, 80% attend
a good or outstanding school. Of those educated out of the area 69%
attend schools in London. Wherever they are living, children and young
people benefit from targeted support based on good knowledge of their
individual needs.
encourage the progress of looked after children, for example 1-1 tuition,
mentoring, after school activities and educational trips and visits. The
virtual school provides good challenge to schools to ensure that the pupil
premium is used effectively. Around three quarters of young people have
an up-to-date personal education plan (PEP), representing an improving
trend. The local authority recognises the need for all looked after children


to have a high quality PEP and the virtual school has developed a useful
guide to support social workers to complete plans effectively.
learning in the classroom. These include a weekly study club to support
young people to complete their homework, and activity clubs such as a
maths club and science taster events. The achievements of looked after
children are celebrated well through an annual awards event. Other out of
school activities are promoted well.
works with the local authority to improve services. They regularly meet
with the corporate parenting board and senior officers and members.
Young people from the group have been involved in training for new
foster carers and undertaking interviews for staff, for example for new
IROs. The feedback from these young people has also led to some
improvements in services, such as in the provision of leisure passes to
looked after children.
about their rights and entitlements. The London-wide Pledge that the
authority makes to the young people in its care is not clear and it is not
communicated to children well. A specific Haringey Pledge is currently
being developed to make this clearer but, at the time of the inspection,
young people were not clear, for example, about whether they could stay
with their foster carer once they have reached the age of 18.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is requires improvement
has been a steady increase in the percentage of children who leave the
care of the authority through adoption. In the year 20132014 this was
Guardianship Orders which, although fewer than in the previous year,
means that the overall performance on children achieving permanence is
improving gradually. However, some children in Haringey are waiting
longer to move in with their adoptive families than in other areas. The
average time it takes between a child entering care and being placed with
their adoptive family is 778 days, which is significantly higher than the
national average of 647 days. In the twelve month period prior to the
inspection, 13 of the 21 cases in proceedings had been completed within
the target of 26 weeks. This means that 62% of cases in proceedings
have been completed within the recommended timescales.
has risen year on year, and the gap between Haringey and the rest of the
country is closing. Special Guardianship Orders have been used for 8% of


BME children in Haringey, and in the majority of cases this has involved
good use of extended family members or connected persons.
children waiting to be adopted, of whom 21 were placed with their
adoptive families, seven have been matched and four children have had
their plans changed to long term fostering. Family finding is taking place
for the remaining children. The average time taken to match a child with
an adoptive family after a court order has been granted is 39 weeks,
which is longer than the national target of 26 weeks. The team is using
local consortia arrangements, adoption parties and national networks to
recruit adopters, and have had some positive results in finding adopters
for older children and for placing brothers and sisters together. This
means that some children who have been waiting to be adopted for a long
time have now been found adoptive families.
that some children experience more moves than is necessary and wait
longer to achieve permanence. Staff spoken to by inspectors understand
the benefits of these approaches to maximise the opportunities for
children to achieve permanence, but they are not yet being promoted
effectively or developed in practice.
in their knowledge about their past, which is important to enabling them
to form a strong identity to support their development and particularly
their emotional well-being.
offering appropriate oversight and challenge. There is a good working
relationship between the chair and the agency decision maker, who
thoroughly and promptly considers decisions made by the panel.
adoption, and this includes post-adoption packages of support. They
receive a swift response when they make initial enquiries and are moved
on to preparation and training sessions in a timely way. Adopters told
inspectors that the sessions are delivered by social workers who are
approachable and knowledgeable and who give a true and honest picture
of the realities of adoption. In the 12-month period before this inspection
there were 20 requests for post-adoption support and 20 packages of
support have being provided.
The graded judgement for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
requires improvement
Young Adults service, who supports them to secure housing, provides


advice on training and employment and helps them to move towards
independence. Young people with a disability are also allocated a social
worker from the Adults Social Care team, which helps to ensure their
specific special needs are met. Young people have the opportunity to build
stable and warm relationships with their adviser and this is a strong
feature of the service; young people know their worker well and many feel
their personal advisor provides a good level of support.
provides good mentoring support and access to a wide range of learning
and development opportunities for care leavers. Young people receive
good pastoral support and practical help in working towards their career
and life goals. However, the programme has been scaled down since
January 2014, and now offers just 10 places annually instead of 40 places
to care leavers in Haringey. As of March 2014, the proportion of care
leavers in education, training and employment had declined from 63%
(March 2013) to 47% (March 2014), which is considerably lower than
similar areas at 87% (March 2013).
leavers are at university and 106 are in further education. The virtual
school is working well to raise aspirations for future care leavers through
visits and taster sessions to university. Care leavers are given good
financial and practical support throughout their university careers,
including during holiday periods.
a written pathway plan to which they have contributed. The majority of
plans seen by inspectors do not reflect individual young peoples goals and
future needs in a meaningful way. Some young people told inspectors that
pathway planning felt like a task that had to be completed rather than
achieving a plan that had meaning for them, that they own.
from 79% in March 2013 to 74% in March 2014. Nevertheless, there is a
good range of accommodation and housing options for young people and
good partnership work with housing providers to ensure that care leavers
are given priority. As a result, the number of homes allocated specifically
for care leavers has increased and there are now a number of twobedroomed homes available for young parents. Some young people
spoken to were unhappy with their accommodation and not all were able
to choose who they shared accommodation with. Some young people are
benefiting from the staying put policy and continue to live with their foster
carers after the age of 18, but this is not yet publicised to all young
people.
independently varies. Many receive a service which meets their individual


needs, but help to manage personal finances is particularly identified as a
deficit by care leavers. Young people who spoke to inspectors had no
shared view of their entitlements to funding, and said that access to
funding is slow and inflexible. This means that a small number of young
people find it difficult to access their set up home grant and many are
restricted to where they spend it. Some young people spoken to did not
know about their rights and entitlements to such things as advocacy or
how to complain about the services they receive.
living is not consistently available. Young people are reminded to register
with a general practitioner and dentist, but most are not provided with a
copy of their health records and do not know how to access them.


Leadership, management and governance require improvement
priorities are clear. The leadership team is ambitious and is effectively
striving to provide good quality services through incremental and targeted
plans for improvement, including building capacity within the service.
Although performance is improving in some important deficit areas, such
as in child protection and adoption responses, performance has not been
sufficiently consolidated in other key areas. This has resulted, for
example, in a decline in the rate of care leavers living in suitable
accommodation and in the number engaged in employment, education
and training. The local authority and its partners know the population of
Haringey well; they demonstrate a good understanding of service
strengths and weakness and how these impact on service delivery.
Haringeys recent self-evaluation identifies strengths, areas for
improvement and priorities for development which are consistent with the
findings of this inspection.
new Deputy Chief Executive and Director of Childrens Services (DCS). The
DCS is identifying the key changes required and setting ambitious targets
for service improvement. Performance is benchmarked against similar
authorities who have good or better performance, so that service
strengths and weaknesses are identified and analysed. As a result,
Haringey has made progress in safely reducing the number of children
who are subject to a child protection plan and those who are looked after.
The local authority has also improved the timeliness and quality of social
work assessments, which has been a stubbornly difficult aspect of service
delivery to improve.
Executive, the Lead Member, the DCS and the LSCB chair. Elected
members discharge their statutory duties effectively; governance and
reporting arrangements have been strengthened through the
accountability protocol for the DCS. The Leader of the Council has recently
been appointed as chair of the Health and Wellbeing Board (HWB). The
priorities of the HWB are not sufficiently linked to childrens social care
priorities. In particular, early help is not identified as a priority, and more
work is required to ensure that the HWB is sufficiently focused on the
effectiveness and commissioning of services for children and young
people.
services continues to be a priority. The Haringey 54,000 transformational
programme, designed to improve outcomes for the 54,000 children and
young people in the borough, is driving the local authoritys agenda for
children and families. Looked after children have been consulted as part of


the arrangements to redesign services for early help and provide help for
families at an early stage.
effective engagement of clinical commissioning groups (CCGs), statutory
and voluntary sectors. This has resulted in some good outcomes for
children and young people. For example, the joint commissioning of multisystemic therapy for children on the edge of care has contributed to the
safe reduction in the number of children entering the care system.
However, commissioning arrangements to support a comprehensive multiagency early help offer to meet the diverse needs of the population of
Haringey is as yet under-developed. Although plans to address this are
being progressed, the early help strategy has not been signed off by
partner agencies and the pace of change is slow.
and has commissioned an external social work agency to recruit and
assess prospective foster carers. However, it is too early to demonstrate
impact and too many children continue to live away from their local
communities.
addressed through appropriate monitoring and action planning. Three
serious incident notifications have been received by Ofsted between 31
March 2013 and 1 April 2014; two have resulted in Serious Case Reviews
being commissioned by the LSCB.
service. The use of performance management information is increasingly
effective but not all data and information are reliable or used to support
improvements in service delivery. For example, data and information
about the patterns of offending of children looked after are not
systematically collated or analysed. As a result, there is little consideration
of the impact of this behaviour on the future life chances of this group of
children and young people. Performance management arrangements for
early help are under-developed. This means it is difficult for the local
authority and partner agencies to judge how successful they are at
delivering early help and ensuring that children and families receive help
at the earliest possible stage. Also performance on immunisations and
dental checks appears weak for looked after children, at 68% for
immunisations and 71% for dental checks, although managers believe this
to be a recording issue.
place within childrens services. This enables a shared understanding of
the strengths and weaknesses of practice and contributes to improved
service delivery. However, these arrangements do not extend to early help


services, so there is no clear systematic and comprehensive approach to
inform service development of these services and programmes.
and Support Service (Cafcass), the family courts and the local Family
Justice Board. This has resulted in improved timescales in private and
public law proceedings, reducing delay for children and young people.
children looked after in Haringey. The Corporate Parenting Board has
helped to increase housing provision through securing a number of twobedroomed properties specifically for care leavers who have children.
Aspire (Haringey Children in Care Council) is consulted on developing
service provision. Both the Lead Cabinet Member and the DCS attend an
advisory panel meeting with Aspire to enable them to have a clearer
understanding of issues and to drive improvement. Young people told
inspectors how they have influenced the introduction of leisure passes for
children looked after, and are involved in training foster carers and the
interviewing of staff.
services. They meet young people and are aware of significant case
issues. Monthly safeguarding assurance days are undertaken by the
Cabinet Member and the DCS; they meet staff, observe front-line practice
and have a good understanding of the issues faced by staff. Regular
performance meetings chaired by the DCS and attended by managers and
social workers ensure performance is challenged and areas of strengths
and weaknesses known and understood.
recent improvement in quality and, as a result, plans for children are
improved. Although the majority of staff say they feel well supported and
morale in the social work teams visited by inspectors is high, the quality of
social work supervision is too variable, with some examples of poor quality
supervision records which are not sufficiently focused on next steps and
the action social workers are required to take. More recent casework
demonstrates better supervision, with some examples of reflective
practice, but more needs to be done to improve the quality of reflective
supervision and the degree of challenge.
positive about working in Haringey. The diversity of the workforce reflects
the community. The local authority recruitment strategy is realistic, and is
based on a detailed analysis of the workforce market. An effective social
work trainee scheme has secured eight post-graduate appointments in the
last 12 months. Newly qualified social workers (NQSWs) spoken to by
inspectors report that their caseloads are protected and they are
particularly positive about the support, supervision and training they


receive. Managers recognise the importance of NQSWs undertaking a
variety of case work to enhance their skills, and to strengthen their
professional confidence. The use of agency staff is currently 12.1% which
is comparable to the national figure. The turnover of social workers has
reduced to 19.9%, but is still higher than the national average. Inspectors
saw a small number of cases where children had experienced frequent
changes in social workers. For those children, this has affected
relationship building and the effectiveness of delivery of plans.
feedback from children and young people, learning from complaints and
serious case reviews. Learning from a recent court judgement has led to
far-reaching changes, for example, with revised information sharing
protocols for the MASH and changes made to the Pan-London procedures.
The number of complaints received by childrens social care is low.
Complaints are dealt with effectively, with all complaints being resolved at
an early stage. However, not all young people, particularly care leavers,
understand how to make a complaint or are aware of their rights and
entitlements, so opportunities are being missed to harness their views to
inform service improvements.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The effectiveness of the LSCB requires improvement
Areas for improvement
representations are known, understood and considered and their
contribution fully harnessed to influence the shape of services.
involvement or association with gangs by young women should be
included as a risk factor to strengthen arrangements to provide a coordinated response to this vulnerable group of young people.
clearly linked to the gang action plan. Make clear how the strategy will link
to front-line practice, and what success criteria will be used to measure
and evaluate progress.
home, missing from care and missing from education to assure itself that
appropriate processes and practice are in place to safeguard this
vulnerable group of children and young people. Strengthen the existing
Boards annual report arrangements to include an evaluation of service
responses for missing children, to support multi-agency actions and
reduce risks posed to children.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
governance arrangements, enabling partners to assess whether they are
fulfilling their statutory responsibilities to protect children.
understanding the effectiveness of early help is a priority, and now has a
work programme to take this forward. However, the Board has yet to
demonstrate influence in ensuring that the early help offer is targeted
appropriately and is making a measurable difference.
reflects local needs, with a strong focus on ensuring that the voice of the
child is heard more clearly and that children have better outcomes.
However, some aspects of the Boards work have not been given sufficient
priority. Although the Board receives some data on children missing, it has
not received or sought a qualitative analysis or report in relation to
children missing from home and care, although it has sought information


on those children and young people missing education. The Board has not
established an overview of performance or the effectiveness of practice in
relation to children missing. The Board has also not established an
overview of private fostering practice, although it is aware that further
resources have been put in place by childrens services in response to the
low number of arrangements being identified.
guidance makes appropriate links to the vulnerabilities of children looked
after and those children who go missing, and identifies the often
unrecognised sexual exploitation risks to boys and young men. The
guidance is wide-ranging, but it does not identify clearly exploitation
issues in relation to association with gangs and gang culture. There is no
mention of gang association as a risk factor for young women in the risk
categories identified. This gap means that front-line practitioners, despite
accessing available training, may not recognise risks in relation to gang
association early enough to ensure that young women receive appropriate
support.
now the vulnerable children sub-group of the Board are working to ensure
that strategy, processes and practice link closely together. However, the
evaluation of the impact of initiatives has not as yet been sufficiently coordinated, measured and understood by the Board.
seeking to recruit a further lay member. Members attendance is mostly
good, although regular representation from schools has not been
achieved. The Board is financially sound.
author of a report in 2013 reviewing the effectiveness of the Board, he
has good knowledge of its performance. The chair is a member of the
Childrens Trust and a recent member of the Health and Wellbeing Board.
of intervention, including seeking assurances from the Haringey Chief
Executive on staffing structure and workforce stability of senior staff in
childrens services, ensuring training for housing staff in relation to
neglect, and ensuring that the third sector are better informed about who
to contact if they wish to make a referral to childrens social care services.
agency completes a Section 11 audit of safeguarding every two years.
This is further strengthened by an independent inspection of audit returns
by agencies, conducted by other Board members to ensure that agency
self-reports are accurate. The Board ensures that cross-cutting themes are
identified and action taken to influence change.


programme; for example, in 2013 audits were undertaken on Section 47
decisions, safeguarding of children with a disability, and compliance with
policies and procedures. Also, a case review took place following
recommendations arising from a management review involving adult
mental health issues and the care of children. These audits have produced
learning areas, recommendations and action plans as a result, with
practice issues for a range of agencies including adult services, which are
helping to influence the shape of provision.
schedule setting out the means by which the Board, agencies and services
across Haringey will seek to learn from experience. This includes learning
through audits of work, Serious Case Reviews and multi-agency case
reviews where the criteria for a Serious Case Review are not met.
identified as requiring either a Serious Case Review or a multi-agency case
review. This includes three Serious Case Reviews, one published in
October 2013 and two that are completed but will not be published until
the respective court proceedings are completed. The Board ensures
through its training program that lessons learned from these local cases,
and also from national cases of concern, are effectively disseminated to
staff across agencies.
for example, threshold guidance, multi-agency thresholds for children with
disability and an escalation policy. The Board has also contributed to
awareness raising of the risks of neglect, including work with housing staff
on the signs of neglect.
priorities, including engaging young people and families, monitoring the
effectiveness of MASH and early help intervention and identification and
response to young people at risk of CSE or who go missing. The Board
monitors the progress of the priorities identified and is able to
demonstrate progress in most, but not all, of its priorities. Progress
includes a survey by Haringey youth council of young peoples views on
safeguarding and asking the gangs action group (GAG) to present a
strategy to the board. The Board has delayed its review of missing from
home and care guidance because the pan-London child protection
procedures are being updated.
role and the level of contact they have with children and families. Training
includes a safeguarding introduction across all levels and a focus on CSE.
Other training includes young people and domestic violence, and serious
case review workshops. Bite size courses increase the range of training


and learning opportunities. Training is evaluated three months after
attendance to assess its effectiveness on practice.
work, including the activity of the six sub-groups. The report includes
some analysis of key issues, including its response to child sexual
exploitation and findings of audits conducted, but the Board has
recognised in its self-assessment that an improvement in performance
data is required to ensure that the next annual report is better informed.
The report contains information from key agencies, reports on completed
serious case reviews and case management reviews and includes an
annual report on the LADO function and the work of Independent
Reviewing Officers. The report does not contain information or any
analysis on services for children missing from home and missing from care
or those in private fostering arrangements.
on Board activities, policy and practice guidelines, threshold documents
and Serious Case Review and case management review reports.


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good co-ordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


