London Borough of Havering
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 27 September  20 October 2016
Report published: 9 December 2016

Childrens services in Havering require improvement to be good

Requires Improvement

permanence

Requires Improvement


Requires Improvement


Inadequate


Requires Improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Havering require improvement to be good. Services for children
in need of help and protection and for children looked after were judged adequate
when last inspected in 2011 and 2013. Service improvement has been slow as a
result of a rise in demand due to an increase in families moving to the area from
other boroughs, and significant staffing pressures.
The situation is now improving. There have been considerable and extensive
changes to the senior management structure since August 2015, resulting in robust
and systematic action to address operational weaknesses in the quality of services.
The current director of childrens services (DCS) was confirmed in post in September
process of change and transformation that is fully endorsed by the newly appointed
chief executive (May 2016) and leading politicians, who have allocated appropriate
resources to embed and improve services for children and young people. A newly
recruited and experienced senior management team has started to make significant
and sustainable changes to core social work practice and to key areas such as
reducing the risks of child sexual exploitation. This means that children are receiving
more consistent help and support and that outcomes are beginning to improve.
Action to stabilise the social care workforce has led to the recruitment of a higher
proportion of permanent social workers. This means that a growing number of
children have the benefit of seeing the same social worker. Staff are positive about
working for Havering. Access to training is good and caseloads are manageable. The
recruitment of new social work team managers and the implementation of systemic
practice have begun to improve the delivery and quality of services to children. An
improvement board is well established and is resourced to oversee and guide
developments, although action planning is not sufficiently sharp.
While some of the systems within the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) and
the emergency duty team are weak, leading to delays in initial responses for some
children and families, children receive a more robust response to their needs once
they have an allocated social worker in the assessment team or in the intervention
and support service (ISS).
The quality of assessment and planning for children and young people is too
variable, and issues of equality and diversity are not considered in enough depth.
Inconsistencies in pre-proceedings work and in permanence planning are being
addressed, underpinned by a robust action plan.
Effective operational and strategic arrangements for children who go missing, who
are at risk of child sexual exploitation or who are vulnerable to radicalisation, are
established, although further improvements are being implemented to ensure the
timeliness of return home interviews.


Most children looked after live within Havering or nearby and benefit from good,
stable placements. Children do well at school, though for some, attendance is not
sufficiently regular. The corporate parenting board and the children in care council
are established, but not fully effective, as representation is limited. Senior managers
are aware that the local authority is not fully meeting its sufficiency duty, particularly
in relation to accommodation for adolescents, care leavers, the recruitment of
adopters and in-house foster carers. Access to advocates and to independent visitors
is very limited.
Services for care leavers are inadequate. Care leavers are not all well supported and
there are widespread weaknesses in achieving good outcomes. While opportunities
and access to employment, training and education are positive, aspirations for care
leavers have not been sufficiently ambitious. Senior managers have recognised that
substantial improvement is needed and have secured funding to recruit additional
experienced social workers to strengthen this service.
Adoption is considered appropriately for all children, although some children with
complex needs are not placed with adopters quickly enough. The recruitment of
adopters has not kept up with demand and numbers are small. New managers are
now in place and they are systematically implementing improvements, such as the
timeliness of placements and enhancing life story book work.
In order for children and young people to have continuity of social workers, and to
improve management oversight and consistency of practice, the social work teams
were restructured in June 2016. Early help services have been restructured and a
new Families Together team has been created for adolescents on the edge of care,
to increase effectiveness. However, the quality of staff supervision at all levels
requires further improvement to ensure that staff are properly held to account for
their practice.
Quality assurance and case auditing arrangements, such as practice week, have
been introduced by the DCS and are improving practice. Managers and staff learn
from individual complaints, although service-wide changes are not well evidenced.
The role of the independent reviewing officers and child protection chairs in
scrutinising and influencing practice is underdeveloped.
The electronic recording system has been improved, and ongoing work and
resources have been allocated to procure a new system, but it still does not support
social workers well enough, or assist managers to oversee the work of their teams.
For care leavers and the adoption service, the recording system is not appropriate for
their needs.
Relevant performance information is produced and is shared across the right forums.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)




Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates no childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in February 2013. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in September 2011. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since September 2016.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since September 2013.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 53,258 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Havering. This is 21.7% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 18.9% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 13.1% (the national average is 14.5%)
 in secondary schools is 10.4% (the national average is 13.2%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 19.2% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Black and Black British, and Asian and Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 15.3% (the national average is 19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 9.5% (the national average is 15%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 30 September 2016, 1,389 children were identified as being in need of a
specialist childrens service, which is an increase from 1,374 on 31 March 2016.
 At 30 September 2016, 285 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a decrease from 302 at 31 March 2016.
 At 30 September 2016, three children lived in privately arranged fostering
placements. This is an increase from two at 30 April 2016.
 Since the last inspection, seven serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and three serious case reviews have been completed or were on-going
at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 30 September 2016, 237 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 43.9 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 229 (42.4
per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 Of this number:
authority area
area
area
 three live with parents. One of these three lives outside the authority
area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been five adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


The casework model used in this area
 Signs of Safety


Recommendations

Ensure that managers at all levels use management information effectively to
oversee the work of their teams, and that performance reports include
analysis, evaluation and commentary.


Ensure that partners understand thresholds, that they are applied consistently
and that children referred to the MASH, or who require help out of hours,
receive a timely and proportionate response.


Ensure that all assessments of children and care leavers consider all areas of
need and risk, including equality and diversity issues and health needs.


Improve pathway plans, reviews of pathway plans and visits to care leavers to
ensure that they meet statutory requirements. Ensure that all plans for
children are specific, measurable and child focused and that copies are
provided to parents and carers in a timely way.


Ensure that all care leavers are fully aware of their entitlements.


Ensure that all children and young people who go missing from home or care
are offered prompt return home interviews and that the information obtained
is used to support their safety plans.


Improve the sufficiency and availability of placements for care leavers,
children looked after and children with a plan of adoption so that they are well
matched according to their needs.


Ensure robust tracking and decision making for children who are subject to
pre-proceedings and permanence planning, to avoid drift and delay, and that
independent reviewing officers and child protection chairs provide sufficient
challenge to these plans.


Take steps to ensure sufficient independent visitors for all children looked
after who would benefit from this.


Ensure that the support needs of children subject to adoption and special
guardianship are comprehensively assessed and result in a plan that
addresses childrens individual needs.


Improve the regularity and scrutiny of management oversight and the quality
of staff supervision at all levels, ensuring that staff are properly held to
account for their practice in providing appropriate help and support for
children and reducing drift.


Increase the influence of the corporate parenting board, ensuring that the
direct involvement of children is central to the boards work and that the
membership and workplan target priorities effectively. Properly celebrate the
achievements of children and young people.


Expedite the development or re-commissioning of the electronic system to
ensure that it is fit for purpose, that it adequately supports the planning and
recording requirements of the care leavers service, the provision of
management information and enables proper storage of adopters records.


Summary for children and young people
 Children and families receive help quickly when they first have problems.
 If problems get worse, families are assessed to make sure that they receive the
right help. Sometimes it takes too long for social workers to visit children to find
out what their needs are.
 Most children and families who need a social worker are well supported and their
lives start to get better. When things do not change quickly enough or children
are at risk of being harmed, managers are not always helped by the right people,
like the police, to decide what to do next.
 Social workers and managers make the right decisions about which children need
protection, and which children need to be looked after in foster care or childrens
homes.
 Some children live a long way from home or in placements that dont meet all of
their needs, as there are not enough suitable placements near to their home.
 Not enough older children are helped to stay with their foster carers until they are
ready to live on their own. The range of accommodation for young people who
leave foster care is not good enough and some young people do not get enough
support to help them to manage their day-to-day lives.
 Young people over the age of 18 who have left care are not given enough help to
live independent and successful lives.
 Children looked after can share their worries and views easily through the MOMO
(Mind Of My Own) app. Senior managers listen carefully to this feedback.
 The children in care council does not represent the views of enough children and
young people of all ages and does not make a difference to improving the
experience of being in care.
 Children who are at risk of sexual exploitation, or who go missing from home or
care, get the right help and this makes them safer.
 Many children have had too many changes of social worker and they find this
difficult and upsetting. Managers are working hard to find more social workers
and to keep them for longer. This hard work is starting to pay off, with more
social workers wanting to work in Havering.
 Managers, social workers, personal advisers and family support workers care
about the children who need their help. They want to make a difference to
children. Managers are arranging extra training to make sure that social workers
and other practitioners are good at understanding and helping children, young
people and their families.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement

Summary
In most cases, outcomes for children improve following intervention from childrens
social care and early help services. The links between early help and social care
are sufficiently established and children and their families have access to a range
of well targeted preventative services. Thresholds are not consistently applied by
all partners. The local authority and the LSCB are aware of this, and the
application of thresholds is currently subject to ongoing awareness raising and
audit.
Partner agencies are well represented in the multi-agency safeguarding hub
(MASH). While overall this has enabled timely and helpful sharing of information,
there are often delays in information-sharing by the police. Inconsistent
management oversight and delays in initial responses to some children and young
people mean that safeguarding plans for them are not robust enough.
Most children are seen regularly by their social workers, particularly once they are
allocated to the assessment team or intervention and support services (ISS).
Assessments are of variable quality and, while some good examples were seen, a
high proportion lack well evidenced analysis of risk. Most plans are adequate; they
are reviewed regularly and partner agencies contribute to the effective
safeguarding of children. However, some plans are not child centred, specific
enough, or include timeframes or outcomes, and contingency planning is poor.
Ethnicity is recorded for most cases, but childrens wider equality and diversity
needs are not always well considered in assessment and planning.
Arrangements to tackle child sexual exploitation and cases of children going
missing from home and care are prioritised, and most children receive a wellcoordinated multi-agency response to their needs. The multi-agency sexual
exploitation (MASE) meetings are purposeful and provide an effective framework
to reduce risks. However, return home interviews are not always timely and some
are not sufficiently thorough or analysed.
Abuse allegations against professionals are mostly well managed and result in
effective plans to protect children.
The emergency duty team (EDT) has not consistently provided a timely response
out of hours. However, senior managers have taken appropriate remedial action to
challenge this, and provided training and clearer guidelines to staff.
Very few children are privately fostered in Havering, but arrangements to identify
and support them are underdeveloped. Awareness raising has not been effective.


Inspection findings

Childrens social care services have experienced a significant increase in
demand since 2013, due to a rapid change in the demographic of the local
population, with families moving into the area from other London boroughs.
This is now stabilising, but has had a significant impact on the quality of social
work services for children in need of help and protection. For example, the
number of children on child protection plans more than doubled between


New senior managers have been appointed and more effective ways of
working have been implemented in the last year, but the quality of social work
practice is still too variable. While inspectors found weaknesses in the MASH,
children receive a more robust response to their needs once they have an
allocated social worker in the assessment team or intervention and support
service hubs.


Early help services have recently been strengthened and restructured
following a full review, in order to improve targeted interventions and increase
capacity. For example, a new Families Together service was launched in
September 2016 to focus on adolescents on the edge of care. This multiagency service is intended to enable children and young people to stay within
their families if they can be kept safe.


Most children in Havering receive a timely and purposeful response to their
needs from early help services. Early help assessments and plans adequately
address childrens needs, and some are good. Childrens centres offer a range
of appropriate interventions for children and their families, through the
implementation of a targeted approach. In cases seen by inspectors,
thresholds for escalating cases by early help staff into social care were
appropriately understood and applied.


The MASH is a single point of contact which is valued by partners. The quality
of referrals to the MASH is variable but improving; in many cases they are not
thorough enough. There is variability and inconsistency in the understanding
and application of thresholds when referrals are progressed in the MASH, and
by partners who are not always clear about thresholds and pathways into
social care. While repeat referrals are low, those seen by inspectors showed a
lack of consistently effective decision-making, including insufficient
consideration of historical information, leading to some children and families
receiving a delayed response from childrens social care.


In cases where statutory thresholds are met, there are sometimes delays in
ascertaining the safety of children through prompt initial visits. This is due to a
number of factors, including a lack of effective information sharing, consent
from parents being inconsistently sought or considered, an inconsistent
application of the risk assessment tool and limited management oversight. In
a few cases, children had not been seen quickly enough by a social worker to
ensure that all safeguarding plans were robust. However, some cases within
the MASH demonstrated clear, purposeful work and effective analysis of risk.



The local authority is aware of the deficiencies in practice in the MASH, having
started work to improve it following a review in March 2016 and as a result of
further issues raised via practice week in September 2016. New managers
have been permanently appointed, and are providing more robust
management oversight and clearer guidance to staff. (Recommendation)


While the MASH has led to more effective engagement of health and
education partners, the co-location with the police has not facilitated a smooth
and timely exchange of information. Police attendance at key meetings,
including strategy meetings, is inconsistent and this has led to delays in
agreeing plans to protect children and in responding effectively to childrens
needs. Senior leaders in Havering have highlighted these concerns to the
Metropolitan Police and improvements are expected, partly as a result of the
local authority being part of a pilot project with two other neighbouring local
authorities.


The quality and timeliness of assessments in Havering are variable. Some
good quality purposeful assessments involving children and their families were
seen during the inspection, but the majority are not sufficiently analytical and
do not consider risks as well as protective factors. In some cases, inspectors
saw sustained efforts to engage challenging parents successfully. However, in
other examples, assessments reflected a lack of challenge to parents by social
workers and partners and this had contributed to delays in decision making
and in escalating concerns appropriately. (Recommendation)


Chronologies are present on most case files, but they are not systematically
used to inform assessment and planning. Case recording is mostly up to date.
However, case records do not routinely reflect childrens experiences or
whether children have been seen alone. The electronic recording system does
not effectively support social work practice and is therefore being updated and
re-commissioned to improve the ease of case recording, as well as capturing
performance information more effectively.


Equality and diversity needs of children are not always recorded or considered
by social workers, although inspectors did see examples of the positive impact
for children of the systemic therapist working with cross-cultural issues.
(Recommendation)


Child protection investigations identify risks to children and lead to appropriate
plans so that risks are reduced. However, the quality is variable. For example,
initial strategy meetings and discussions often do not include all relevant
agencies such as health partners, but subsequent strategy meetings
demonstrate better involvement. In some cases there are delays in completing
child protection enquiries, for example social workers reported that cases held
by the police in the child abuse investigation team cannot be accessed by
police in the MASH. Senior managers in the local authority are currently in
discussion with the police to resolve this issue. The majority of decisions
following child protection enquiries are appropriate. However, the rationale for
these decisions is not always clearly recorded. Overall, management oversight,
guidance and direction for social workers in the MASH are not thorough


enough, leading, for example, to initial plans from strategy meetings for some
children and their families not being timely or specific.

The timeliness of initial child protection conferences is improving and a high
proportion (89%) of initial conferences result in a child protection plan. Most
conferences are well attended by partners, who share key information
effectively.


The quality of most child in need and child protection plans is adequate. Plans
include the key issues and they are reviewed regularly. Children are seen, and
seen alone, and their views are considered in accordance with the plan.
Parents are mostly well engaged and social workers are establishing
meaningful relationships with children and families. Core group meetings are
well attended and systematically consider the child protection plan, but they
do not routinely develop the plan to take into account what has changed,
improved or got worse for children, and contingency planning is poor. Most
plans seen by inspectors were not sufficiently measureable or outcome
focused, for example not making clear whether risks for children were
reducing. Some plans seen by inspectors were adult focused and did not
sufficiently take account of all the needs and risks relating to children,
particularly in cases when domestic violence was a feature.
(Recommendation)


The role of the child protection chairs is underdeveloped. Chairs do not always
challenge drift or delay or scrutinise casework and, as a result, the impact on
childrens experiences is limited. While this weakness has been identified by
senior managers, activity to remedy the shortfall has not yet been
implemented.


Step-up and step-down processes are mostly effective. While most children
are stepped down from a child protection plan to a child in need plan
appropriately, arrangements to monitor sustained improvement are
inconsistent. The number of repeat child protection plans has increased; the
proportion of children with open plans that had been subject to a second or
subsequent child protection plan was 14% in 201516. This is a rise from 3%
in 201415, and is now more in line with similar authorities. Step-down
arrangements to early help services are well supported by the family coach
team, who provide effective transitional support and monitoring for children
and their families. The Families Together team additionally provides helpful
support to children who are identified as being on the edge of care, as well as
to young people returning home following custody or being looked after.


Staff turnover has begun to stabilise and most children enjoy the consistency
of an allocated social worker. Almost all children who are subject to child
protection or child in need plans are visited by their social workers in
accordance with their plans. Most social workers spoken to by inspectors knew
children and their needs and personalities well. However, childrens wishes
and feelings are not well reflected in childrens files. In examples of better
work, inspectors saw the effective use of direct work tools to gain the views of


children. Social workers have access to an effective family group conference
service and this has contributed to improved outcomes for children.

The provision of advocacy services to children is not well utilised or sufficiently
promoted by professionals. Few children attend important meetings, for
example child protection conferences. However, when children do have this
support, advocates effectively represent the voice of the children and ensure
that their views are well considered.


Arrangements to monitor the welfare of children living with parents who
experience mental ill-health, or who misuse drugs or alcohol, are mostly
robust. A well-coordinated partnership response promotes collaborative
working and ensures that the needs of children living in these households are
effectively met. For example, services for victims of domestic abuse are
sufficient to meet local need. A programme of support to children who live
with domestic abuse is provided. Although there is no specific provision for
perpetrators within Havering, services for these adults are accessed through
other London boroughs. Children experiencing neglect are well monitored and
tracked to ensure cases are escalated and reviewed. This prevents long term
exposure of children to neglect.


Managers within the ISS provide consistent, purposeful and effective case
direction to social workers, and this results in plans for children being
progressed well and in good time. Social workers report good access to
supportive managers and helpful consultation about casework decisions. While
management oversight is not sufficiently rigorous or consistent within the
MASH service, this has recently been addressed due to the appointment of a
new group manager and a focus on the quality of management oversight
provided by the deputy team managers.


The joint protocol for homeless 16- and 17-year-old young people has been
implemented effectively and is resulting in young people being provided with
appropriate accommodation in a timely manner.


The emergency duty team (EDT) in Havering is provided by the East London
partnership. Reponses by this service are variable and children do not
consistently receive a proportionate response to their protection needs. For
example, children are not always seen by a social worker when they are
accommodated or workers do not have the appropriate paperwork for foster
carers. Senior managers in Havering have challenged the performance of the
EDT service and the local authority is monitoring this arrangement to ensure
that children receive a timely and appropriate emergency response.
(Recommendation)


Multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC) arrangements are well
embedded and understood across the partnership. Meetings are well
attended, enabling information to be effectively shared. Professionals provide
sustained and committed efforts to reduce the risks of domestic violence to
children and their families. Multi-agency public protection arrangements
(MAPPA) are well understood across the partnership and ensure that there is


effective supervision of offenders in the community. Potential risks to children
are well monitored.

Abuse allegations against professionals and carers who work with children are
taken seriously and responded to promptly by the designated officer. Strategy
meetings are well attended, with good multi-agency information sharing;
decision making is timely and appropriate.


Child sexual exploitation is a key priority for the local authority and its
partners. There is a good awareness of child sexual exploitation among family
support workers and social workers, and the quality of practice appropriately
safeguards the needs of children and young people. The local authority is
refining the risk assessment tool to be more specific and to capture
information more robustly. Mapping meetings for individual children ensure
that information is shared effectively and there is a well-coordinated response
to risk in most cases. In cases seen by inspectors, children at risk of sexual
exploitation who are subject to child protection plans receive well-targeted
help based on a thorough multi-agency understanding of risk.


Arrangements to respond to child sexual exploitation at a strategic level are
well established through multi-agency sexual exploitation (MASE) meetings
and there is evidence of detailed mapping of intelligence and appropriate
disruption activity to safeguard children and young people. Partners have an
increasing understanding of the local profile, which informs planning.
However, cross-borough intelligence sharing and mapping have not yet been
implemented.


The local authority monitors effectively those children who are electively home
educated. Specialist staff provide good advice and guidance and clearly record
the details of each case. The local authority focuses well on ensuring that
children in alternative provision are getting a good education and staff closely
monitor their progress.


Arrangements to identify and monitor children missing from home, care or
education are well embedded and mostly comprehensive. However, the
quality and regularity of return interviews are inconsistent. The missing from
home coordinator has significant knowledge of all children missing and is able
to provide up-to-date information which is not always captured on the
electronic case files. In relation to children missing from education, the local
authority works well with partners to find these children. All cases of children
missing education are recorded electronically and case files are uploaded to
the local authority database. (Recommendation)


The partnership has worked effectively to ensure that staff are well aware and
equipped to identify girls at risk of female genital mutilation. Training is
provided to professionals and clear protocols are in place; this has ensured
that girls are receiving a timely response when they are identified as being at
potential risk.


Coordination of services to combat radicalisation is effective and this work is
well supported by the Prevent officer, who works purposefully and in


partnership with social care services to reduce risks to young people as well as
to raise awareness. Work with children involved in gang activity is developing,
aided by a gangs specialist who is based within the MASH.

Private fostering arrangements are underdeveloped. While awareness raising
has taken place, this has had a narrow focus and has not been delivered to all
professionals or across the wider community effectively. Case work seen was
thorough and supportive, although subject to a delay in an initial response in
the MASH.


Senior managers seek feedback on the service provided through a number of
measures, including telephone calls to families on cases audited during
practice weeks. Responses are reported to be largely positive, with families
saying that they benefit from respectful relationships with workers and that
the support they receive is helpful to them.


Services for children with disabilities are of good quality; they are child
centred, timely and compliant with all statutory processes. A stable and
experienced team with reasonable case-loads works holistically with families
and with partner agencies. Good supervision arrangements and management
oversight are in place. Transition arrangements into adult services are being
developed further.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Recent decisions for children to become looked after are appropriate and well
considered. However, the Public Law Outline processes are not used well and
decision making within court proceedings is not timely, leading to delays in some
children becoming looked after. Most children looked after live within or near
Havering and benefit from good, stable placements. Most children experience
improved or improving outcomes. They do well at school, although for some,
attendance is not regular enough. Childrens educational attainment and progress
are effectively supported by the virtual school.
Some children have had too many changes of social worker, which makes it
difficult for workers to form consistent, positive relationships with them.
Permanence planning, particularly for older children, has not been sufficiently
tracked, leading to delays in long term matching for some children. Although the
regularity of reviews for children looked after is good, independent reviewing
officers are not effective enough in challenging or escalating concerns about poor
practice or delays in ensuring that plans for children are being achieved.
The response to children who go missing or who are at risk of sexual exploitation
is mostly effective, although the quality of return home interviews is not
consistently good. The timeliness of health assessments is improving, following the
appointments of a consultant paediatrician and nursing staff.
The children in care council is not yet effective at representing the views of all
children looked after. Advocacy for children looked after is limited and no children
have the support of an independent visitor.
Adoption is considered for all children who are unable to live with their birth
families, although the number of children placed for adoption is small. The
appointment of experienced and knowledgeable managers is improving the quality
and timeliness of adoption work by setting standards and establishing systems and
processes for the service.
Services for care leavers are inadequate. Young people are rarely involved in
pathway planning, and plans are not of sufficient quality. Care leavers are not able
to access a suitable range of accommodation, leading to some care leavers living
in independent accommodation before they have the skills to support themselves.
Care leavers health needs are not sufficiently assessed and they are not provided
with enough information about their health histories. Senior managers have
identified the weaknesses and are beginning to make improvements.


Inspection findings

The local authority makes concerted efforts to ensure that children remain
with their families if it is safe to do so. Inspectors saw no cases where children
were looked after unnecessarily and in the majority of cases, decisions that
children should become looked after were made within a timescale that met
the childrens needs. However, for a small minority of children, an overoptimistic determination that they remain with their families meant that they
experienced delays in becoming looked after. Unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children are well supported, with good consideration of their needs, culture
and language.


When the plan is for children or young people to return home, the majority
have appropriate plans to support them, with risks clearly understood and
minimised. A small minority of older young people have returned to local
authority accommodation as a result of plans not being sufficiently effective or
where family arrangements have disrupted.


Children who are subject to the pre-proceedings phase of the Public Law
Outline are not reviewed regularly enough. Letters before action, which are
sent to parents to explain what will happen if their childrens circumstances do
not improve, are clear. However, a lack of effective intervention, such as
prompt assessments of parents and family members and review means that
progress is not tracked, plans are unclear, and actions are not always
updated. As a result, some children and families spend too long at this stage,
leading to delays in issuing proceedings. (Recommendation)


The local authority maintains positive and productive relationships with the
judiciary and with the children and family court advisory and support service
(Cafcass). Social work reports are consistently of sufficient quality and are
accepted by the courts. Care proceedings are not completed in a timely way;
the average time for completion in 201516 was 30 weeks, which is outside
the threshold of 26 weeks, but is similar to other London boroughs. When
some cases come to court, viability assessments of potential carers have not
always been completed, resulting in delay for some children while these
assessments are undertaken.


The use of special guardianship orders (SGOs) is increasing, enabling children
to live with extended family members when it is not safe for them to live with
their birth parents. In the year 201516, 17 children left care through the
granting of SGOs. This number has increased between April and September
predicted for the remainder of the year. Assessments undertaken thoroughly
assess the strengths and vulnerabilities of family members to care for children
as special guardians. However, this process is not systematically established
and relies on workers knowledge of individual children and families. This
means that the local authority cannot be fully assured that progress is always
timely and robust.



The local authority has 102 children looked after (over 40%) who are the
subject of voluntary, section 20 arrangements. The use of such arrangements
has, for some children, adversely impacted on the timeliness and quality of
permanence planning. Inconsistent use of permanence planning meetings has
been a key factor in delaying permanence plans for children. An audit was
undertaken by the local authority in July 2016, which considered 94 cases
where children were the subject of section 20 arrangements. The audit
identified that, in 54 of these cases, regular permanence planning meetings
had not taken place, particularly for 42 young people over 15 years old, and in
permanence. In response to these issues, a robust action plan across the
whole service has been implemented and this is ensuring more timely
permanence planning for children.


At the time of the inspection, a number of children who were settled and
thriving in long-term stable placements had not been permanently matched
with their current carers. The local authority recognises the uncertainty that
lack of permanence can cause and is taking the necessary steps to formalise
these arrangements via the appropriate panel.


The educational attainment and progress of children looked after are
supported by a well led virtual school. Children looked after do well at school.
Current local authority data shows that outcomes for primary school children
are high and in many cases similar to the figures for all children nationally. At
key stage 4, children looked after do not do quite so well, but still do better
than their peers nationally.


The number of school changes for Havering children looked after is low, with
past year. This helps to contribute to consistency of education provision for
children. Personal education plans (PEPs) are generally fit for purpose, identify
barriers to learning and the strategies to overcome these barriers. They
contain detailed information about educational attainments. Actions are clear,
well defined and based on a sound analysis.


Staff in the virtual school robustly monitor the impact of pupil premium spend.
Schools have to apply for the funding based on PEP targets. School staff
report that staff in the virtual school challenge them to provide evidence of
the impact of the use of this money to improve the educational outcomes for
children looked after. School attendance of secondary-aged children who are
looked after is not yet good enough, at 86%, although primary school
attendance is high, at 98% overall. While attendance figures have improved
year on year, current data indicates that only 64% of children looked after
have attendance figures of 95% or better. This is an increase from 57.7% in


The local authority keeps records of children looked after who attend
alternative provision, with staff at the virtual school effectively monitoring the
arrangements. At the time of the inspection, there were no school-aged


children looked after who received education provision of less than 25 hours a
week.

Assessments of children looked after are not always regularly updated to
reflect significant changes in their circumstances. This means that, in a
minority of cases, there is no current up-to-date assessment of childrens
needs. Some assessments lack detail or are insufficiently focused on the
current needs of the child. Assessments seen by inspectors did not
consistently consider diversity issues for children looked after.
(Recommendation)


Case recording in the majority of cases is clear and up to date and includes
childrens wishes and feelings. Information relating to work being undertaken
with children to help them understand their journey into and through care is
less well recorded.


Challenge by independent reviewing officers (IROs) is not consistent or
effective. Numbers of recorded challenges are low, with only 19 informal and
five formal challenges having been made since January 2016 for issues such
as delays in issuing legal proceedings. Critically, informal and formal escalation
procedures are not used when concerns about children are identified.
Challenge is not rigorous or decisive for some children to ensure that
permanence plans are acted upon without delay or that actions from looked
after reviews are progressed. (Recommendation)


Caseloads for IROs are manageable. Reviews of children looked after are
consistently held within timescales and are appropriately brought forward
when changes in childrens circumstances necessitate a review of their plan.
IROs see children prior to reviews to ensure that children understand their
purpose and have good opportunity to express their views. Children are
encouraged effectively to take part, with their wishes and feelings well
recorded. Care plans are not always specific or detailed in terms of the actions
required to ensure childrens well-being. This means that professionals,
children and their families are not always clear that actions are being taken or
that progress is being made. Carers and other adults working with children
reported to inspectors that delays in minutes of reviews being sent out means
that they, or the children themselves, do not always have a record of the
current care plan. (Recommendation)


Performance in relation to the timeliness of initial and annual health
assessments has recently improved from a low base, but is still not
implemented effectively for all children. Current data for July to September
the 28-day timescale. For review health assessments for the same period, the
number completed within timescale was 74%. The successful appointments of
a consultant paediatrician to complete initial assessments and of two nurses to
complete review assessments have enabled this improvement, but difficulties
and delays in the commissioning process have historically resulted in too few
children having assessments completed in good time. A lack of comprehensive


data for the date of the most recent dental check means that there is no
effective process to ensure that childrens oral health needs are met.

Arrangements for meeting childrens emotional health needs are adequate.
The provision of an emotional health worker within the children looked after
service is having a positive impact on the range of services being offered. In
the 12 months prior to the inspection, 40 children looked after had benefited
from support from child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS), with
a further 32 accessing support from the commissioned counselling service.
However, a lack of qualitative data relating to the services offered means that
the local authority cannot judge the effectiveness of this provision. Inspectors
saw some good examples of emotional health support for children and a
number of children were clearly benefiting from CAMHS support. There are
gaps in the provision of support when the threshold for CAMHS is not met, a
deficit recognised by the local authority.


Social workers visit children regularly and see them alone, when appropriate,
at least within minimum timescales. However, the quality of these visits is
variable. In some, there is clear detail relating to the purpose of the visit, with
childrens voices well recorded and information about what work is being
done. In others, the purpose of the visit is less clear. Children and foster
carers told inspectors that some children have had too many changes of social
worker. For a minority of children, this has impinged on their capacity to build
trusting relationships with social workers who know them well. One young
person told inspectors, I am tired of having to repeat my story to different
people. In order to address this, in June 2016 the local authority re-structured
the social work teams to provide more continuity for children and young
people, and has made considerable progress in recruiting permanent staff in
the last three months.


The needs of children at risk of, or engaging in, substance misuse are met
through a commissioned service. Screening processes for this service ensure
that when concerns about other risks, such as child sexual exploitation, are
identified, these are appropriately shared.


Risks relating to children looked after who are at risk of sexual exploitation
and missing are mostly well managed. Links between missing episodes and
potential child sexual exploitation risks are appropriately considered. Risk
assessments are routinely completed and reviewed when risks escalate.
Strategy meetings are appropriately held to coordinate multi-agency
responses when children are missing more than three times, or when children
are at risk of harm through sexual exploitation. Return home interviews take
place in the very large majority of cases, but the numbers taking place within
indicates that from April to September 2016, 41% of return home interviews
were completed within 72 hours. This means that the gathering of information
to help protect children from future missing episodes is potentially lost. In a
number of cases, prompt decisive action to accommodate young people in
good quality residential provision is having a significant positive impact on the


number of missing episodes and reducing the risk of sexual exploitation.
(Recommendation)

Arrangements for children to have contact with their families and friends are
well considered. Contact arrangements for children are clearly identified at
looked after reviews. Contact arrangements are well facilitated by the contact
service.


Sufficiency planning of local placements for children who are looked after is
not effective enough. Strategic plans to identify future needs based on the
previous and current children looked after population have improved but are
still not sufficiently well developed. A shortage of in-house foster placements
and commissioned independent sector placements has resulted in some young
people being placed in semi-independent supported residential provision not
consistent with their assessed need. At the time of the inspection, 28 young
people aged 16 or 17 and three 15-year-olds were placed in such
accommodation. While not ideal, inspectors found that the three 15-year-olds
were well supported, with effective risk management plans. The need to
increase the number of local foster placements is clearly recognised by the
local authority and while recruitment initiatives are in place, they are showing
little impact. (Recommendation)


Senior managers are committed to ensuring that children and young people
are placed within their localities and local authority data indicates that at the
time of the inspection 74% of all children looked after were placed within
Havering or neighbouring authorities. In cases seen by inspectors, children
placed at a distance from Havering were well supported by social workers.
Regular and effective liaison with providers and a swift response to any
emerging concerns contribute to the stability of these placements. Generally,
childrens health and education needs are well met and placements are
effective in meeting childrens often complex needs.


Fostering services meet the needs of children well. Foster carers benefit from
a wide range of training courses and support groups. Foster carers spoken to
by inspectors were positive about the support they received, particularly the
easy accessibility of support and dedicated help and advice out of hours.
Foster carers exercise delegated authority on an individual basis, making dayto-day decisions for children in their care, and this helps to normalise
childrens experiences.


Children are carefully matched to carers and their wishes and feelings are
considered well. Brothers and sisters are consistently placed together unless
their plans identify that it would not be in their best interests. The large
majority of children benefit from stable and positive placements. Short-term
placement stability is good, with 88% of children looked after having only one
or two placements in the 12 months prior to the inspection. However, an
increase in the number of foster placement breakdowns, particularly those for
older young people, is having an adverse impact on the figures for longer
term stability for children looked after.



Children and young people enjoy a good range of leisure activities that
support their wider emotional and social development, both at home and in
school. Carers support children and young people well to become involved in
social, recreational and friendship building activities. Passes are provided to
enable them to use local authority leisure activities.


A focus on individual youth crime prevention through the youth offending
service ensures that children at risk of offending are identified early and
receive a timely and focused intervention. The corporate parenting board
reported in 2016 that, while 12% of all youth offences were committed by
children looked after, only one young person subsequently re-offended.


The participation of children looked after in service development is not
sufficiently embedded. Some positive efforts to facilitate communication with
children and young people have been introduced, such as the use of the Mind
Of My Own (MOMO) app. Efforts to undertake wider participation have been
limited, meaning that there is little evidence of how the voices of children and
young people have contributed to changes in the service they receive.


The children in care council is underdeveloped. The group is very small and
communication between the council, the corporate parenting board and the
rest of the children looked after population is ineffective in ensuring that
childrens voices are sufficiently heard. The impact of the children in care
council in improving the quality of service that children receive is therefore
limited. (Recommendation)


At the time of the inspection, no children in care were matched with an
independent visitor. This means that no children had the benefit of the
support such provision could offer to advise, assist and befriend them during
their time in care. This support is particularly relevant for children and young
people who are placed out of area. (Recommendation)


Advocacy support to children is limited. Support is delivered through a
commissioned provider but only nine children looked after were in receipt of
this at the time of the inspection. Children are aware of the opportunity to
make complaints about services. However, the impact of learning from
complaints to improve their experiences is insufficiently embedded to achieve
whole service change.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement

Adoption is considered for all children who are unable to live with birth family
members. However, some children with complex needs or from specific ethnic
minority backgrounds have waited a long time for their permanent
arrangements to be identified. Permanence planning meetings, chaired by the
recently appointed team manager for adoption, are bringing earlier


consideration of adoption for children, and dedicated family finders are
enabling more timely matches to be made.

The authoritys performance against the Department for Educations adoption
scorecard shows that timeliness in the three key indicators on the three-year
averages 201215 does not yet meet the governments thresholds for
performance. The average time in 201215 between a child entering care and
moving in with their adoptive family had reduced from 651 days to 607 days,
compared to the 201114 period, but this still means that children were
waiting 120 days longer than the government threshold of 487 days.
Unvalidated local authority data for 201617 shows an average time period of
with complex needs. Of the six children placed with their adoptive families and
awaiting orders in 201516, the average is 438 days, demonstrating recent
improved performance in this area, and almost in line with the adoption
scorecard threshold of 426 days for 201316.


Children in Havering wait too long between placement orders being granted
by the court and securing an appropriate adoption match. This means that for
some children there is delay in knowing where they will live and who their
adoptive parents will be. The published figures for 201215 show the average
number of days between receiving court authority to place a child to be
adopted and the authority deciding on a match to an adoptive family was 180
days. This is higher than the Department for Education target of 121 days, but
better than the national average of 223 days.


In Havering, 64% of children wait more than 16 months between entering
care and moving in with their adoptive families. However, the numbers are
small and of the seven children who had their adoption orders granted in
less than the governments revised threshold of 14 months.


In the last year, there has been a reduction in the numbers of children
adopted in Havering. Seven children had an adoption order granted in 2015
authority proactively considers a wide range of family members as special
guardians, including active and appropriate exploration of extended family
overseas; this resulted in 20% of children looked after in Havering leaving
care for permanent placements in 201516.


The recruitment of adopters has not been sufficient and a lack of proactive
recruitment in the last 12 months has resulted in few in-house prospective
adopters currently undergoing assessments of suitability. This has not
prevented family finding for children in Havering, as the local authority has
placed eight of the 10 children placed or adopted in the last 12 months with
interagency adopters. However, a lack of any targeted recruitment has
resulted in delays for some children finding their permanent family, and
adopters can wait too long to have children placed; they are then often used
by other local authorities. Timescales to progress the few recent adopters
assessments through stage one and stage two are not timely, and the local


authority does not have an accurate assessment of why this is the case.
(Recommendation)

Fostering to adopt is not yet embedded as a core element of adoption work.
However, inspectors saw that permanency was achieved within 12 months for
one child who was placed with interagency adoptive carers from four months
old, enabling security and consistency of care from a very young age.


In the last 12 months, the appointment of experienced and knowledgeable
managers has begun to improve the quality and timeliness of adoption work
by setting standards and establishing systems and processes for the service.
While some child permanence reports (CPRs), prospective adopter reports
(PARs) and adoption support assessments seen during the inspection were
comprehensive, overall the consistency of work is not yet sufficiently of a
good standard. The recent introduction of a range of direct work tools,
including story stem work and creative early life storybooks, is helping young
children to understand the circumstances of their transition to their adoptive
homes.


Dedicated focus on family finding activity is starting to improve the timescales
for securing appropriate and timely matches for children. In the majority of
cases seen, matching reports carefully consider the needs of children in
relation to the strengths and qualities of prospective adopters. For one
adopter spoken to, a recent life appreciation day  brought the child to life,
enabling a successful match of a child with complex needs. Information
provided by professionals enabled her to effectively piece together the childs
early experiences and better equip her to understand and meet his needs.


An established and robust system is in place to consider adoption as a best
interest decision. The agency decision maker provides appropriate challenge
to social workers and managers to ensure adoption is the right plan for the
child and that children go to live with the most appropriate families. While in
the last 12 months eight children with plans for adoption had their plans
changed, this was mainly due to positive special guardian assessments and
orders to family members that enabled children to remain within their birth
family. In only one case was this due to no suitable adoptive family being
identified within reasonable timescales for the children, who remained within
their foster placement with a view to permanency.


The fostering and adoption panel chair is experienced and knowledgeable and
brings learning from her work chairing other local authority panels. The
combined panel sets appropriate standards, applicable to both areas of work.
Appropriate and experienced panel members include a young person with a
care history who brings a real focus on the experience of children and
effective challenge to practice. The panel provides individual feedback on the
quality of the CPRs and PARs and the panel chair reports that, while the
quality of written work to the panel is variable, in recent months this has
improved and is now mostly of a good standard. Effective quality assurance
provided by the new team manager is bringing improved consistency of
compliance, comprehension, and timeliness to the work in the service.



Adopters who spoke to inspectors felt well prepared for the assessment,
panel, and placement. In particular, well-facilitated training helped them to
consider issues about the challenges adoption brings in relation to some of the
experiences adopted children face. This prepared them well for the reality
when their child came to live with them.


Information held on adopters files is currently stored on two electronic
systems, making it difficult for the local authority to have a robust overview of
compliance in this area. In files sampled, required information on disclosure
and barring service (DBS) checks, health checks, medicals, and references
was located, but not stored in a consistent way and place by each worker. As
a result, the service cannot easily assure itself that information is up to date,
current and meets statutory requirements. (Recommendation)


An accessible Guide to adoption and adoption support is available for children
and young people, and this includes space for them to write down their
worries. It contains useful contact numbers of organisations for those who
may be feeling confused, wondering about their birth family, or are struggling
to know how to tell people they are adopted. Assessed adoption and special
guardian support needs result in a support plan. However, not all support
plans are comprehensive, and some lack clear and specific details of individual
childrens needs. This means that adopters or carers do not all have a good
overview of their childs additional or likely needs in the future. A range of
effective support is available, including direct work with families, letterbox
contact, direct contact supervision, and general advice, resulting in no
adoption or special guardians breakdowns in the last three years.
(Recommendation)


Life story work has not had sufficient priority for children in Havering. In
response to this, managers proactively established the Life Story Project to
offer support to 19 adopters who expressed an interest, to prepare and
improve life story books and later life letters for their children. Although
retrospective, adopters valued the work; one commented that this service had
helped them to support their daughter who has recently started to question
her history and the decision to place her for adoption. All recently completed
life stories seen during the inspection were age appropriate, detailed, and with
difficult and sensitive information well written, helping the child to know about
and understand their early experiences.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is inadequate


There are widespread failures that result in care leavers not having their
welfare promoted. Since July 2016, staff and managers have been aware of
many of the issues that inspectors have identified. In a few areas,
improvements have already been made. For example, the increase in the

number of staff who help young people find education, employment or
training, which has resulted in an increase in the number of apprenticeship
opportunities for care leavers. The local authority is now in contact with
almost all of its care leavers. A new manager has been appointed, and senior
managers are in the process of recruiting experienced social workers to
strengthen the service. However, these measures are yet to have a
demonstrable impact and inspectors found too many examples of insufficient
oversight, guidance and training for staff. A number of recommendations from
the 2011 inspection are still relevant today, for example regarding the quality
of pathway plans.

Pathway planning is of poor quality. It is not compliant with statutory
guidance or effective. Plans lack detail, many sections are not completed or
reviewed regularly and young people spoken to by inspectors were not aware
of plans to meet their needs or were sufficiently involved in developing them.
Targets and actions, when they do exist, lack clarity and urgency. They are
not based on an analysis of the young persons history or current position.
Staff acknowledge that the case management system is not fit for the purpose
of recording their work in supporting care leavers. (Recommendation)


Plans to assess risk and pre-empt crises are not always in place. Pathway
plans do not contain sufficiently detailed contingency plans. For example, all
care leavers spoken to by inspectors reported occasions of being placed in
semi-independent or independent accommodation before they had the skills
needed to support themselves, such as being able to cook. They had all had
periods living in accommodation where they felt unsafe. On an individual level,
staff take seriously the safety of young people and react promptly with
protective action when young people are at risk of harm.


Case records for care leavers are not sufficiently comprehensive, related to
the pathway plan or based on an up-to-date assessment of need. Senior
managers are aware of this as their own audit in July 2016 judged that 54%
of the pathway plans sampled either required improvement or were
inadequate. Advisers use case notes to record issues not covered in pathway
plans, but these notes are not detailed and do not provide sufficiently clear
information about the young person. However, many advisers do know their
care leavers well and work tenaciously to support them. One care leaver told
inspectors about the excellent support they had received. Inspectors saw
evidence where advisers provide good support to care leavers who are
parents, to help them to care for their children or support them when their
children become looked after.


The analysis and recording of care leavers health histories and needs are very
poor. Care leavers are not given a summary of their health needs when they
leave care and health needs are not considered in the pathway planning
process. In too many cases, care leavers are simple advised to: Make sure
you are registered with a GP and a dentist. One care leaver told inspectors of
a significant medical condition which was not mentioned in their records.
(Recommendation)



Care leavers health needs are not sufficiently well assessed and their
experiences are too variable. Transitions for young people with disabilities are
not managed well. While staff have very recently been trained in the C-card,
to give sexual health guidance, there is no clear programme of sexual health
education based on assessed needs. The local authority is planning to provide
care leavers with a pack containing their health information, but at the time of
the inspection there was nothing in place. Advisers are aware of the
challenges for care leavers to access adult mental health services, and work
hard with care leavers to help them engage with appropriate support. Care
leavers who met with inspectors reported specific instances of good help.


The draft care leaver service action plan is not sufficiently rigorous. Targets
are not comprehensive and lack clarity about how they will be achieved and
by whom. Statements are too vague and are not supported by evidence of
analysis.

with the opportunity to give feedback on their experiences. The previous
system was used infrequently. For example, in the three-month period from
April to June 2016, the authority received only five responses. They have
introduced an application for mobile electronic devices called Mind Of My
Own (MOMO), for both children in care and care leavers. Staff have managed
the implementation of this project well. Results are analysed well and issues
now go direct to the complaints department. In the period from July to
September 2016, the authority received 89 responses.
and care leavers to develop independent living skills and confidence. While
staff arrange some training when a specific need is identified, there is no
detailed analysis of each care leavers need and a strategic summary of this.
The local authority is over-reliant on foster carers to provide this development
prior to children leaving care, and as fewer than 10% of care leavers stay put
with their foster carers, many are unable to take advantage of this support.
While the proportion of children staying in care until they are 18, at 73%, is
higher than the figure nationally, the local authority does not monitor
sufficiently well the development of necessary skills. Staff are aware of this
and in the last four months have introduced a range of initiatives. For
example, Spark 2 Life involves 12 care leavers being mentored to help them
develop employability skills.
education, employment or training. This proportion has increased year on year
and the local authority reports that this is currently at 66%. Of these, 5% are
at university, 35% are in other further education, 3% have apprenticeships,
position to seek education, employment or training due to a range of factors,
including illness or disability. A recently appointed placement coordinator is
establishing apprenticeship opportunities for care leavers in the area.


people good work experience. While these are directed at all children in the
borough, many of the programmes have high numbers of care leavers taking
part. The authority has introduced City Walks, a programme of work
experience with small- to medium-sized enterprises and major firms. Thus far,
few of the care leavers have gone on to work experience and apprenticeships
as a result. In addition, 15% of the participants involved in the Baby to
Briefcase programme of training are care leavers. This programme is aimed
directly at young people with children.
leavers achievements and does not hold any group activities such as an
annual celebration event. Care leavers state that they do not feel their
achievements are celebrated well as a group or that the local authority is
particularly proud of them. For example, When you are under 18 they look
after you because they have to, but then they dont. The level of care when
you turn 18 drops a lot. Another care leaver reported: I dont feel they show
theyre proud. Advisers acknowledge individual success, for example by
sending the young person a card and gift voucher. (Recommendation)
accommodation has increased this year to 97%, the local authority does not
work sufficiently strategically to ensure that a suitable range of
accommodation is available to make appropriate placements. Strategic plans
to identify future needs, based on the current children looked after population,
are not sufficiently well developed. The local authority has no specific
provision for emergency accommodation. Staff have to find ad hoc
arrangements for each case of placement breakdown. The sufficiency
statement predicts an increase in care leavers. However, it does not identify
how the accommodation needs of these young people will be met. In the last
few months, the local authority has begun to work more closely with housing
and accommodation providers, with emerging evidence of improved planning
for accommodation. (Recommendation)
three care leavers due to either risk or placement breakdown. These cases
were carefully managed and young people were appropriately supported. A
few staff are not sufficiently aware of the need for visits after placement
moves and do not update pathway plans as required or properly identify risks
of tenancy breakdowns. However, good partnership working with the housing
department ensures that care leavers have the highest possible priority for
accommodation and for arranging financial support through benefits.
entitlements and benefits. Many report that they had to research the issue
themselves and they found out about more benefits than they had previously
been told. In a very few cases, care leavers have had to lobby the local
authority to access accumulated savings and set up home allowance funding.
Care leavers report great difficulty accessing their records, some waiting for


many months after making the request. The local authority used to provide a
leaflet for care leavers but one adviser stated that they no longer do this. The
local authority is aware of this and staff have recently held meetings with care
leavers to speed up access to their records. The care leavers pledge is brief
and does not set out how the local authority will honour its pledge.
(Recommendation)


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Services for vulnerable children in Havering have not been good enough for some
time, and a few areas have not sufficiently improved since the last inspection.
Children have not been able to rely on support that will consistently meet their
needs, and for some, such as care leavers, practice does not meet minimum
standards. Substantial changes in the senior and political leadership team over the
past 18 months, including the recruitment of a permanent, experienced senior
management team, are positive. The DCS has brought renewed focus and drive.
Social work teams have been successfully restructured. Political and financial
support for recruitment and retention and for the Face to Face approach is strong.
Staff are positive about working for Havering. Training is good and caseloads are
manageable. Since April 2016, agency rates have fallen by 25 percentage points.
The improvement board is addressing weaknesses, such as delays in health
assessments and the timeliness of single assessments, although in some instances,
actions have not been urgent enough, for example improving pathway planning for
care leavers. Extra resources and management capacity have been put in place in
recognition of the scale of the task. Quality assurance arrangements are well
articulated, and case auditing arrangements are strong, but the learning cycle is
not well embedded and improvements are not always rigorously tracked. Managers
and staff learn from individual complaints but service-wide changes are not well
evidenced. The role of the IRO in scrutinising and influencing practice is
underdeveloped.
The management oversight of casework is adequate and sometimes good, but
supervision and appraisal are not effective in holding staff to account.
Although the electronic recording system has been improved, it still does not
support social workers well enough, or assist managers to oversee the work of
their teams. Relevant performance information is shared with the right strategic
groups and forums. Improvements are planned to improve analysis and ensure a
focus on outcomes.
Senior leaders have taken positive steps to understand better what it is like to be a
child in care in Havering, but they have not utilised the corporate parenting board
well enough to engage with children and young people to improve their lives.
The approach to sufficiency is improving, helped by a better understanding of what
children need, but the local authority is not yet meeting its sufficiency duty,
particularly in relation to accommodation for care leavers and the recruitment of
adopters and in-house foster carers.
The operational and strategic arrangements to respond to children who go
missing, who are at risk of child sexual exploitation or who are vulnerable to
radicalisation are effective.


Inspection findings
months as assistant director for childrens social care. Twelve months before
the inspection, childrens services experienced a significant increase in
demand due to an unexpected change in the demography of the borough,
with more families moving in from other London boroughs due to lower
housing costs. Workforce instability and agency rates were high. Senior and
political leaders acknowledge that the approach to improvement over time has
not been sufficiently focused on the key service weaknesses or organised or
systematic enough, leading to vulnerable children receiving an inconsistent
service. During the inspection, the legacy of this was evident on childrens
case files. Social workers told inspectors that this had been a difficult period
for them in terms of workloads and reliability of management support.
management experience to the task of service development. He has drawn on
external resources to diagnose service weaknesses and has demonstrated his
commitment to achieve cultural and practice changes. With the firm support
of political leaders, he has made a promising start.
increase the number of first-line managers through the creation of pods in
core social work teams. This was in recognition of the need to improve the
management oversight of casework. A critical remedial step was to review the
effectiveness of previous senior leaders and to appoint new, experienced
permanent senior managers; this team is now in place. A new chief executive
and lead member for childrens services were appointed in May 2016.
Although the senior and political leadership team is now stable, the level of
instability and change has slowed Haverings improvement journey.
transformation board, has overseen a wide range of practice issues through
fortnightly meetings, chaired by the DCS. Minutes evidence detailed discussion
and careful consideration of data, feedback from young people, and audit
findings. The board appropriately reports to the cabinet, overview and scrutiny
committee and the health and well-being board. However, the extent and
scale of the areas for improvement are considerable. As a result, some priority
matters, such as the quality of pathway planning, which has been raised in
previous inspections, have not been afforded the right level of urgency.
Despite recent progress, almost all areas of practice still require improvement
in order to be good, and a few do not adequately meet the needs of children.
identified in the local authoritys self-assessment and broadly mirrors the
strengths and weaknesses highlighted through the inspection, but it is not
always clear which areas are considered the most critical or the highest
priority. It is also not always explicit who is accountable and how
improvements will be monitored. Some service improvement plans are


appropriately focused on key changes that are needed, such as actions arising
from the recent audit of section 20 cases. Others do not address critical
weaknesses well enough, such as the leaving care draft action plan. Some
positive changes can be evidenced, such as better processes that are ensuring
the right children are progressed through the MASH to childrens social care.
Senior managers acknowledge that a sharper and better coordinated approach
is needed, and as a result, a transformation manager has been appointed.
Although a positive step, the impact of this appointment is not yet evidenced.
an appropriate range of activity, including case auditing, complaints and the
scrutiny provided by IROs. The accountability of managers at all levels is
explicit. The policy and accompanying framework describe the cycle of case
auditing, and the reporting and improvement processes for this activity are
well embedded. However, in other respects, the application of the policy and
framework is less effective. The role of the IROs and child protection
conference chairs is underdeveloped, limiting the impact of their scrutiny on
practice. Learning from complaints on a case-by-case basis works well, but it
is not sufficiently embedded in the quality assurance cycle. Overall, managers
do not sufficiently track specific actions resulting from quality assurance
activity to ensure changes in practice are sustained. Senior managers
acknowledge that although they took appropriate steps to strengthen practice
within the MASH following a review in March 2016, this subsequently slipped
due to a lack of rigour in overseeing, for example, how quickly children were
seen following referral. This led to some children not being seen quickly
enough, although immediate plans to safeguard them were in place.
(Recommendation)
culture of learning from case auditing. This has been largely successful. All
members of the senior management team, including the chief executive, chief
operating officer, DCS, the principal social worker and heads of service were
involved in the most recent practice week in September 2016. They viewed
case records, spoke with practitioners, asked family members about their
experiences and observed key meetings. This effectively brought senior
managers closer to the experiences of children, young people and families.
One hundred children were considered, with 50 case files audited. Findings
have enabled managers to draw comparisons with the previous practice week,
with important areas for development identified, such as the need to improve
the management oversight of early help casework. Follow-up of findings from
the first practice week was robust, for example every case when visiting was
not sufficiently regular or children were not seen alone was re-audited, with
learning appropriately disseminated.
has been instability in the childrens social care workforce, with high rates of
agency staff at social worker and first-line manager levels. In 201516, the
proportion of agency staff stubbornly remained at around 50%, and this led to
one third of children experiencing three or more changes of social worker in a


year. For some time, rates of pay in Havering have been lower than in
neighbouring authorities, but this has now been rectified through a market
supplement.
staff has markedly improved, with the implementation of a multi-layered
strategy to attract and retain social workers and managers. The Face-to-Face
vision, launched in May 2016, is central to this strategy. Its purpose is to
enable practitioners to spend more and increasingly effective time with
children and families, and to establish Havering as a unique social work
employer. The council has invested significant additional funds, with 200 staff
already briefed in systemic practice, and all permanent staff programmed to
attend accredited training in the coming year. In a small number of complex
cases, inspectors saw the positive impact of this approach. Social workers
consistently told inspectors that they feel positive about the vision. Some
recently appointed permanent staff told inspectors that this is why they chose
to work for Havering.
enabling them to spend the time with families that they need. Social workers
say that they are well supported; they have good access to training and
benefit from regular supervision. They value the provision of good quality
mobile equipment. The range of measures is steadily taking effect, with the
proportion of permanent childrens social care staff rising to 75% at the time
of the inspection. This is an increase of 25 percentage points over a six-month
period, and is a notable achievement.
and support of social workers in their first, or assessed and supported, year of
employment (ASYEs). In 201415, just 11 of 25 ASYE social workers remained
in Havering, primarily because first-line managers were too busy to support
them properly. The current cohort of 22 ASYEs, three Step up to social work
students and eight Frontline practitioners are supported well by additional
practice supervisors and consultant social workers. Supernumerary social
workers enable these staff to hold low caseloads. ASYE social workers and
students told inspectors that they are receiving the right help to develop and
consolidate their practice skills.
including the briefings, conferences and courses provided by the LSCB. The
career progression framework is a comprehensive professional development
offer for social workers and managers at all levels. However, managers do not
consistently analyse the learning needs of their services in a systematic way,
and appraisals are weak. Leaders have not ensured that staff in the leaving
care service are supported to become sufficiently skilled or confident to fulfil
their statutory responsibilities, particularly in relation to pathway planning.
and were of an acceptable standard. Some good examples were seen of
detailed case supervision, using a Signs of Safety approach to identify risks,


needs and strengths, leading to meaningful plans for children. However,
inspectors also brought to the attention of the DCS a small number of cases
where managers had not effectively driven plans or fully recognised risks. This
left children at risk of harm. Formal supervision records do not evidence that
staff are sufficiently held to account for the quality of their practice.
(Recommendation)
inspection but it is still not fully fit for purpose because it does not properly
support social workers to maintain and share a meaningful record of their
work. It is a particular challenge for the adoption service, where adopters
electronic files are disorganised and difficult to read, and in the leaving care
service where the system does not support effective pathway planning, a key
statutory duty of the service. Managers acknowledge that a wholesale review
is needed, and this is underway, but a solution is likely to take some time to
achieve. It is positive that the lead member for childrens services is
championing this issue, but progress is too slow. (Recommendation)
performance information. In particular, it does not enable first-line managers
to oversee closely the work of their teams. The performance team produces
and circulates weekly reports, and this includes most of the key information
that managers need, but the layout is not helpful, and not all managers use it
well. A notable gap is the timescale for children being seen following referral;
senior managers swiftly addressed this gap when it was highlighted by
inspectors during the inspection. Key forums such as childrens scrutiny,
monthly lead member briefings, the improvement board and the corporate
parenting board receive appropriate management information, and overall
they use this data well to scrutinise performance. However, the frequency of
visits to children looked after and those subject to child protection plans is not
routinely included. Some data lacks depth because it is primarily the reporting
of headline numbers with little analysis, for example regarding adoption
performance. Senior and performance managers have ensured that data is
consistently accurate, and when commentary is provided, this is helpful. The
next step is to make performance information more meaningful to enhance
the way it is used to understand and improve the experiences of children. For
example, further improvements are planned to improve analysis and ensure a
focus on outcomes, such as through the implementation of the Outcomes
Star model to support and manage change. (Recommendation)
and informal links between the chief executive, the DCS, the chair of the
LSCB, the leader of the council and the lead member for childrens services.
The chief executive and the lead member take an active interest in progress,
and are aware of individual cases on a need to know basis. The lead
member, appointed in May 2016, is already championing some key issues,
such as the need to provide care leavers with apprenticeships within the
council. Minutes of the monthly formal meetings between the chief executive,
the DCS and the chair of the LSCB evidence appropriate and effective


direction, careful consideration of plans for improvement and mutual support
and challenge. The chief executive demonstrates a thorough knowledge of the
challenges facing childrens social care and has forged helpful links with other
boroughs through the wider London chief executive group.
well developed, senior managers have taken steps to hear what children
looked after have to say about their lives through the MOMO app. Complaints
from MOMO now go directly to the complaints officer, which is positive.
on the corporate parenting board, and the forum has not prioritised the
experiences of care leavers over time. The board does consider the views of
young people by carefully analysing feedback, and it oversees key
performance issues such as placement stability. However, its impact is
impaired because children and young people do not sufficiently influence its
work plan, and because the membership is not wide enough. The board has
not prioritised the celebration of children looked after and care leavers
achievements, and this is an important weakness. (Recommendation)
care population, with appropriate and analysis of trends, challenges and gaps.
It is less clear about how achievements will be measured. Progress against
some targets, such as improving the range of accommodation options for care
leavers, has been slow. Over the last six months, senior managers have taken
decisive steps to address gaps, for instance by strengthening the edge of care
service and increasing activity to recruit more in-house foster carers. However,
targets for 201617 are unlikely to be achieved, and the number of these
carers fell from 88 at 31 March 2016 to 75 at 31 August 2016. The use of
supported accommodation for young people who are not ready to live in this
type of accommodation, and the very small number of children who have
been placed in unregulated provision, are a legacy of this. Overall, the
approach to sufficiency over time has not been robust enough, and recent
measures have yet to have a measurable impact.
Commissioning Unit and a childrens commissioner post to oversee and
coordinate commissioning activity on behalf of the clinical commissioning
group, public health and childrens social care. Although now in place, it is too
soon to judge the impact of these ventures, particularly in relation to mapping
commissioned services against need. Current commissioning arrangements
effectively ensure that the quality of provision is overseen and tested. Senior
and commissioning managers have made appropriate decisions to decommission, re-commission or bring services back in-house where quality has
been compromised or where providers have not met demand.
children at risk of sexual exploitation is well established, although the recently
updated strategy has not yet been published. Partners have taken careful
account of the child sexual exploitation peer review, which was published in


April 2016. The review affirmed local arrangements overall, mirroring the
positive findings of this inspection in relation to disruption activity, multiagency practice and the development of the Havering problem profile. The
review highlighted the need to strengthen the strategic and operational
coordination of the local response to child sexual exploitation. As a result,
partners have invested in a strategic lead with operational oversight for child
sexual exploitation and missing. Although the post holder has only been in
place since 1 August 2016, she has already further strengthened the
operational response, ensuring that plans for children are followed through,
that intelligence is used well and that professionals have access to the right
support and advice to identify and assess risk.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
The board meets all of its statutory functions as defined in Working Together
second lay member. The board demonstrates open and honest challenge between
board members. However, the board is insufficiently informed about the quality of
frontline practice. There is limited data and analysis provided by agencies in the
Havering Safeguarding Children Board (HSCB) annual report 201516. This inhibits
the boards monitoring function to fully understand the overall effectiveness of
safeguarding services.
The board has been effective in raising some practice standards by providing
challenge to multi-agency partners, but this has been hampered by inconsistent
data. However, the board has worked effectively to influence increased staff
resources to improve timeliness of the health assessments of children looked after.
The HSCB provides effective leadership in tackling child sexual exploitation at both
strategic and operational levels. This ensures that work focuses effectively on the
most vulnerable children. Oversight of arrangements to tackle child sexual
exploitation and children and young people who go missing is robust.
The board and its partners receive good quality information on how emerging
trends are linked to related issues such as gang violence, and where groups are
moving across police force boundaries to extend their drug dealing networks
(known as the County lines model). This has enabled a high level of disruption
activities, effectively targeted and coordinated between agencies.
The annual safeguarding report provides clarity and depth on a wide range of
issues. For example, there is a helpful commentary on the positive impact of early
help initiatives. Early help activity is tracked and monitored by the board, which
has supported the development of a wide range of services delivered by partner
agencies. This has resulted in families receiving better quality services.
The chair routinely meets with a wide range of partner agencies and is proactive in
raising issues appropriately. All agencies report their operational risk issues
transparently, via the risk register. This results in effective support from other
agencies, as well as challenge, to resolve wide ranging safeguarding issues. An
example of this is the effective resolution of the delays in child sexual exploitation
contacts being dealt with appropriately. Thresholds into early help and statutory
services are inconsistently understood by partners and this is reflected in the
quality of referrals to the MASH.
Monitoring of private fostering arrangements is not sufficiently strong.


Recommendations
performance information to enable effective monitoring and evaluation of key
safeguarding services, including those for disabled children.
contribution to the safeguarding boards annual report to enable effective
action planning.
partner agencies, and identify where there are areas for improvement.
children who are privately fostered are identified and supported effectively.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
regularly with the chief executive and lead member, as well as senior
managers from partner agencies. This ensures that key priorities for children
are shared at the most senior level. The chair of the board attends the Health
and Well-being Board, and presents the HSCBs annual report. The chair
provides appropriate challenge, ensuring that childrens issues are highlighted.
The Health and Well-being Board has reviewed a limited number of issues in
detail, such as services for disabled children and the provision of the health
assessments for children looked after. This led, for example, to a marked
improvement in the timeliness of these health assessments.
appointed as the independent chair of the Havering adults safeguarding
board. This has resulted in some effective joint working, such as auditing and
local service planning and the creation of 86 champions against domestic
violence. The board is financially sound and members make appropriate
contributions on time.
sufficiently senior officers from a wide variety of relevant agencies. Board
members are committed to improving the life chances of children. The one lay
member is involved at board level and contributes effectively. The relationship
between the board and the lead member has been strong for a number of
years.
high quality safeguarding services. The board is effective in raising practice
standards by holding multi-agency partners to account on some issues, but
this is limited due to inconsistent data. Partners are also able to share relevant


concerns to aid understanding, for example the need to increase the staffing
levels of police officers in the MASH, and to ensure enough health
professionals and permanently recruited social workers are in place to
undertake core safeguarding duties. The board has worked effectively to
influence the increase in the staffing resources of health providers in order to
successfully improve the timeliness of the health assessments of children
looked after.
agencies. The board has recognised shortcomings regarding the level of
practice focus and critical enquiry. As a result, the tasks of the groups are
currently being reviewed, to increase their effectiveness. The minutes of the
working groups do not provide a concise record of activity; this has been
recognised by the chair, and action is being taken to improve the quality of
the records.
provide oversight to senior leaders regarding the 13 areas that have been
identified as presenting the highest risks. While the risk register is reviewed
routinely at board level, it has not prevented some issues from being
overlooked. For example, the quality of reports from some agencies to child
protection conferences is unsatisfactory and lacks analysis of risk.
statutory services is inconsistent and this is reflected in the quality of referrals
into the MASH. The board has recognised the need to refresh training on the
application of thresholds with partners and this work is about to commence.
(Recommendation)
at a senior level. However, it has not been an effective tool as the data
provision has been inconsistent, and some areas lack analysis and
commentary. The data does not enable a full or accurate picture of the
differences that agencies are making for children, or help to identify gaps in
safeguarding services, for example services to care leavers, to children who
are being privately fostered, or disabled children. During the inspection, it
became clear that the police from the child abuse investigation team were not
consistently attending strategy meetings. The board was not aware of this, as
this information is not included in the data that the board receives.
Weaknesses in data provision therefore reduce the boards influence on the
planning and commissioning of services as it cannot systematically monitor
and evaluate quality. (Recommendation)
safeguarding practice. The chair and senior managers on the board have
recently met with a wide range of young people, including young people
looked after and young carers, to talk about what made them feel unsafe in
the borough, and how services could be improved. The information gained
from young people has subsequently been used to inform a safeguarding
event in October 2016.


some areas of progress as well as board challenges. It includes commentary
on early help services, allegations against professionals, private fostering, the
independent reviewing officer service, audit and performance, the MASH and
an update on the previous years challenges. The analysis by each partner
agency of their contribution to safeguarding activity is inconsistent and limits
the usefulness of this report in understanding what works well and what
needs to change. While the priorities and the vision statement are reflected in
the accompanying business plan, the action plan is not sufficiently robust, and
information relating to children with disabilities is absent. (Recommendations)
improvements and developments of this service within the HSCBs annual
report. Challenge has been effective, and referrals have increased.
initiation of serious case reviews (SCRs) and case management reviews. The
series of training sessions provided following a recent SCR was of high quality
and welcomed by multi-agency partners, but turnover of social workers has
meant that some more recently appointed staff are unfamiliar with the lessons
learned. Learning to support improvements to practice is therefore limited.
Two SCRs have been progressed in the last year and one has been published.
The board proactively seeks to learn lessons before completion of reviews and
put changes in place quickly before a serious case review is published, to
ensure that children are safeguarded. Following the findings of a recent SCR,
which has yet to be published, action was taken to improve arrangements for
children who attend accident and emergency units, to ensure that relevant
cases are always fully reviewed by senior paediatricians before discharge.
responses to SCRs that cross all agencies, such as the implementation of an
effective escalation policy. A recent neglect strategy was launched in October
report is concise and contains all relevant information. None of the small
number of child deaths during the last year were linked to safeguarding
issues, and plans are in place to improve this report by linking findings to a
wider population in order to improve the quality of information provided. The
CDOP report appropriately challenged the local authoritys decommissioning,
because of budget constraints, of a smoking cessation service, due to the
known risks to pregnant mothers and the risk of miscarriage.
are completed and evidence of action plans is submitted for scrutiny.
However, this relies too heavily on self-reporting. There is no scrutiny or
analysis of the findings of section 11 audits by cross-referencing them with
other multi-agency audit findings. The board receives assurance about
safeguarding practice in schools via section 175 reports.


MASH and return home interviews. Both audits appropriately identified the
need for improvements. However, modifications made within the MASH were
not tracked to ensure sustained improvement. As a result, quality assurance
processes in the MASH team are still underdeveloped and do not ensure that
key information, or the rationale for decisions taken, are clear to social
workers in progressing their work. The boards audit of the quality of return
home interviews resulted in the appropriate de-commissioning of a previous
service. The board has not established a system for the oversight of relevant
single audit findings. This means that the board does not have a coherent
view of quality of work by respective partners or the level of demand for
services.
quality localised information by extensive use of the problem profile on child
sexual exploitation in Havering. This means that all partner agencies are
supported to be an effective conduit for sharing best practice within their
workforce. This problem profile has helped each agency review and improve
training around child sexual exploitation. The board has improved multiagency practice in understanding, awareness and effectiveness by focusing on
the most vulnerable children. For example, within the local hospital, training
on child sexual exploitation is now targeting all clinical areas where children
may attend. Additionally, some schools now offer sessions to Year 6 children
around the dangers of grooming on the internet and via smart phones. The
board and its partners also receive high quality information on how these
emerging trends in Havering are linked to related issues such as gang
violence. This is enabling effective targeting of disruption activities.
provided by the board. During the period April 2015 to March 2016, 55
courses took place, with over 700 participants from various agencies. Training
is evaluated, but the board recognises that this process requires further
development to begin to measure the impact of learning. Training is
responsive to changing needs as it combines learning from Haverings own
SCRs, as well as nationally published SCRs and research findings, into current
training programmes. The board has an accessible and informative website,
which also has various sites for different aged children with relevant good
quality links on a range of safeguarding issues. The website also holds the
pan-London LSCB policies and procedures, which the board has adopted.
progress on early help assessments and the impact is reported within the
boards annual report.
arrangements and awareness raising campaigns have had limited effect.
Private fostering assessments are not timely, resulting in privately fostered
children not being initially seen within statutory timescales.
(Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Louise Warren
Deputy lead inspector: Stephanie Murray
Team inspectors: Andy Whippey, Emmy Tomsett, Marcie Taylor, Joy Howick, Derrick
Baughan, Cathy Blair (associate inspector)
Shadow inspectors: Nicola Bennett, Sandra Jacobs-Walls (regulatory inspector)
Senior data analyst: Patrick Thomson
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


