London Borough of Hillingdon
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 25 November 2013  18 December 2013
The overall judgement is requires improvement.
There are no widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being
harmed or at risk of harm. The welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and
promoted. However, the authority is not yet delivering good protection and help
and/or care for children, young people and families.

Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Good


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
requires improvement.
The LSCB is not yet demonstrating the characteristics of good.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of Local
Authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents

Section 1: the Local Authority


Summary of key findings


What does the Local Authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this Local Authority area


Inspection judgements about the Local Authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the Local Authority
Summary of key findings
This Local Authority requires improvement and is not yet good because
 The right decisions about the type of help children and young people need are
not always made by some social work managers. This means that a small number
of children are being offered services as children in need of help, instead of as
children at risk of harm. As a result, these children might not get the immediate
help they need at the right time. Social workers and managers sometimes
terminate the help they are offering to families too soon, which can result in a
rapid referral for help again, for the same problems.
 When social workers undertake assessments for children who need help,
important information from the past is not always included in assessments. This
means that the help provided might not be at the right level.
 Officers who chair case conferences and review the plans for children, have too
many different tasks to do, and are therefore, in some cases, not making sure
that child protection planning is always good enough. When children need a plan
to keep them safe, core groups of people who work with children often work well
together, but this is not always evident in their written plans.
 Officers who review plans for looked after children have too many children to
consider. They are therefore not making sure the written care plans they see are
strong enough. This means that tasks are not done quickly enough.
 Social workers can often talk about plans for looked after childrens care very
well. However, written plans that explain what needs to get better, do not always
reach the same standard.
 Sometimes, there are multiple changes of social workers. This particularly affects
looked after children who need a stable figure in their lives to plan for their care.
Because of this, some looked after children are not being visited often enough or
seen on their own enough during visits. In addition, their views are not always
recorded as well as they should be.
 Some looked after children do not do as well as they should at school, and the
systems for monitoring this need to be improved.
 Young people who are ready to leave care do not have good enough written
pathway plans. These plans should provide details about what sort of support
they are going to get, and how and when this will happen. Too many young
people who leave care do not go on to further education and are currently
unemployed.
 Senior leaders do not yet have an effective plan in place to help them make sure
services are constantly getting better for looked after children.
 The information that tells senior leaders, social workers and their managers what
they are doing well and what they need to do better, is not clear enough. It does


not make sure they are informed well enough to consistently improve the services
that keep children safe and well cared for.
The Local Authority has the following strengths
 When people who work with children inform social care services that they think
children are being harmed, social workers and their partners, including the police,
act quickly to investigate and make sure children are safe.
 The introduction of the Childrens Pathway programme, to assist the childs
journey through social care services, is driven by the Director of Children and
Young Peoples Services (DCS) and has led to some services improving. This can
be seen, for example, through the early help offer for children and families. A
new early help structure and an early help assessment have been brought in to
ensure that families get the support they need, such as parenting classes. As a
result, the people who provide early help services now know exactly when they
should tell social workers that families need specialist assistance.
 Overall, services to children are improving because the Childrens Pathway
programme is well understood by councillors, the people who run services for
children in the council and their partners. These groups communicate with one
another regularly to make sure they know what each other are doing.
 The plan for the council and its partners, to improve the way services are
delivered, is presented in an innovative way, bringing together a number of
action plans onto a single format and presenting it visually at meetings with
people who run services. This shows them what is getting better for children and
what still needs to be done.
 Some partnerships which keep children safe are strong. For example, social
workers and the police work together with children who are at risk of sexual
exploitation and with families who are experiencing domestic violence. Work with
partners to help unaccompanied asylum seeking children coming into the country
is a particular strength in Hillingdon.
 The majority of children in care live in places that support them well, and the
council works hard to make sure that those places can be permanent.
 Therapeutic support is offered to all children in care, including those who live
outside the borough. The council is highly committed to helping looked after
young people to achieve stability where they live.
 Care leavers have good relationships with their social workers and personal
advisers who know them well, and help them get ready to leave care.
 The Local Authority is good at placing looked after children for adoption when
this is what they need, and then supporting the adoptive family before and after
the court order is made.


What does the Local Authority need to improve?
Areas for improvement
 When families need plans to help their parenting improve, these plans need to be
robustly audited and quality assured so that it is clear what families have to do to
improve.
 When children and families need an assessment, the assessment needs to be
very clear in identifying childrens needs. When making decisions about what level
of help is required historical information about the family should be taken into
account.
 Managers of social work teams need to apply a consistent understanding of
thresholds for services, so that children and families get the right help at the right
time and that their cases are not closed too early before circumstances have
improved.
 When children and young people need written plans in place to help improve
their lives, the plans must be of a good quality so that they effectively drive the
provision of high quality services to children.
 The independent reviewing service needs to be reviewed to ensure that it can
meet its requirements to rigorously scrutinise and challenge the quality of child
protection and care plans.
 Children and young people who need social work visits should always receive
their statutory entitlement to these visits and they should be seen alone so that
their views are always recorded, enabling them to influence plans for their
protection and care.
 Looked after childrens educational outcomes need to improve, and the virtual
school needs to systematically track progress and take action that closes the gap
in attainment as rapidly as possible.
 Care leavers who wish to seek education, employment and training should be
better supported to access these services, so that young people can choose the
best option for them. This is particularly necessary for employment, through the
provision of schemes such as work placements or vocational training.
 Improve the quality of audit and of performance reporting so that it drives an
embedded culture of rigorous performance management which transforms the
standards of social work practice.
 Improve corporate parenting responsibilities across the partnership to ensure
services to looked after children improve and support children to achieve their
aspirations.
 Maintain sustained efforts to recruit experienced staff and ensure that all staff
receive regular supervision in line with the councils supervision policy.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the Local Authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference its making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the Local Authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of Local Authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Ian Young
Team inspectors: Mary Candlin, Brenda McLaughlin, Pietro Battista, Tina Shepherd,
Judith Nelson, Christine Davies.


Information about this Local Authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 66,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in the London Borough of Hillingdon. This is 23.4% of the total
population in the area (source: ONS Mid-Year Estimates 2012).
attending primary, secondary and special schools this breaks down as
follows (source: Jan 2013 School Census):
-

in primary schools 19% of pupils (the national average is 18%)

-

in secondary schools 19% of pupils (the national average is 15%)

-

in special schools 38% of pupils (the national average is 37%).

 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for
approximately 50% of all children living in the area, compared with 22% in
the country as a whole (Census 2011).
 The largest minority ethnic group of children and young people in the
Borough are Asian or Asian British at 26% (Census 2011)
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language is as follows (source: Jan 2013 School Census):
-

in primary schools this is 44% (the national average is 18%)

-

in secondary schools this is 35% (the national average is 14%).

Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 1,954 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a
reduction from 2,622 at 31 March 2012.
 At 31 March 2013, 218 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is a reduction from 346 at 31 March 2012.
 At 31 March 2013, ten children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is numerically unchanged from the ten children from 31
March 2012.


The Local Authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 367 children are being looked after by the LA (a rate of
to the nearest 5 children looked after). This is a reduction from 375 (58 per
 Of the 367 children looked after at 31 March 2013:
-


-


-

(27%) were out of borough

-

borough

-

borough, with 48 of these less than 20 miles from home, with a further
local children (15%) were placed in foster care more than 20 miles
from home

-

A small number of children were placed with parents  due to very low
numbers the data has been suppressed in published returns

-

The remaining 61 children were placed in various types of placement
including adoptive placements and independent living.

 In the 12 month to 31 March 2013:
-

there were 15 adoption orders

-

nine children became the subject of special guardianship orders

-

returned to being looked after

-

independent living.


Other Ofsted inspections
 The Local Authority operates three childrens homes. These were judged to
be good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Hillingdons services for looked after children was
in December 2009. The Local Authority was judged to be good.
 The Local Authoritys fostering and adoption services were both judged good
in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
Other information about this area
 Details of leadership posts:
-

The Director of Children and Young Peoples Services has been in post
since June 2013

-

The Chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post
since September 2009.


Inspection judgements about the Local Authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
require improvement.
 When children, young people and families encounter difficulties in their lives, they
can easily access practical help through a wide range of universally available early
help services. Partners take account of the views of children, young people and
their families and are effective in addressing concerns, which reduces referrals to
social care or specialist support for most children. When families need additional
support, plans are now better co-ordinated between schools, childrens centres,
youth projects and partner agencies, including health. These plans help to target
work and reduce the likelihood of harm. Partners have worked well to re-model
their early intervention strategy and this joint working is having a positive impact
on the lives of families. Practitioners in these settings form strong relationships
with families, to help them build resilience to deal with their problems, so that
they do not get any worse.
 Early help practitioners share concerns well and offer coherent integrated help to
families when concerns are first identified. For example, in the children's centres
visited by inspectors, there is good knowledge of universal and targeted services
available for families with young children, and plans for help give families good
access to the wide range of services available. Inspectors found that the coordination of Team around the Family (TAF) arrangements and the use of local
early help assessments effectively secure services for those in immediate need.
However, the lack of an effective quality assurance and audit system for early
help assessments means that the outcomes identified for children are not always
clearly defined in TAF plans. As a result, it is difficult to measure what has
changed for some children. Moreover, this makes it difficult for professionals to
recognise and know what works so that they can repeat the success for other
families.
 When a familys problems escalate, the councils Intensive Team within the
Family Key Working Service provide a good level of support to prevent problems
getting worse. Key workers from the team work well to improve childrens
wellbeing and diminish risks within families. Case examples show a real reduction
of risk of harm to children. The support offered strengthens parenting skills, such
as managing childrens behaviour or establishing daily routines. This improves
childrens emotional wellbeing and reduces the need for families to be referred
for further specialist services.
 All partner agencies understand the local authoritys threshold for services and
make appropriate referrals if harm to children and young people is suspected or
likely. Most referrals to childrens social care services are dealt with effectively by
the recently reconfigured Triage and Multi Agency Safeguarding Hub team, in
partnership with the police. Children requiring protection are identified by the
Triage team and passed promptly to the assessment team, where immediate or
significant risks are recognised, and swift action is taken to prevent further harm.


 Child protection enquiries are undertaken in a timely manner. They are led by
qualified and suitably experienced social workers in conjunction, where
appropriate, with the police, and supported by partner agencies so that most
children are kept safe. However, there are inconsistencies in the application of
thresholds by managers in the long term social work teams. In a small number of
cases seen, the threshold for child protection was met, but children were being
offered a service as children in need, which in some cases led to a delay in timely
protective action.
 Assessments of childrens needs by social workers are generally prompt and most
assessments result in the delivery of appropriate services. Assessments of
children and young peoples cultural and ethnic needs have improved following
changes to social work teams in line with the Childrens Pathway programme. The
assessments reviewed by inspectors included appropriately identified risks and
the actions required to reduce those risks. Children are usually seen and seen
alone. In most cases seen by inspectors, their views are fully considered and they
influence the outcomes of assessments. However, this is not yet consistent and
the voice of children and young people is not heard or recorded sufficiently in
some cases.
 Assessments are not all of a good quality. Some assessments are not informed by
historical information. The inconsistent quality of chronologies and recording
means that key information is not always available to inform analysis, so that the
right services can be promptly provided. This leads to recommendations in some
plans that are overly optimistic about what can be achieved by some families.
Written plans do not always identify clear, specific changes required within
timescales. In some cases this leads to drift and premature closure of others as it
is not initially clear what needs to change. Inspectors found that in some
instances, this resulted either in re-referrals, or children becoming subject of a
child protection plan for a second or subsequent time for the same problems. In a
small number of cases tracked or sampled by inspectors, children and young
peoples plans had not been adapted in response to changes of circumstance or
increased levels of risk. In these cases, management oversight was not robust
and individual supervision sessions were not held as often as they should have
been, so that social workers could be robustly challenged to improve their
practice.
 For children with child protection plans, information sharing between agencies
and professionals is timely and this helps to keep children safe by focussing
clearly on the risks to their safety and what needs to be done to protect them.
The Local Authority is in the process of implementing the signs of safety model,
which is beginning to improve the quality of child protection plans, but still needs
to be robustly embedded. Inspectors have seen evidence at core groups, of
positive, active multi-agency intervention and support, which is reducing the risk
of harm to children and improving outcomes. However, the staff who chair child
protection meetings have a very wide remit and are not always effective in
consistently identifying and challenging poor practice, specifically in terms of the
quality of written assessments and reports presented at child protection


conferences. Quality assurance of case conference chairs work by their managers
is not of a good standard.
 When privately fostered children and young people are identified by the Local
Authority, assessments are good and focussed on ensuring their safety. The Local
Authority recognises that the number of children privately fostered is low and
have acknowledged the need, identified by the Local Safeguarding Children
Board, to raise awareness of these children across partner agencies, so that they
are identified early and provided with a service to meet their needs.
 For children who go missing from home or care, the Child Sexual Exploitation
(CSE) and Missing Children multi-agency operational meeting convenes regularly,
is chaired by a senior social care manager, and focusses appropriately on the
needs of individual young people. Inspectors reviewed a number of cases
considered by the operations meeting and identified that for those young people,
risks are being effectively managed. However, actions are not routinely recorded
on their personal files to support individual plans for their protection.
 Monitoring by the Local Authority demonstrates that the numbers of children
missing education is on an upward trajectory. The turnover is high because a
large proportion of children missing education are of Gypsy, Roma and Traveller
heritage. In the current academic year, 237 children were identified as missing
from education and all were traced.
 In addition to the operations meeting, the Local Authority and its partners have
other effective systems in place for identifying and routinely sharing information
to protect children at risk of sexual exploitation. For example, Operation OWL a
partnership between police and social workers, has been successful in sharing
intelligence, identifying individuals who pose a risk to young people and taking
joint action to prevent concerns from escalating.
 Young people who need protection because they enter the country
unaccompanied by adults, are kept safe, particularly where there is a risk of them
going missing or being sexually exploited or trafficked. The Local Authority has a
dedicated stand-by team in Heathrow Airport. Together with their partners in the
UK Border Agency, the Local Authority is highly responsive to the needs of
unaccompanied minors and trafficked children, resulting in timely risk assessment
and positive outcomes for these vulnerable young people. Targeted support is
promptly put in place, and comparatively high numbers of these young people
enter care from age 14 onwards to keep them safe. Education services are
promptly provided with effective provision that assists young peoples integration.
An active approach is taken to cultural issues and these young people make good
progress in English, academic and practical subjects, and generally stay on in
education.
 Children with disabilities and their families are offered help and protection when
needs and concerns are first identified. A range of cases reviewed by inspectors,
including children subject to child protection plans, demonstrated that their
circumstances improved as a result of timely interventions. Young people with a
disability, and their families, are involved in planning services at a local level. For


example, following consultation with a young persons champion and with
parents, schools now provide respite services during holiday periods.
 When children and families need help outside of normal working hours, the Local
Authority has a good service which responds to the needs of families. Robust
communication with day services is effective in ensuring continuity in meeting
childrens needs at any time.
 Children and young people who are the subject of statutory plans have good
access to and use the services of an independently commissioned advocacy
service. The advocacy service ensures children and young peoples voices are
heard during meetings and sometimes in their written plans. When tracking and
sampling cases, inspectors saw evidence of support being provided to young
people to assist them in making their views known to professionals, or when
making a complaint.
 The Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO) arrangements for managing and
responding to allegations of abuse or mistreatment of children by professionals
and carers is effective. Allegations are taken seriously and responded to
appropriately.
 For children living in households where domestic violence is in evidence, MultiAgency Risk Assessment Conferences (MARAC) are well established, with good
representation and input from partner agencies. Inspectors saw evidence of
appropriate communication between the police and children's social care services
through the MARAC, and this is helping to protect children.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence require improvement.
 When problems escalate in families to the point that children and young people
need to be looked after, professionals act swiftly. They hold family group
conferences that are effective in supporting children and their families. When it is
the right decision, these conferences succeed in preventing some children coming
into care. When children and young people need to be in care, the Public Law
Outline process is used effectively and the right decisions are taken to ensure
that being looked after is in their best interests. When decisions are made that
children and young people can return home, in most cases, assessments and
plans are put in place to ensure this is achieved safely and sustainably.
 Good communication between the Independent Reviewing Officers and the
Children and Family Court Advisory Service (CAFCAS) means that childrens care
planning is shared and agreed in most cases. For those young people who come
into the country seeking asylum with no one holding parental responsibility for
them, legal advice is consistently sought which means they are provided with
protection straight away. Legal services within family proceedings are sufficiently
resourced and include a dedicated representative who specialises in asylum and
immigration.
 When the Local Authority needs to secure a childs care, they make good
decisions to apply to the court for legal orders. The average length of care
proceedings is improving and social workers are committed to the need to
continue to improve timescales, so that children and young people can achieve
the right permanence option at the earliest opportunity.
 Some looked after children and young people have had the same social worker
over time and have built a positive relationship with them. Life story work is
undertaken to help them to understand why they are in care and to explain the
plans for their future. In some instances, visits from social workers to children
and young people in care are not always timely and some looked after children
are not always seen alone by their social workers. This means that some social
workers are not fully aware of, or fully recording, the views of looked after
children and allowing them to influence their plans. All looked after children have
a plan that ensures they are cared for appropriately and address health and
educational needs. However, the quality of written plans is not consistent
although most are satisfactory. The good plans seen recognised the importance
of contact between children and their families where this is in a childs best
interests, and contact between brothers and sisters is given a high priority. The
majority of social workers know children well and can articulate the plans for the
child. However, this is not always reflected in written, individualised care plans.
Some plans lack timescales for completing actions, detail about how objectives
will be achieved and what progress has been made against the plan.
 Most children and young people looked after are placed within or very close to
the borough, they receive visits and support from allocated social workers and
are well supported in their health and educational needs. Cases tracked during
the inspection included some young people who lived the furthest away from the


Local Authority area. They were visited by regulatory inspectors to gather their
views. These visits demonstrated that good placement plans are in place. For
example, a young man was in a specialist placement due to his highly complex
needs and was being offered intensive support. Effective planning of a
commissioned support package included a comprehensive assessment of his
emotional wellbeing and the recruitment of a dedicated staff team to provide him
with individualised care. This resulted in a marked improvement in his behaviour
and functioning and significantly improved his life chances.
 Children and young people are encouraged and supported by the Local Authority
to have an active and enthusiastic Children in Care Council. This is facilitated by a
highly effective childrens rights officer who offers a platform for children and
young people to make complaints and raise issues that are important to them.
Some children and young people are well involved in improvement projects, and
inspectors saw evidence of the influence of these groups in service delivery and
design. The majority of young people spoken to are aware of the advocacy
service and how to access this to get help and support in ensuring their voice is
heard.
 Educational attainment of looked after children and young people is below that of
other looked after children nationally at all key stages. The attainment of those
young people achieving GCSEs at A*- C is below the national average. The virtual
school ensures pastoral support, tuition and practical help are in place to meet
individual need. However, systems to track looked after childrens progress
through personal education plans are currently basic and underdeveloped,
meaning the progress of a number of children from their starting point is slow.
Funding provided for additional tuition and learning support through personal
educational allowances or the Pupil Premium, is not measured for effectiveness.
The Local Authority has good systems to monitor school attendance for looked
after children, including those placed in schools outside the borough, and puts in
place effective pastoral and practical support measures, such as transport. Overall
absence levels, which were above the comparable national and London averages
in 2012 at 6%, have reduced to 4.6% by the end July 2013.
 Reviews of looked after childrens care plans are timely. Immediately prior to
review meetings, most children are seen and spoken to by their Independent
Reviewing Officer and their views are taken into account. Foster carers and
children spoke positively of their Independent Reviewing Officer (IRO) who, in a
number of cases, was the consistent professional in their lives. However, IRO
caseloads are high and this impacts on their ability to meet with children early
enough to gain their views on setting up the review, or the effectiveness of their
care plan. In most cases, the review of care plans was satisfactory, although a
few lacked robust challenge in addressing the progress of the plan. This was
particularly the case in securing permanence, which leads to drift and delay in
progressing plans for a number of children. Minutes of review meetings are given
to children and young people but they are not provided in other languages to
children whose first language is not English. This limits some young peoples
understanding of what is being written about and planned for them.


 The majority of children and young people benefit from a stable placement that
provides for continuity of care and supports them in achieving their aspirations.
Where there is a risk of placement breakdown, support for children, young people
and their carers is provided via the fostering clinical psychology service, which
helps maintain stability of placements. The fostering service ensures that carers
offer placements that meet childrens needs, with regular training and good
support available to carers.
 There is a strong commitment to achieving permanency through legal routes for
all children who are looked after. This is promoted by senior managers, well
supported by elected members and is an improving picture that is resulting in
greater numbers of children being able to remain in placements permanently.
Long term financial and social work support is provided to encourage the take up
of Special Guardianship by family members and foster carers, including
Independent Fostering Agency carers. This is beginning to show an impact by
increasing the numbers of children for whom this route to permanency is
considered appropriate and in their best interests, and they can be assisted to
remain in placement permanently.
 Ambition in seeking permanence for brothers and sisters means that most are
placed together. Separation is very carefully considered and is based upon
assessment of the childrens individual needs. For young children where the plan
is for adoption, permanence is progressed in parallel in a timely way. In some
cases, where the plan for permanence is long term foster care, there is a delay in
prioritising assessments of the suitability of foster carers, although this has been
recognised and is being addressed by the Local Authority through the Childrens
Pathway programme.
 All permanence options are well considered for children by the Local Authoritys
combined adoption and permanence team. Progress in achieving childrens
permanency plans is tracked and overseen by regular placement planning
meetings (PPMs) and in both statutory reviews and case supervision. However,
when adoption or permanency plans need to change, because for example, a
suitable family cannot be found to take all brothers and sisters together, there is
a lack of clarity about how and by whom that decision should be taken. The Local
Authority is aware of this issue and senior managers have appropriate
expectations of what the process needs to be. Plans are in place to ensure
expectations are consistently understood and followed by all social workers,
managers and reviewing officers. For most children, this has not had a negative
impact on their stability or permanence in placement as existing carers have
come forward to be assessed as permanent carers.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is good.
 When it is not safe or appropriate for children and young people to return to the
care of parents or birth family, the Local Authority has a strong commitment to
ensure that adoption is considered as early as possible. In the year to date, 80%
of children adopted were placed within 12 months of the approval to place for


adoption. There is an effective action plan in place to make further improvements
to this figure. Making this a reality for more children is being put into operation
by the specialised adoption and permanency team and the childrens social work
teams. Although the authority recognises that there is still work to do to improve
the service further. For example, their aim is to ensure that all social workers in
the childrens social work teams routinely consider adoption at the earliest
opportunity for every child, and make a referral to the adoption and permanency
team, so that the search for a suitable family can begin in a timely manner.
 The review of the structure of the adoption and permanency team as part of the
Childrens Pathway programme has led to the creation of two sub teams; one
with a focus on family finding and another with a focus on assessment of
applicants, and this has sharpened the focus on both of these aspects. The
improved and streamlined processes for recruitment, training and assessment of
adopters, matching with children and effective support is having a positive impact
for children. The choice of placements is increasing and the identification of
potential placements happens quickly. As a result, more children are able to live
with their permanent family sooner. The Local Authoritys current data shows a
considerable reduction in the time between a child becoming looked after and
being placed for adoption, from an average of 704 days between 2009 to 2012,
to 581 days in the year to date, which is better than comparators. Whilst the
court process continues to cause delays in achieving permanence, and cases are
not yet being concluded within the recommended 26 weeks, the average time
from receiving the courts authority to place, to a child being placed for adoption
is improving. It was 151 days in 2011/12 an improvement on the previous year
and better than both the national average and statistical neighbours.
 Robust monitoring is in place to ensure delays are minimised. There are 22
children currently with an adoption plan for whom a match has not yet been
identified and this number has reduced from 26 in April 2013. As a result of
streamlining the recruitment process, there is a 40% increase in the number of
adopters approved and more of those adopters are being approved within the
required timescale. In 2012/13, 73% of new adopters were approved within eight
months and the Local Authoritys own information shows that 75% of approvals
are now being completed within six months. Adopters spoken to by inspectors
said that they had received prompt responses throughout the process, and
frequent visiting from experienced social workers meant that their approvals
progressed to consideration by the adoption panel in a timely way. All adopters
approved at the panel are asked to consider fostering to adopt, and two children
have so far been placed under this scheme, which will enable those children to
remain with the same carers if the adoption plan is successful.
 Social workers undertake good quality, timely assessments and say that training
is helping them to continually improve their analytical and assessment skills.
Adopters said that they receive good training, and their assessing social worker
encourages and enables them to think more widely about the range of children
they could care for, for example older children and whether they could take
brothers and sisters. This has both developed adopters and widened the resource
available in house.


 The combined adoption and permanency panel has an independent chair whose
role promotes overview and consistency of approach. The fortnightly frequency of
panels helps to minimise the potential for delay in achieving a childs adoption
plan, by approving new carers and considering matches for children promptly.
Rigorous scrutiny of assessment and potential matches for children is an effective
quality assurance mechanism, providing valuable feedback about quality and
identifying learning and development points for staff, so that practice can
continually improve. As the agency decision maker, the DCS considers the panels
recommendations thoroughly and promptly, ensuring that there is no delay in
making the right decisions about childrens futures.
 Effective parallel adoption planning is increasingly in place which means that the
search for potential adopters can begin while assessments of the birth family are
taking place during legal proceedings. The progress of individual childrens
adoption plans are monitored effectively by regular Permanency Planning
Meetings and at statutory reviews. Good use is made of case histories, so
adopters of older siblings are routinely approached early in the process as a
potential match and to explore whether they would consider a concurrent
placement. A wide range of family finding strategies are used and tailored for
each child. Any links are promptly and diligently pursued and there is effective
liaison with the childs social worker.
 Overall, timescales for achieving adoption for children and young people are good
and improving. However, some children continue to wait too long and timescales
for the formal review of adoption plans are not are not yet fully in place. Children
are helped while waiting, to understand their past, express feelings and be
prepared for the future. They also benefit from careful assessment by social
workers of how best to meet the individual needs of brothers and sisters, and
time is taken to explore fully whether they can be placed together. As a result,
placements are more likely to be suitable, stable and meet their needs. There
have been no adoption disruptions since April 2010.
 A dedicated member of staff ensures a good range of in house support and
effective signposting to a wide range of commissioned post-adoption support
services. Letterbox contact and direct contact arrangements are well organised.
Adopters spoken to by inspectors were very positive about the service that they
and their children had received from the adoption team from the point of
placement, particularly the frequency and reliability of visits. They valued the
continued access to social work advice and support after the order was granted
and talked about the help they and their children receive to prepare for and to
maintain direct contact with birth families, especially with brothers and sisters.
The graded judgement for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
requires improvement.
 Care leavers were highly complimentary about the access they get to a broad
range of services through the Young Peoples team, which has been formed as
part of the Childrens Pathway programme. Social workers and personal advisors
build purposeful relationships and get to know young people well through
frequent direct contact. Case files show that the team draws a wide range of


information from partners and works with each young person to assess their
individual needs.
 Practitioners tailor their work to meet care leavers immediate needs. Those with
learning difficulties are supported well. However, this high quality level of support
is not always consistently reflected in written pathway plans, the plans do not
always identify who is responsible for delivering each task, or by when the task
should be complete. Examples seen lacked detail in one or more areas so that
progress of the plans cannot be measured and do not have contingency plans to
cover potential changes in circumstances. Reviews take place regularly and
incorporate young peoples views, although the small number of young people
who spoke to inspectors do not find the formal reviewing process or
documentation helpful. Systems to support high quality pathway planning are not
yet fully in place.
 Too many care leavers are not in education, training and employment by
comparison with their local peers. This remains a key priority for the Local
Authority. Information, advice and guidance are offered to those who go into
employment, and young people have been successful in the small number of
apprenticeships secured by the council. However, a comparatively high proportion
of those not continuing in training or education are unemployed. Services leading
to suitable work experience or vocational training are not well developed.
However, a number of care leavers are given financial and practical support to
achieve success in higher education which includes help with transport and
accommodation.
 The great majority of care leavers are guided and supported well and are in safe,
suitable housing, although a small number of young people make two or more
moves on leaving care before they find settled housing. Young people have
access to a good range of accommodation, including some options that include
more intensive support. When their status is unclear, young asylum seekers are
helped to secure legal advice services, so the right choices can be offered.
 The health needs of young people leaving care and care leavers are supported
well. Health assessments take place before young people leave care and a clear
action plan was in place in cases reviewed by inspectors. Social workers and
personal advisors ensure that young people are aware of their entitlement to
continuing health support, although the young peoples views of what is
important in their health is not always clearly recorded on pathway plans.
 Most young people who spoke to inspectors know about their rights and how to
access services, although they said they would like more access to information in
varied written and electronic formats. Young people are supported in making
sensible choices about their health, lifestyles, well-being and managing finances,
and this is informed by a well-publicised charter of their rights.
Leadership, management and governance requires improvement
 Strategic managers and the lead elected member demonstrate an appropriate
understanding of strategic and operational priorities. The lines of accountability
between the Chief Executive, Director of Children and Young Peoples Service


(DCS) and the lead member are strong. There are clear reporting arrangements
across the Childrens Pathway transformation programme to monitor and review
key priorities, of which the DCS is the key driver. They are fully aware of
challenges and weaknesses and use external scrutiny well, such as the recent
safeguarding diagnostic undertaken by the Local Government Association, to
drive improvement. This has led to the development of several key areas for
improving safeguarding practice, such as reviewing child protection plans to make
them more outcome focused, and these are promoted by the councils senior
leaders through the monthly Safeguarding Review Board. Clear accountabilities
exist between the Chief Executive and Hillingdon Safeguarding Children Board
chair, who meet regularly to discuss safeguarding issues.
 Established arrangements are in place for the council, together with its partner
agencies including health, to commission services for children and young people.
For example, a needs assessment has been used to reshape and strengthen the
early identification of need and early help pathways, which means that families
can access support prior to assessment for targeted or specialist provision. As
part of a commitment to placing looked after children locally and supporting the
principles of achieving best value, the council are part of the West London
Alliance Childrens Services Efficiencies programme. This programme effectively
underpins the sufficiency strategy, and has recently resulted in an increase in
local foster care provision as part of the Childrens Pathway Programme. Whilst
the Local Authority recognises the need to continue increasing the number of in
house foster care options, placement decisions are based on achieving high
quality outcomes that are needs led, rather than cost based. The Local Authority
also works in partnership with providers to secure a sufficient range of local
housing options for care leavers.
 A key strength of the council is its commitment to the emotional support of young
people by investing in the provision of specialised therapeutic support, which is
offered to all looked after children, including those in out of borough placements.
While the Local Authority is in the process of collating detailed placement and
health performance information across the partnership, this has yet to be
finalised. Consequently, the council does not yet fully capture or communicate
details of looked after children and care leavers health needs sufficiently. This
includes CAMHS provision, which is under a comprehensive review.
 The recent rigorous review of the work of the corporate parenting board,
undertaken by the Local Authority, has led to the strengthening of the boards
structures. However, it is too early in the implementation phase to fully
demonstrate impact. The Local Authority does not currently operate to an
overarching strategic corporate parenting plan, and progress against its current
work plan has not been swift or focussed enough to deliver its objectives.
 Members and officers have a clear commitment to corporate parenting and
actively champion the needs of children and young people. This is evident from
the support provided to the children in care council, where looked after children
and care leavers are very well supported to have a voice and influence changes
to their lives. Inspectors found recent evidence of young peoples views and
experiences influencing changes in the development and provision of services,


such as the increase in the care leavers grant and access to driving lessons to
improve young peoples employability. The councils commitment to celebrating
childrens aspirations and achievements is good, including the well attended,
positive, annual Kids in Care Awards. The Local Authority recognises that issues,
such as closing the education gap between looked after children and their peers,
improving the frequency and quality of social work visits to looked after children,
remain key priorities.
 A wealth of performance information is used across strategic and operational
forums to drive improvement and raise standards. However, inspectors found
performance reports were sometimes overly technical and not as clear as they
could be on what wasnt working well. This gave some middle managers an
overly positive impression in some key areas of activity, negatively impacting on
their ability to drive improvement. The councils electronic recording system could
assist with this issue, however, it is not yet fully utilised to support performance
management. Plans are in place to improve performance management and
quality assurance arrangements through the innovative Performance
Improvement Plan, which consolidates action planning across the partnership and
supports effective joint monitoring and review of progress. The Local Authority
and its partners recognise that this positive development needs to be further
strengthened by a sharper focus on demonstrating outcomes for children from
planned activity.
 The narratives that underpin audits, undertaken by social care managers to
support this inspection, were evaluative, and aligned with inspection findings in
most cases. The Local Authority has recognised that the ratings attributed to
these cases, together with those in a random sample of routine audits, were not
consistently robust and did not routinely provide an accurate picture of social
work practice, or sufficiently inform learning.
 No children were identified as being left at immediate risk of significant harm
during the inspection. However, in some cases the consistency of management
oversight and decision making and the quality of social work practice was not
sufficiently robust. During the inspection a small number of cases were therefore
referred back to the Local Authority, and the DCS took appropriate, swift action in
response to concerns raised.
 The Local Authority has made sustained efforts to prioritise additional resources,
increasing the numbers of social work posts and securing some permanent staff
as a result. Despite this, there remains a lack of stability brought about by the
shortage of permanent and experienced workers across front line services. This
poses a significant constraint to the delivery of the Childrens Pathway
transformation programme. It results in children not being allocated to a
consistent professional who tenaciously drives plans forward. Also, a high number
of posts across front line practice, including senior manager positions are interim,
and this does not support stability or continuity in service provision.
 Workers were positive about their managers, including senior managers. They
value the approach of grouping workers in PODs which provides for reflective
discussion of cases and supports learning. As part of the Childrens Pathway


programme, the Local Authority has invested in a training programme for front
line managers in reflective supervision. However, the frequency of individual
supervision sessions is not sufficiently regular to meet the councils own
supervision policy, and a small number workers reported significant gaps. In
addition, inspectors found the quality and frequency of some supervision records
was inconsistent.
 The Local Authority demonstrates commitment to recruiting, investing in and
training its workforce. Although personal development plans were not routinely
completed, the Principal Social Worker (PSW) facilitates access to an online
discussion forum to promote sharing of good practice. This role is effective and
champions social workers career paths by updating their knowledge and skills
through research and training, which are disseminated well and are easily
accessible. The PSW also produces briefings from lessons learned from serious
case reviews nationally. Newly qualified social workers are supported well and
developing a career pathway for all staff is a key priority. However, some staff
report that capacity issues within their service negatively impacts on their ability
to take up the training opportunities offered.
 Clear processes are in place to support children, young people and their families
to make complaints, and feedback is used to inform learning. The approach
adopted to responding to complaints reflects a learning culture and priority is
given to this important area of work. Response to complaints has not historically
been timely, but recent performance information shows significant improvement.
Children and families making complaints and compliments have access to an
independent advocacy and childrens rights service and evidence of take up of
these services was demonstrated.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
requires improvement.
Areas for improvement
 Ensure that time allocated to LSCB meetings is sufficient for partners to
effectively undertake its work.
 Improve the communication with other strategic bodies such as the Health and
Wellbeing Board, to ensure strategies aiming to improve the lives of children and
young people are effectively co-ordinated.
 Ensure that the LSCB effectively evaluates safeguarding performance through
audit and performance monitoring of multi-agency activity, and makes sure the
evaluation is used to improve services.
 Ensure that the LSCB provides effective challenge to partners and holds partners
to account to improve safeguarding outcomes for children and young people.
 Ensure that children, families and the community are appropriately engaged in
the work of the LSCB strategically and operationally, so that its work reflects their
views.
 Ensure that partners are appropriately engaged in developing and delivering
multi-agency aspects of the signs of safety approach to risk management, so that
there is full multiagency engagement in identifying risks and strengths to keep
children safe.
 Ensure that the impact and effectiveness of multi-agency safeguarding training is
evaluated so that its effectiveness can be assessed and improved.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
 The LSCB complies with its statutory responsibilities. The Annual Report has
recently been produced and it provides a comprehensive review of the work of
the Board, and demonstrates how the Board, through its partner agencies, coordinates work to safeguard children in the area. Clear priorities are set out in an
achievable and measurable action plan. One priority, to engage children, families
and the community, has not been sufficiently progressed at either strategic or
operational levels. Therefore its work does not reflect childrens views. This
commitment has, however, been renewed, together with an undertaking to make
effective use of the lay members appointed earlier this year in this regard.
 The terms of reference for the LSCB are clear but need to be refreshed to
encompass its developing role. Governance arrangements are appropriately
established between the LSCB, the Local Authoritys Chief Executive, senior
managers and the Childrens Trust. However, protocols between the LSCB and
other key partnerships such as the Health and Wellbeing Board and the
Community Safety Partnership have yet to be formalised.


 The role of the LSCB Chair is sufficiently independent. The LSCB Chair also chairs
the Adult Safeguarding Board (ASB), which benefits from communication across
both boards and provides an opportunity for members to meet, as the boards sit
on the same day. The LSCB has recognised the time allocated to both the LSCB
and ASB components is insufficient to enable appropriate governance, and plans
are in place to increase the time allocations for these respective meetings. The
LSCB is at an early stage of developing oversight of, and involvement in, early
intervention. It has influenced the development of the early help assessment and
Team Around the Family plan replacing the Common Assessment Framework.
 Performance management and analysis are not sufficiently well developed within
the Board. The LSCB monitors front-line practice by individual partner agencies
through a range of individual agency audits and performance management
information. Issues arising from these are routinely considered by the LSCB
performance sub group and are reported on to the Board. However, monitoring
and evaluation on a multi-agency basis is underdeveloped at this stage. The LSCB
introduced multi-agency audits very recently and only eight cases have so far
been reviewed with limited impact as yet on the safeguarding system. Prior to the
implementation of the multi-agency audits, the LSCB carried out comprehensive
management reviews on four specific cases in 2012/2013.
 Whilst the LSCB has reviewed some key areas of performance; others have not
yet received sufficient analysis, in particular, the significant drop in children
subject to child protection plans and the significant rise in the proportion of
children subject to repeat plans. This lack of scrutiny has occurred in the context
of the board acknowledging concerns about the smartness and effectiveness of
child protection plans, staff turnover and the quality of assessments and
management oversight.
 The LSCB has also not ensured that the multi-agency implications of the roll out
of the signs of safety approach have been systematically addressed. This is
particularly within child protection conferences, so that the whole partnership is
engaged in this approach to recognising risks and strengths in families in keeping
their children safe.
 The LSCB regularly receives updates from member agencies, which enable
partners to have a clear understanding of issues affecting the delivery of
safeguarding services across the local area. For example, updates detail any
significant organisational and staffing changes, staffing shortages and the need to
improve the quality of some aspects of child protection practice and management
oversight. Whilst this is information sharing, there is little evidence that it results
in effective challenge to partners, or holding partners to account, in a way that
that improves the delivery of services or outcomes for vulnerable children.
 Safeguarding is a priority for all key partners. There is appropriate representation
of partner agencies within the sub/working groups of the LSCB. However, the
LSCB annual report demonstrates that over the last year, representation by some
partners at the LSCB meetings has significantly decreased from the previous year.
However, the LSCB chair has undertaken significant engagement with partner


agencies and through the London Safeguarding Board, to improve partners
participation and attendance.
 The LSCB has established appropriate priorities based on local needs and is
prompt to respond to emerging local and national issues. Safeguarding Audits
under Section 11 of the Children Act 2004, were completed last year by partner
agencies, confirming that all partners are appropriately prioritising safeguarding.
 Effective systems are established to ensure child sexual exploitation, trafficking,
missing children and child deaths, are appropriately overseen by the Board. The
LSCB is aware of the need for all partners to improve private fostering
notifications. However, specific action to raise awareness and notification of
children privately fostered in the local schools has not yet been successful and as
a result, the number of notifications currently remains low.
 Whilst no local Serious Case Reviews (SCRs) have been recently undertaken, the
LSCB has implemented learning from previous SCRs and national findings,
alongside learning from individual agency reviews. Learning is incorporated well
into the extensive LSCB training programme which is well established and is well
attended by partner agencies. LSCB training is responsive to the Boards priorities
and partner agencys needs. For example, it is now providing signs of safety
training for partner agencies. However, the evaluation of the impact of training is
at an early stage of development.


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work based
learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and
other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


