London Borough of Hounslow
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 14 January 2014 to 5 February 2014
The overall judgement is requires improvement.
There are no widespread or serious failures that leave children being harmed or at
risk of harm. The welfare of children looked after is safeguarded and promoted.
However, the authority is not yet delivering good protection and help and care for
children, young people and families.

Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
Requires improvement.
The LSCB is not yet demonstrating the characteristics of good.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents

Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the local safeguarding children board


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority requires improvement and is not yet good because

When older children and young people need to access early help services,
particularly when they have complex needs, these services are not effective and
too many older children come into care because early help services do not
provide the help that they need.


Important information about the child or young persons history is not always
given enough consideration. Some assessments take too long and this means
that plans to provide services also take too long to be put in place. Although
children and young people are safe, they do not always get the support that
they need quickly enough.


When children and young people go missing from home, care or education or
are at risk of sexual exploitation, the local authority and other agencies in
Hounslow work separately to prevent them coming to harm. Multi-agency
arrangements are not yet fully in place to make sure that these vulnerable
children are fully safeguarded.


When agencies are involved in protecting children the written plans they follow
are not focussed enough on key actions. They do not always help children and
families to understand what needs to change to make them safe and are not
always clear and measurable.


When children and families need help out of normal working hours, the out-ofhours service does not have access to all the information that they may need.
This is important as this service needs to make decisions to keep children safe
and consider if they should become looked after.


A very small number of children and young people who are privately fostered
are known to the local authority. The authority cannot be sure that it knows of
all children living in a private fostering arrangement.


In Hounslow, too few children and young people are making use of advocacy
services to help them to have their voices heard. The voices and views of the
wide range of looked after children and care leavers are not gathered well by
the local authority to help them to shape the services provided. Although some
children are able to get their own views heard, such as those who are on the
Children in Care Council, many children do not have this opportunity.


Sometimes children are looked after voluntarily with their parents permission
by the local authority when there are sufficient concerns for their safety to
allow court orders to be obtained. In some of these cases, this causes


difficulties if parents change their minds about consenting to their child being
looked after, which creates uncertainty for the child and their carers.

On some occasions when children and young people come into care there is
unnecessary delay in making plans as soon as possible about their long term
future, to enable them to be in a permanent new home or returned home as
quickly as possible.

local authority is working to improve this, it is not getting better quickly
enough.
people looked after at reviews, but they are not challenging social workers and
managers enough to ensure that things happen in the best way possible for the
child or young person.
achieve and too many young people leaving care do not go into further
education or get jobs.
it takes too long for the local authority to match children to adopters. People
interested in adopting children also experience delay from when they first
express an interest to when they begin to be assessed, although once this
starts it gets done quickly and they feel well supported.
For example, some of the changes in the team that supports young people
preparing to leave care and care leavers are not yet working effectively. Staff in
this team do not always feel well supported.
Panel of safeguarding children and the needs of children looked after is not
sufficiently strong. Links between childrens services, the Childrens Trust and
the Health and Wellbeing Board, which bring together all the key agencies in
the area, are not sufficiently established to make sure that issues affecting
children are prioritised.
is not always fully interpreted or understood. This makes it difficult for them to
know if the plans that they have in place to improve services are really working.
It is also difficult to ensure that services provided can be matched to the
changing needs of children and young people.
young people in care and is struggling to achieve this, although it has a surplus
of foster placements for babies.


The local authority has the following strengths
kept safe through effective child protection arrangements between childrens
services and partner agencies. In the cases seen by inspectors, everyone knew
what to do if a child or young person was at risk and needed protection, and at
what point they needed to take action.
they get from the local authority and partner agencies. They have good
relationships with their social workers and others who support and care for
them. Importantly, these relationships last over the time the help and support
is needed.
of the children and families that they support. As a result, children and families
from Hounslows many different cultures and ethnic backgrounds get the help
that they need in the way that is most appropriate for them.
childrens services and the other agencies that support children. This ensures
that children and their families benefit from services that are joined up and
from staff who share information and work well together.
about adults who pose a risk to children and young people. They make sure
that these adults are monitored and are helped, to prevent children being
harmed by them.
need to be protected they consider all the risk and protective factors well.
Parents who need extra support to care safely for their children are supported
well by the Specialist Intensive Support Programme.
deal with any issues they may have through good therapeutic support delivered
by specialist workers, and through the direct therapeutic work done by their
social workers and carers.
maintain contact informally with families and friends. They are also helped to
do so safely through the authoritys formal contact arrangements. This is done
at times and places which are convenient for the children and their families.
foster carers and their children. This helps children and young people who are
fostered to form strong relationships with their carers.


they are the right people to care for the child. They are well prepared and
supported during and after adoption by the adoption team.
education or university are encouraged throughout their school careers, and are
supported very well so that they achieve their goals.
advisers, who know them well and help them to make plans that suit their
needs.
accommodation that is made available to them, and from helpful preparation
for independence.
and elected members across the local authority, who work hard to make sure
that the services that they receive are of a good quality and are what the
children need.
keeping a stable workforce so that children and young people can benefit from
having the same people helping them.

What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
Areas for improvement
of services and for the management of the individual cases of children who are
missing, vulnerable or at risk of sexual exploitation are implemented, recorded
and publicised.
fostered are robust and are effectively publicised across the partnership and
within the community.
multi-agency plans to be agreed.
what is required from parents and agencies to safeguard children.


out of office hours.
child, and their wishes and feelings, and that these lead to comprehensive and
effective early help plans.
reviewed and that a legal order is sought if more appropriate.
considered at the earliest stages when children become looked after.
appropriately focussed to prevent the need for them to be looked after.
after children and their local peers.
should improve their analysis of the wide variation in achievement for looked
after children and those preparing to leave care; they should strengthen work
to close the gap in attendance and attainment of those young people with their
local peers.
challenge to care planning for looked after children, to ensure that the best
outcomes for children are achieved without delay.
fully analysed, to avoid children experiencing too many changes of where they
live.
children within the authoritys area.
ensure that children are adopted in a timely manner.
through the court system.
training to keep up to date with best practice.
is available for the children who are waiting for adoption.


education or go to university, and provide better support for young people to
access apprenticeships, work placements or vocational training.
to support continuing improvement in practice and ensure that workloads are
sustainable.
through the local authoritys Scrutiny Committee and the Corporate Parenting
Panel to drive improvement.
is underpinned by robust evaluation and analysis and leads to improvement in
service delivery.
whether it is appropriate to combine adult and childrens services into a family
directorate.
effective links between childrens services, the Childrens Trust and the Health
and Wellbeing Board.
after children that meets their needs.
and that workload is appropriately distributed across services.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and an
additional inspector from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Pietro Battista
Team inspectors: Brendan Parkinson, Emmy Tomsett, Ali Mekki, Jenny Booker,
Christine Davies, John Gregg, Pauline Turner and Kathryn Gethin.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 63,200 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Hounslow. This is 25% of the total population in the area. (ONS MidYear estimates 2012.)
 Approximately 22% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The school population in Hounslow is approximately 39,400. The proportion
of children entitled to free school meals (January 2013 School Census)
 in primary schools is 28.9% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 31.8% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 76% of
all children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole
(Census 2011).
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are Asian and Black (Census 2011).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language (January 2013 School Census)
 in primary schools is 62.3% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 57.2% (the national average is 14%).
 The population is more ethnically and linguistically diverse than the London
average, with 46% of people identifying themselves as being of Black, Asian
and Minority Ethnic origin. The population is quite fluid, with a higher
turnover of both international and domestic migrants compared to London
and national averages.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 1,758 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a
reduction from 2,200 at 31 March 2012. The number of children identified
between March 2013 and this inspection was 1,617.
 At 31 March 2013, 200 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is a reduction from 216 at 31 March 2012. At the
time of this inspection 223 were subject of a child protection plan.
 At 31 March 2013, the number of children known to the local authority who
lived in a privately arranged fostering placement was less than five. This


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


was also the case for previous years. At the time of this inspection five
children were known to the authority to be living in private fostering
arrangements.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 305 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 52 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 320 (56
per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2012.
 Of this number 160 (52%) lived outside the local authority area, 200
(66%) lived within 20 miles from their home, and 70 (23%) lived
more than 20 miles from their home.
authority area; 6% lived in a secure unit; 19% lived in hostels.
authority area.
area. 14% were placed with in-house foster carers, 2% were placed
with relatives or friends.
 Four lived with parents, none of whom lived out of the authority area.
 At the time of this inspection, 328 children were looked after by the
local authority.
(7%) subsequently returned to be looked after between 1/04/12 and
moved on to independent living.
 One young person ceased to be looked after and is now living in a
house in multiple occupation.
 In the last 12 months:
 There have been 15 adoptions.
 Five children became subject of special guardianship orders.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two childrens homes. Both were judged to be
good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Hounslows safeguarding arrangements was in
November 2009. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of Hounslows services for looked after children was
in November 2009. The local authority was judged to be good.
Other information about this area
 The acting Director of Childrens Services has been in post since October
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since September 2010.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
require improvement.
to their needs following the recent establishment of Early Help Hounslow, which
brings together many local authority and partner agencies. Universal support
services, such as childrens centres and youth centres, remain locally based and
work alongside a range of targeted support services across the borough.
services, and from strong partnership working. Thresholds for access to
services are understood and are consistently applied by staff from partner
agencies. The local authority and its partners have a strategy for early
intervention, but this is not sufficiently informed by the analysis or
understanding of the impact of early help services. As a result, some are not
sufficiently well targeted to the identified local needs. For example the services
for addressing some complex needs of older children, such as substance and
alcohol misuse, are too limited, leaving them at risk of becoming looked after.
children do not require the involvement of social work services. The Virtual
Initial Planning Meeting is used effectively to co-ordinate timely early help and
intervention, drawing on key universal and targeted services.
(EHAs), which replaced Common Assessment Framework assessments in
Hounslow in November 2013. These provide a gateway for access to early help
services and have resulted in a significant increase in the number of
assessments undertaken and families receiving support. However, the quality of
these assessments is not sufficiently consistent in key aspects. For example,
five of 12 assessments seen by inspectors do not fully consider the childs
history or identify the childs wishes, experiences and feelings. More recent
assessments completed by the Early Help Hounslow service are of a better
quality and focus more clearly on the direct experiences of children. The local
authority is aware of the inconsistency and is working with partners to improve
this work.
not yet consistently outcome-focused. This reduces the ability of staff to track
effectively whether outcomes are improving for the child. The Family Star
Outcome model is being introduced across early help services to measure the
effectiveness of work with families. However, the evaluation of the impact of
early help services was not built in from the beginning of the service and
remains underdeveloped.


childrens services are appropriate, well-articulated and are used consistently
within social care services and by partner agencies. The quality of information
sharing when referrals are made is highly variable, but is steadily improving as
a result of recent training on the new thresholds. Within childrens services
decisions about contacts and referrals are timely and are made by experienced
practitioners who understand the duties and responsibilities of the local
authority. Decisions are routinely made and recorded by managers, with a clear
rationale and action plan; as a consequence, the risks to and needs of children
are prioritised and addressed appropriately.
appropriately undertaken by qualified social workers. Child protection enquiries
are robust. Strategy discussions between police and social care staff are timely,
clearly recorded and result in well-coordinated arrangements to protect
children. However, not all relevant partner agencies are routinely consulted
beyond the initial information sharing stage as part of child protection
enquiries.
At the time of inspection the police, probation service and the local authority
had established a co-located Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH). Health
and education partners are due to join the MASH in the near future. The MASH
was implemented five weeks prior to this inspection and it is too early to assess
its impact and effectiveness.
robustly screened and risk assessed through the MASH, using standard tools.
The new MASH is beginning to help partner agencies to improve their collective
knowledge of the prevalence of domestic abuse, parental substance misuse and
mental ill-health and to better target their services to address these issues.
documented in assessments, and include patterns of behaviour. These
contribute strongly to the analysis of the needs of children and young people.
by the authoritys Specialist Intensive Support Programme, including jointly
commissioned assessments where there are proceedings in the Family Court.
The programme delivers a high standard of parenting assessments and direct
work with some children who are either on the edge of care or working towards
a return to their birth families. Social workers based in the local hospital also
produce good quality referrals which result in effective planning and discharge
arrangements for new-born babies or informed arrangements for their
protection.
seen on most case files, but these are not routinely or fully used by workers to


inform assessments and future planning. Children in need assessments are not
always undertaken in a timely manner and this results in the needs of some
children not being addressed as promptly as they should be. However, most
eventually result in appropriate offers of support to children and their families
once plans have been agreed.
measurable, the quality of child protection plans remains too variable. Many of
those seen do not enable parents to understand what is expected of them well
enough, nor to identify sufficiently the consequences of not meeting these
expectations. Most plans contain contingency arrangements should children not
be safeguarded and these are reviewed regularly. Step-down arrangements for
children who no longer need to be subject to a child protection plan are mostly
timely, and monitoring arrangements for these are robust in terms of
expectations for change and improvements.
seen alone where appropriate. Where children are unable to communicate
effectively or are pre-verbal, practitioners use other techniques, such as sign
language and interpreters, to good effect. Most children now report positively
that their social workers do not change as frequently as before, so they are
better able to develop more trusting, meaningful and sustained relationships.
good understanding of the diverse needs of children and their families and
ensure that those needs are appropriately considered and addressed.
protection inquiries. Whilst childrens services take action to protect children in
the interim, there is undue delay in ensuring that multi-agency plans to protect
children are put into place. The local authority and its partners recognise this
and commissioned an independent audit that identified delays caused by
communication and administration issues, and these are beginning to be
tackled.
specific and measurable, resulting in further delay until the first core group
meeting develops the plan into more specific objective tasks. Child protection
conferences are effectively and sensitively chaired. Parents and partner
agencies are enabled to contribute and the wishes and feelings of children are
sought and recorded. However, little consideration is given of whether it may
be appropriate for older children to attend child protection conferences to
enable them to fully engage in planning for their safety, and very few do. Multiagency meetings such as core groups and conferences are well attended, with
effective collaborative working, particularly with health and education partners.
partnership with parents and do this well. In many cases this enables children


to remain at home with their parents with appropriate safeguards in place.
However, in four cases seen by inspectors, the prospects for success were low
and the persistence in working with parents was unrealistic and led to delay in
the implementation of contingency plans for the safety and well-being of the
child. In six cases seen, assessment, intervention and planning are
predominantly focussed on supporting the adult and addressing their needs
rather than maintaining the essential focus on the experience and
vulnerabilities of the child.
across partner agencies, particularly when tackling issues of domestic abuse.
Information sharing at the Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference (MARAC)
and the MultiAgency Public Protection Arrangements are robust. Partners have
a clear understanding of risk to children living in circumstances where domestic
abuse is a factor and where adults are known to pose a significant risk to
children. The meetings recommend appropriate actions to be taken by partners
within timescales which are both realistic and challenging.
Local Authority Designated Officer service is effective. Allegations are recorded
and monitored robustly and the different arrangements for children and adults
in these cases are well co-ordinated, diligently pursued and tracked to ensure
safe outcomes.
sexual exploitation and those children and young people who are missing from
home, care and education are under-developed. The local authority and its
partners have been slow to tackle these issues collectively. Until recently these
have primarily been addressed through separate agency arrangements, which
have not enabled agencies to fully know the number, extent and reasons for
children going missing. Incidents and those identified as at likely risk are now
reported to the MASH through the recently-introduced, centralised specialist
police unit. This is beginning to improve intelligence, communication and the
assessment of such risks to young people. Commitment from partner agencies
to improve joint working in these areas is evident, but this work is not yet
embedded and it is too early to assess its impact.
result, the voice of the child is not always effectively considered. While the
arrangements for provision of an advocacy service have recently been recommissioned it is too early to see its impact.
provides very limited involvement with children and their families out of hours
and responds to emergencies only. The EDT does not have access to
Hounslows electronic recording system to provide the background information
or current circumstances on known children and families to inform decisions.
EDT staff have delegated powers to make a wide range of decisions about


Hounslow children, but there is no formal arrangement for these decisions to be
discussed or authorised by a Hounslow senior manager. No cases were seen by
inspectors where children were left at risk or unsafe decisions were made by
the EDT. Some social work staff report that information is not always shared
promptly with them by the EDT following intervention out of hours. The local
authority recognises the issue and is arranging for the EDT to have access to its
childrens services electronic database.
proportion to the size and composition of the local population, and has not
increased in recent years. Activity to increase public awareness, and to enable
the community and staff from partner agencies to identify and notify when
private fostering is taking place, has not been effective or sufficiently promoted
and publicised recently. Privately fostered children who are known to the
authority do receive appropriate monitoring and support.

The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence require improvement.
based on clear assessments of their needs. The majority of assessments seen
by inspectors are at least adequate, with some good examples. A small number
of assessments have been independently evaluated by a specialist NSPCC
service commissioned to consider whether it is safe for children to return home.
None of these assessments has resulted in a change of plan for the child.
into care are consistent and care plans accurately reflect risk and capacity for
change by parents within the childs timescales. However, a high proportion of
older teenagers with complex needs are becoming looked after as a last resort,
when they can no longer be supported at home and early help services have
not been effective in preventing the need for care.
children accommodated under section 20 of the Children Act, in voluntary care
arrangements. The reasons for this are not sufficiently known to the local
authority. In some cases seen by inspectors, an interim care order should have
been considered as an alternative. In some cases, the use of voluntary care has
caused difficulties for children and young people where parents have withdrawn
consent at short notice. In cases seen by inspectors it was not sufficiently clear
that other, more legally permanent, alternatives such as special guardianship
orders, residence orders or adoption had been fully considered by social
workers or by independent reviewing officers. However, more recently such
options are now beginning to be considered when case planning.


considered and a good range of services is available to support their family. No
cases were seen by inspectors where younger children had been received into
care or returned home inappropriately. Consideration of the childs long-term
future does not always happen by the second statutory review. As a result,
some experience undue drift and delay in securing a permanent place to live.
children in care teams at appropriate times and always have an allocated social
worker to maintain continuity of support, which is particularly important to
those who are going through legal processes.
looked after children, rates of both short term (12.5%) and long term (68%)
stability require improvement and the reasons for this are not always well
understood by the authority. As a result, looked after children experience too
many moves, and more work needs to be done to avoid this occurring,
especially in an unplanned manner.
and form strong relationships with them. Children are almost always seen alone
during statutory visits and visiting patterns often exceed statutory
requirements. This was particularly the case for younger children and for
children and young people who live outside the borough. Childrens wishes and
feelings are sought, consistently listened to, respected and taken into account
when making and implementing care plans. Records of statutory visits, looked
after children review documentation and child permanence reports reflect the
voice of the child almost without exception. High quality and sustained direct
work is undertaken with children to help them to understand their early
experiences and to make sense of their current situation.
and challenge to care planning for looked after children to ensure that the very
best outcomes for children are achieved without delay. Whilst they do meet
their core statutory duties and produce an annual report on their work, there is
little evidence that they provide rigorous challenge to case planning for children
or engage effectively with looked after children. No issues were escalated by
IROs formally to senior managers, despite IROs acknowledging to inspectors
that they did have concerns in some of the cases selected for this inspection.
Hounslow and this gap is not closing for children at some stages of their
education. In Hounslow, the performance of looked after children is similar to
those in other outer London boroughs and nationally, but this is not
consistently the case across all indicators by the end of Key Stage 4. Through
their links with schools and support services the Virtual School team, called the
Looked After Children Educational Support (LACES), ensures that looked after
children aged three to sixteen years living both inside and outside the borough


have access to high quality education and support. However, this has so far
had limited impact on improving the progress that some looked after children
make.
between year groups. Childrens individual progress is tracked in detail through
Personal Educational Plans, although collation and analysis of attainment and
progress by the virtual school is limited. The numbers of children being
compared with their peers in some Key Stages and year groups is small but,
overall, the gap for Hounslow looked after children is not closing consistently
with their age group in Hounslow or with looked after children nationally.
Looked after children in Hounslow make better progress than looked after
children nationally by the end of Key Stage 2, notably in reading where
concerted support has been put in through the Letterbox Club literacy scheme.
The small numbers who are in care before the age of 1, who are tracked
through from their primary school education to the end of Key Stage 4, make
good progress. However, the majority those at the end of Key Stage 4 have
come into care at an older age. Their progress and attainment is not
consistently good and most do not make up ground. Some young people who
arrive in Hounslow unaccompanied by a responsible adult are ambitious and
achieve well with good support. The proportion of looked after children
achieving 5 A* to Cs including English and maths, 13% in 2013, has improved
from 2012, and is now in line with national, but below other comparators at
CCSE is high at 84% and 54% of children looked after achieve 5 A* to Gs.
Achievement of 5A* to Cs improved from 2012 to 2013 and is now in line with
the national figure at 35.5%
Plans, which are of a satisfactory quality. The detailed tracking for each child
underpins decisions on how best to support the child through a range of
commissioned tuition, coaching and mentoring, homework clubs and enriching
activities. In some cases seen, this is very effective in helping those children
who have high aspirations, through trips to Universities and taster days.
However, those who do not have high aspirations are less effectively engaged
and supported.
Plans and children are effectively helped through pastoral and behavioural
support. Where children looked after move school, only schools graded good or
outstanding are now considered. However, because of previously existing
arrangements, only 76% of children looked after are in schools graded good or
better. Attendance is closely monitored and good provision is in place for
children without a school place. Absence from school overall is low, but
persistent absence among a few young people, mostly out of borough, is high
and this is being appropriately addressed.


after, both in terms of physical and emotional health and well-being, but
progress to ensure that all children have timely health and dental checks is
variable between teams. While 100% of children in some teams had received
these assessments and checks, in the children with disabilities team the figure
is 89%. Children and young people directly involved with and able to access Da
Spot, a childrens services resource centre for children, are well supported with
health improvement work to keep safe, avoid drugs and alcohol and lead a
healthy lifestyle. However, many more children looked after, who are not able
to access the resource centre, are at a disadvantage. Children and young
people are well supported with their emotional well-being. The local authority
provides a range of dedicated therapeutic input for looked after children at all
ages and stages of care, which supports the good direct work done by social
workers and carers. Looked after children who live out of the borough are well
supported to access health services near to where they live.
good consideration is given to deciding whether brothers and sisters can live
together. Children are helped to build positive relationships, contact
arrangements are carefully considered and childrens views about contact are
respected.
with their families. The local authoritys in-house contact service provides an
extensive range of supervised contact arrangements as well as transport to
unsupervised contacts. Workers are well-trained, supervised and carefully
briefed about the childs history and current circumstances. Every effort is made
to ensure consistency of escorts for children. Reports by contact workers are
regularly used as evidence in court during proceedings and the quality of these
is improving.
work to recruit and support foster carers is of an excellent quality. In-house
foster carers spoken to were very satisfied with the service that they receive
from Hounslow. However, there are not enough foster carers in the borough
and the service is unable to increase the pool of foster carers sufficiently to
meet identified need. Recruitment activity has resulted in a net gain of 13
households last year, with 18 new carers and five who left the service. The
recruitment target for the 20122013 year was exceeded. However, those
recruited were primarily for younger children and babies whereas there remains
a shortage of foster homes for teenagers in the area.
parties are robust. They are made in partnership with the West London Alliance
and Pan-London arrangements. Placement arrangements seen were safe and
appropriate. However, the sufficiency duty, under the Children Act 1989 to
secure as far as reasonably practical, sufficient accommodation within the
authoritys area is not met.


provide good feedback to services and to the Corporate Parenting Panel.
However, the interaction between these children and the rest of the looked
after population is limited. The Participation Officer makes strenuous efforts to
keep in contact with out of borough children but opportunities for these
children to undertake the same level of participation activities as locally placed
children is also limited.
group of elected members who are determined to improve the lives of looked
after children in Hounslow. However, little evidence was seen of a strong
impact by the panel. They describe their work to involve all local authority
elected members and other departments in the corporate parenting task as
improving slowly, and inspectors agree with this. The panel considers issues
raised by looked after young people as a standing item at all its meetings, and
young people have attended panel meetings. However, there is little evidence
of what impact their views have had in the work of the panel.
and young people are informed about how to complain but are not encouraged
or supported to do so. Information about complaints is aggregated and
reported on in an annual report. Increasing numbers of children are accessing
the advocacy service, but outcomes from this work are not yet available.
authority area, most live within a short distance of Hounslow. This enables
them and their carers to maintain regular contact with their social workers and
support staff. Looked after children who live out of the area are effectively
supported to access suitable services in the areas in which they live, in
particular health and education, where they are not easily able to access
services in Hounslow.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is requires improvement.
some children experience delay in going to live with their new family. The local
authority is taking appropriate action to reduce the length of time that children
wait before they go to live with their adoptive family and for the most recent
cases the timescale is reducing. However, the current average time taken from
when a child first becomes looked after by the authority to when they go to live
with their new family is too long; it is currently 672 days, which is higher than
the national threshold of 608 days. It is also higher than both the England
average (647 days) and that of statistical neighbours (636 days). In Hounslow,
only 54% of children move in with their new family within the target of twenty
months, this is lower than the all England average of 55%. This is because of
the difficulty the local authority has experienced in finding suitable adopters for
the age and needs of some children.


the authority too long on average to match the child with suitable adopters
despite some recent improvements. Hounslow now takes 222 days on average.
This is higher than the England average of 210 days and of statistical
neighbours. As a result, children are waiting too long to meet their new
families.
children, who had waited for a long time, no longer being considered suited to
adoption. This is because their needs have changed in the time taken to seek a
permanent family for them. In 20122013, 32% of children in Hounslow who
had a plan for adoption had this changed away from adoption. The 20102013
average for such a change was 17%, which is also higher than both the
average in England (9%) and that of statistical neighbours (12%). Although
timescales for adoption in Hounslow are improving, few older children are put
through adoption and there have been no children aged five or older adopted in
the last year.
children no longer experience any drift or delay in their care plan. A monitoring
board, which considers timescales, is now in place and senior managers have
recently improved the rigour with which they scrutinise planning for children.
This is beginning to reduce the delay that children with a more recent plan for
adoption experience.
weeks. The local court started working to the Public Law Outline (PLO)
arrangements in August 2013. The local authority is also developing a triborough arrangement to improve the quality of evidence reported to the court
and to further reduce delay. The authority has taken a range of effective action
to oversee cases before the court to improve timeliness. It is too early to assess
the full impact of these actions, although four cases were recently completed
within 26 weeks.
have good working relationships with local authority staff. The Specialist
Intensive Support Programme is acknowledged as providing good reports for
court. This service is now used following an agreed letter of instruction from all
parties, and this is helping to reduce both delay and the reliance on
independent assessments.
(CPRs), which is acknowledged by the court. The local district family judge
reports that over time the quality of reports received has improved greatly.
Permanence planning is culturally sensitive to diversity issues for children and
their families.


that some children experience. However, fostering to adopt or concurrent
planning are not routinely considered. This means that early opportunities for a
child to live with a permanent family are not maximised. The local authority
accepts that this is an area for development.
between placement for adoption and the court making the order. Children
develop sustained security and attachment to their new family. This is because
of the care taken to match them and the high quality of the work done in the
adoption team.
process into practice and this is having a positive impact. Several adopters
reported to inspectors that they had a positive experience of adopting with
Hounslow.
assessment starting. Once the assessment starts, they are assessed promptly
and are able to access both the consortium and adoption register more quickly
than is required. The consortium arrangements allow adopters to access timely
preparation training. In 20122013, 14 children were placed with adopters
approved by other adoption agencies. At the time of this inspection nine
adopters are waiting to be matched to a child. Three of these are on hold for
various appropriate reasons. This is due to the difficulties that the authority has
experienced in finding suitable families for the children waiting to be adopted.
Adopters are able to complete safe base training after they are approved. This
makes sure that they are able to respond to the needs of their children.
other agencies to reduce delay. Social workers who are family-finding for
children do this alongside a range of other tasks and duties, including
assessment and support. This means that social workers cannot always be as
responsive as they need to be when finding families for children, which can
cause undue delay. Adopters for younger children are often found without delay
but older children often have to wait much longer.
their adoptive families are receiving support. A range of therapeutic
interventions is available through the adoption team; this includes a part-time
clinical social worker, which has contributed positively to the stability of
adoptions. Contact is carefully considered and arrangements are set out in the
adoption support plan. There is a small backlog of work with adopted adults
wishing to access their birth records. No formal complaints have been made
about the service in the last year.
the local authority. Although there have been some recent changes to the


panel, including the appointment of a new chair, the authority has ensured
stability and continuity through the independent vice chair. Panel decision
sheets do not always follow good practice recommendations, which require the
decision maker to set out the key arguments, consider any additional material
and explain the reason for their decision. Arrangements are in place for panel
members to receive annual appraisals. However, panel members have not
received any training in the last year to make sure that they keep up to date
with current adoption practice and that they are informed about the national
adoption agenda.
The graded judgment for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
requires improvement.
through the Pathways leaving care team, who form good relationships with
them and who encourage them to engage in constructive activities. This
enables practitioners to better assess and understand the needs of the young
people, and to help them to plan for their future.
over the past year, where previously too many plans were not in place or were
outdated. However, plans are not yet of a consistently high quality. Plans do
not always explicitly reflect the views of young people and few contain
contingency arrangements to address what action should be taken if the young
persons circumstances change.
combining support services for young people preparing to leave care and those
who have left care. However, the transition process has not gone smoothly and
difficulties remain, with turnover of staff and managers. Staff report a number
of concerns about how well they are managed and supported to help young
people. Senior managers are aware of and are tackling these issues, which at
the time of this inspection remain unresolved. Measures taken to strengthen
supervision arrangements in the team are beginning to have a positive effect
on the quality of work. However, workloads in the team remain high.
of managers and with oversight of independent reviewing officers who track
individual young peoples progress well. Services are provided, in partnership
with other agencies, to meet the complex needs of young people as they move
to independence. Support for care leavers who are young parents and asylum
seekers is particularly well-established.
and too few young people have useful qualifications, skills and experience for
work. Pathways staff successfully encourage some care leavers without
qualifications, including young parents, to return to flexible learning in high
quality colleges and community education. Only a small minority of care leavers


make use of these services. The challenge remains for the service to expand its
impact to the majority of young people who are not currently engaged. A
growing number of care leavers achieve highly and are supported financially
and through staying-put accommodation to go on to university, with ten on
track to go in September 2014.
national average and for other local young people. This represents 110 young
care leavers aged from 18 to 21 years. Without the inclusion of unaccompanied
minors, who mostly stay on in education, the proportion is even higher at 44%.
Every effort is made to meet individuals aspirations through direct work and
partnerships but there is insufficient provision for care leavers to take up
vocational training and work based learning. Very few care leavers are currently
in apprenticeships, and only two of these are within local authority services.
Housing Panel. Some options provide bespoke guidance on practical and
financial skills to maintain a tenancy. The very large majority of care leavers
move quickly into permanent suitable housing of their choice. Accommodation
for care leavers has significantly improved. In 201112, too many care leavers
were not in accommodation that suited their needs (80% were in suitable
accommodation) and young people, including those under 18, were too often
placed in bed and breakfast. Since the opening of further semi-independent
accommodation with emergency access, no young people aged under 18 have
been placed in bed and breakfast.
sufficient and includes 24-hour floating support. Care leavers receive effective
community support with partner agencies such as Visions (for substance
misuse) and Dfuse, (for emotional and behavioural issues). However, provision
for care leavers with housing needs relating to drug and alcohol dependency
and other complex difficulties is underdeveloped. There are sufficient mother
and baby placements. In cases sampled by inspectors, little use was made of
universal provision such as childrens centres to support care leavers who are
young parents, and the awareness of the support that these services offer was
low amongst practitioners in the Pathways service.
physical and emotional health needs. Health assessments are undertaken
before young people leave care and clear action plans are in place that address
their health needs. Those with mental ill-health receive good support. Social
workers and personal advisors ensure that young people are aware of their
entitlement to continuing health support, although the young peoples views of
what is important in their health are not always clearly recorded in pathway
plans.
entitlements. Young people spoken to knew about bursaries for further and


higher education, advocacy, access to interpreters and how to complain. Young
people reported that they are happy with the range of services and the level of
contact offered by most social workers and personal advisors. Complaints by
young people have been appropriately addressed by managers.
about their views on the services that are provided for them. However,
representation of care leavers on the Children in Care Council is now low. At a
time when this local authority is consulting on revisions to the Care Leavers
Charter, care leavers have too little opportunity to exchange their views and to
have a say.
Leadership, management and governance require improvement
incorporating childrens and adults services, has been subject to a limited
evaluation of the possible impact of combining these functions, called a test of
assurance. This is due to be reviewed during 2014. The interim Director of
Adults service is due to take on the combined services and the role of the
Director of Childrens Services in June 2014, on an interim basis.
Childrens Trust arrangements have been strengthened to ensure coordinated
partner agency activity at a time when strategic planning arrangements for
children and young people in the area are undergoing significant change.
However, engagement with the Health and Wellbeing Board has been
approached too slowly and childrens issues have not yet been effectively
aligned in the work and priorities of that board.
with other strategic planning for childrens services. There is far less clarity in
relation to sufficiency planning for children looked after, which has led to a
limited focus on recruitment and planning for an appropriate balance of local
and in-house provision to match need. The local authority is not sufficiently
specific about the identified groups of young people for whom placements may
be required, and does not set out what they plan to do to secure sufficient
placements for them.
Executive and acting Director of Childrens Services demonstrate attention,
focus and drive to promote children and family issues. However, the formal
arrangements to discharge the local authoritys childrens scrutiny function for
help and protection, and the Corporate Parenting Panel do not provide
sufficient focus or challenge on aspects of the service which require
improvement. Childrens services have also experienced additional uncertainties
from several recent changes at senior managerial level, with further similar
changes planned over the coming year, which adversely affect the continuity
and pace of improvement.


members and the independent chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board
(LSCB). These ensure that all are well briefed and that services are subject to a
balance of support and challenge. It is recognised that the LSCB is improving
with further developments underway.
across childrens services. Significant staffing and other resources have been
maintained and enhanced within childrens social care for early help as well as
for children looked after. Potential pressures to return children looked after to
lower cost local placements are appropriately based on the needs and stability
of each child. A high priority has been given to achieving, for the most part,
manageable and balanced social worker caseloads, and this supports effective
direct work with children.
childrens services. Performance reports are fully considered at three-monthly
intervals by key elected members and senior officers. More regular monitoring
of a wide range of indicators is provided to and considered at all levels of
operational management. However, the reports contain too little analysis and
evaluation. For example, evaluation systems are not yet in place for senior
managers to assure themselves that early help plans are effective in responding
to the identified needs of children and their families. This is recognised by the
local authority and evaluation of the effectiveness of individual early help plans
has recently commenced.
despite some cases being considered by the local safeguarding children board
to see if they met the threshold for a serious case review.
targeted audits, addressing both compliance and some qualitative performance
measures. The targeted auditing is determined by existing performance data as
well as by specific strategic objectives. Some audits have specifically targeted
issues raised in this inspection, such as initial child protection conferences not
being timely. However, many of the issues raised in this inspection, whilst
known to the authority, have not yet been subject to audit. Findings of audits
provided by the local authority on cases selected for this inspection were mostly
similar to those of inspectors, although where there was variance, the findings
of the authority were more optimistic and positive than those of inspectors. The
authority acknowledged this and is now working to develop greater consistency
in its audits.
on previously assessed needs of children in the area. However, the local
authority has yet to fully develop commissioning opportunities. There are
examples of strong and effective work with key partner agencies, for example,
with the housing authority in working across the troubled families agenda,


additional supported accommodation for young adults leaving care and in
individual targeted work in safeguarding families against so-called rogue
landlords.
which is valued by the Judiciary. They acknowledge increased focus by the
authority on making timely care applications, the robustness of thresholds and
plans, and the steadily reducing length of time of proceedings, albeit from a
base of previously lengthy timescales. Effective arrangements are in place,
particularly for implementing jointly instructed assessments of parenting
capacity and in the engagement of the local authority with Cafcass.
service delivery, mostly modelling an open and accessible managerial style in
many parts of the service. This enables them to have a sufficiently clear and
extensive understanding of the issues, pressures and performance of the
service. As a consequence they are able to consider and devise responses to
issues, such as previously high or unequal workloads, and the impact of the
rapidly changing diverse population.
support, supervision and effectively managed workloads, particularly within the
Pathways service. High caseloads also remain a continuing challenge within
parts of the intake service. While the authority has been aware of a range of
difficulties within the Pathways service for some time, and is highly active in
seeking to address these, they remain unresolved.
highly successful in recent years, as a consequence of concerted and
coordinated activity by corporate human resources, membership of a crossauthority training alliance and direct focus on recruitment and retention.
Particularly successful has been the quality of practitioners supported through
participation in the step-up to social work programme. This has resulted in a
high proportion of permanent practitioners who have access to extensive
programmes of training, individualised support and mentoring. There are
reducing numbers of locum social workers and, for example, low rates of illhealth absence. The position at first line management level has been less
settled, although it continues to improve. The benefits are evident in better
relationships with children and young people, as well as improved knowledge of
services and work with partner agencies.
particularly from children looked after, although the broader consultation
through the children in care council is not sufficiently well developed. Examples
of efforts to seek and learn from the experiences of looked after children
include: their involvement in responding to the Ofsted inspection framework;
attending a meeting about the Munro review; and contributing to Bristol
University research into the voice and journey of the child. These have been


positively supplemented by the contributions of advocates for children with
existing complaints. Learning from complaints, representations and surveys is
appropriate although not extensive. Regular oversight of the reasons for and
outcomes of complaints is exercised by the Director of Childrens Services.
Some changes have resulted, for example, in producing clearer information for
both children and parents receiving services.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the local safeguarding
children board (LSCB)
The effectiveness of the LSCB requires improvement.
Areas for improvement
performance through audit and performance monitoring of multi-agency
activity, and that this evaluation is used to improve services.
is evaluated so that its effectiveness can be assessed and improved.
recorded in its minutes and the LSCB annual report and that this information is
used to develop and monitor local plans that demonstrate what measurable
impact the Board is having.
serious case review, even if one is not carried out, the Board must check that
the local authority has notified Ofsted.
engage with the work of the Board and ensure that the views of all sectors
including faith and wider voluntary groups are represented.
other key strategic groups, such as the Health and Wellbeing Board and the
Local Safeguarding Adults Board. To ensure that the safeguarding of children is
prioritised.
that the work of the Monitoring and Evaluation, Missing and Vulnerable and the
Child Sexual Exploitation Sub Groups are influencing practice.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
established, with the LSCB chair regularly meeting with the Director of
Childrens Services, Chief Executive Officer and Lead Members following LSCB
meetings, to ensure that the authority is fulfilling its safeguarding
responsibilities. The LSCB chair is a member of the Childrens Trust, which helps
to ensure that safeguarding is appropriately considered in the wider context of
services for children and families. A recent protocol between the LSCB and the
Health and Wellbeing Board has been established, but it is too early to
demonstrate that the LSCB has influenced the work of this Board to ensure that
safeguarding of children is prioritised.


annual report provide a detailed review of the activity of the Board and the
extensive range of issues that it has considered. However, the report does not
sufficiently analyse the significance of many of these issues and what impact, if
any, the work of the Board has made on them. The Board has identified
priorities for its partners that are appropriately based on local and national
issues, but these are not transferred into an achievable and measurable action
plan.
community to secure their views to influence the development of its work and
safeguarding practice. An LSCB young peoples forum has been recently
established, with a committed and enthusiastic small group of young people
who are well supported to consider and give their views on the sensitive issues
identified by the Board. This forum is at too early a stage of development to
show impact. The views of the community are well represented at the LSCB
through the appointment of a lay member. However, the views and
engagement of the wider voluntary and faith sectors are not well represented
at the board.
responsibilities of the chair and board members. The role of the LSCB chair is
sufficiently independent. The chair is highly experienced and is well respected
by partner agencies staff at all levels. He effectively oversees the work of the
Board, ably assisted by the LSCB manager. The chair has effectively raised the
profile of safeguarding and appropriately challenged partner agencies and the
local authority where shortfalls have been identified. The LSCB chair has
recently been appointed to chair the Adult Safeguarding Board. It is too early to
assess the impact that this will have on ensuring that the work of both boards
are effectively undertaken.
early help services across it partners, although it is too early for it to evaluate
the impact. The LSCB has actively and appropriately maintained an overview of
the safeguarding of children looked after, and particularly those placed outside
of the area. It has challenged childrens services to report to the Board on the
effectiveness of these services, although it is too early to show if this has had
impact.
Board. The LSCB has recently begun to receive individual agency audits and
monitoring information from some of its key partners. However, monitoring and
analysis of this information and the impact across the partnership is not regular
or embedded in the culture of the board. Performance management and audit
models used within individual partner agencies are not consistent with each
other or rigorously established. LSCB plans to develop multi-agency monitoring
and audit are at a very early stage of development. In recognition of this the
LSCB chair has personally undertaken and externally commissioned some


targeted audits. The learning from these has been appropriately reported to
and acted on by the LSCB.
confirmed through the safeguarding audits that agencies completed last year
under Section 11 of the Children Act 2004.
Serious Case Review Sub-Group are well-established, well-represented by
partner agencies and robustly consider detailed information. The Health and
Education Networks are increasingly ensuring that safeguarding issues are
effectively addressed within the wide range of health and education services
and are reported to the LSCB. However, the progress of work by the LSCB
Monitoring and Evaluation, Missing and Vulnerable and the Child Sexual
Exploitation Sub Groups, which were restructured in 2013, has been slow. As a
result, performance management and development of localised policies and
procedures for these areas are at a very early stage of development.
Feltham Young Offender Institute (FYOI), sited within the borough. Good
communication and collaboration ensure that safeguarding young people is well
focused at FYOI through its representation on the LSCB and through the chair
visiting the institute and regularly reporting on safeguarding practice. The LSCB
has recently established a FYOI scrutiny group to enhance this oversight. It is
too early to see its impact.
the LSCB has implemented learning from previous SCRs and national findings.
The LSCB serious case review sub-committee has appropriately commissioned
and considered reviews of individual agency involvement in cases that did not
meet the threshold for an SCR. It is the role of the local authority to notify
Ofsted of such incidents considered by the Board, but the authority has not
done so and the LSCB has not picked this up.
underpins safeguarding training provided within individual partner agencies.
This has been progressively developed to incorporate learning from local
serious incidents, issues arising from LSCB conferences and national issues,
including learning from high profile serious case reviews from other authorities.
Evaluation of the quality and impact of training on improving practice and the
experience of children is at an early stage of development. This is primarily
based on feedback from training participants through questionnaires and a
telephone poll. It is not evident that the evaluation of training is effectively
used strategically. For example, some training participants reported that
training was too basic to enhance their safeguarding work; however, the LSCB
has yet to address this.


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, workbased
learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and
other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


