Leicester City Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
Inspection date: 19 June to 13 July 2017
Report published: 4 September 2017

Childrens services in Leicester require improvement to be good

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Good

_______________________

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Services for children have improved significantly since the last inspection in 2015,
which judged them overall to be inadequate. Senior leaders and managers took
decisive action following this inspection and have remained clearly focused on
securing the necessary improvements. While more work is needed before services
are consistently good, sustained progress has been achieved.
One of the main foundations of this progress is the effective use of quality assurance
and performance management information, which enables managers to understand
what they need to do to keep children safe and how to better manage identified
risks. In parallel with this is a radical transformation of culture, whereby staff feel
safe working in an open and transparent environment, reporting that leaders
manage change well. Senior leaders and officers recognise that there is no room for
complacency. There is more to do to improve the quality and consistency of help that
children receive, particularly their assessments of need, plans and frontline manager
supervision.
The local authority has revitalised and strengthened relationships with partners. As a
result, the support for children in need of help and protection, children looked after
and young people leaving care is better. Those children at immediate risk of
significant harm benefit from effective strategy discussions at the front door. These
meet consistently high standards, are inclusive of all relevant partners and result in
effective action to keep children safe. Having a secure and accessible front door
continuously staffed by qualified social workers provides a consistent and swift
response which avoids any delay in childrens needs being identified.
Changes made through the local authoritys improvement plan have now become
part of everyday practice. The application of an effective joint-working protocol
between housing and childrens social care for homeless 16- and 17-year-olds is in
significant contrast to previous poor practice. Young people at risk of homelessness
now receive a consistent and appropriate response to meet their needs. Participation
in the county-wide multi-agency child sexual exploitation hub since earlier this year is
already showing a positive impact for children identified at risk of child sexual
exploitation and those who go missing from home and care, and is informing
childrens plans to identify and reduce risk.
In parallel to progress, there remain areas of practice needing improvement. These
include the work done for disabled children and those privately fostered. While
assessments and plans for disabled children consider the needs of the whole family,
responses to safeguarding for some children need to be quicker and are not yet good
enough. Senior managers are considering the next stages for change and
improvement to this service. Children living in private fostering arrangements do not
benefit from having an individual assessment separately from their carers, so not all
support plans fully consider their needs.


An effective leadership team has ensured that, while there has been a strong focus
on improvements to former areas of inadequate practice, the quality of services
provided to children looked after and care leavers has been sustained and adoption
performance has improved. The majority of children looked after live in local, stable
homes. The local authority is in touch with almost all of its care leavers, the vast
majority of whom live in suitable accommodation. Care leavers report positively on
their relationship with personal advisers. However, preparation into adulthood for
some care leavers and disabled children is not happening early enough, so they
cannot prepare for their future learning or employment opportunities until very late.
Young people leaving care need better-quality health and medical information.
Children receive a good adoption service in Leicester and the quality of adoption
services has been strengthened since the last inspection. Clear early permanence
planning and success in achieving adoption for brothers and sisters together,
disabled children and those from Black and Mixed ethnic backgrounds mean that
children achieve good outcomes.
A committed lead member actively promotes the local authority corporate parenting
responsibilities, including the principle of as if this were my child, that underpin the
strategic vision and five promises to children looked after and care leavers. The city
council agreement to waive the first two weeks rent when a care leaver moves into
their first council tenancy will be a substantial support for young people. While local
authority senior leaders and officers demonstrate an ownership of their corporate
parenting responsibilities, they recognise that more still needs to be done. The city
council has been too slow to provide ring-fenced opportunities for its care leavers in
work experience, traineeships and apprenticeships, and the capacity of the virtual
school does not enable staff to drive improvement for all children looked after.
Inspectors met with four very impressive and different groups of children and young
people who were all willing to share their experiences about what it is like to receive
support in Leicester. Inclusion of these childrens views and listening to children
receiving services are actively promoted by senior leaders and managers. Inspectors
observed members of the Children in Care Council receiving training for participation
in social work staff recruitment panels. The opportunity for children in need of help
and protection to access advocacy support so that they can influence decisions made
in multi-agency meetings is less strong and is an area for improvement. The vast
majority of children looked after have strong relationships with their independent
reviewing officers, who, because they have lower caseloads, can build stronger
relationships with children, support them in their reviews and promote permanence.
Workforce stability and the recruitment of permanent social workers continue to be
challenges for leaders and managers in Leicester. There is some progress in reducing
changes in social worker for some children, but such changes are still too common,
which reduces childrens opportunity to build trust. Although mitigated by effective
auditing, frontline management oversight is not always effective, so the work to
effect change for some children is too slow. The local authority is now close to
having a fully permanent management workforce.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area1
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. Four were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspections.
 The last inspection report for the local authoritys childrens services was
published in 20 March 2015. The judgements for the local authority were:
 Overall effectiveness: inadequate
 Children who need help and protection: inadequate
 Children looked after and achieving permanence: requires improvement
 Adoption performance: good
 Experiences and progress of care leavers: requires improvement
 Leadership, management and governance: inadequate
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services has been in post since October 2014.
 The city mayor has been in post since 5 May 2011 and was re-elected on 7 May
 The chief operating officer has been in post since April 2012
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since June
Children living in this area
 Approximately 82,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Leicester City. This is 24% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 29% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 17% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 18% (the national average is 13%).

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 58% of all
children living in the area, compared to 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian/Asian British and Indian.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:


in primary schools is 52% (the national average is 20%)



in secondary schools is 50% (the national average is 16%).

Child protection in this area
 At 1 July 2017, 2,403 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from 2,638 at
 At 1 July 2017, 485 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 58 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 518
(63 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 1 July 2017, five children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from nine at 31 March 2016.
 In the two years before inspection, seven serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted and three serious case reviews have been completed.
 There were three serious case reviews ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 1 July 2017, 662 children are being looked after by the local authority (a rate
of 80 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 645 (79 per 10,000 children)
at 31 March 2016. Of this number:







area



three live in residential special schools,2 all of whom live out of the authority
area










These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 32 adoptions
be looked after
independent living
houses in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Improve the quality of social work assessments, so that they are consistently
informed by the child and his or her family history, reflect the diverse identities
of individual children and are updated regularly to take account of childrens
changing needs and circumstances.


Improve the timeliness and quality of safeguarding interventions for disabled
children.


Ensure that practice for children who are subject to private fostering
arrangements meets statutory requirements and that all privately fostered
children have an individual assessment.


Ensure that children are enabled to participate in meetings that inform their
plans and that these plans are succinct, containing clear details, actions and
timescales.


Ensure that the virtual school has the capacity to drive improvement for all
children looked after.


Improve the quality of medical and health information that care leavers receive
prior to leaving care.


Reduce the number of 18- to 21-year-old care leavers who are not in
education, employment or training.


Ensure that the transition arrangements from childrens social care to adult
services for young disabled children who have additional needs are both timely
and effective.


Improve the quality of frontline management oversight and direction across all
teams to ensure that management oversight of practice supports effective case
progression and decision-making.

children looked after, through regular attendance and participation in the
corporate parenting forum.
commissioned against identified need within an agreed framework across the
city.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children who need help in Leicester are getting better. Council
leaders and officers have worked very hard so that when most children and their
families need help, they have this at the time that they need it.
 Some children have too many changes in social worker, and this makes it hard for
them to have good relationships. This is getting better, and more social workers
want to work and help children in Leicester.
 Assessments for some children need to include much more information about
them and their family. This will help to make sure that their plans are clear, so
that children and families know what needs to change to make things better.
 Social workers and managers make the right decisions about which children need
protection and when children are not able to live at home with their parents.
They find them a good home and make sure that children see people who are
important to them. Children live with the people looking after them for a long
time, and have the help that they need to make sure that they are healthy and
go to school regularly.
 Children whose plan is for them to be adopted live with families very quickly and
receive plenty of help. They are able to live with their brothers and sisters.
Adopters are very happy with the support that they have to help children and
young people to live in homes that best meet their needs.
 Young people leaving care receive a service that needs to improve. They need
more information about their health and medical needs. Young people do not
always know soon enough what help they can access when they become an
adult, and too many care leavers are not in education, employment or training.
 Young people leaving care are happy with the support that they receive to find a
good and safe place to live. Staff mostly keep in contact with them and young
people know where to go for help when they need it.
 Disabled children and their families need to have help more quickly when they
need support. Council leaders and managers will be putting together a plan to
make this service better.
 Childrens views are very important to workers and managers, who make sure
that they are included in the plans or changes that they make to services.
Childrens views are valued and well respected, and inspectors saw some good
examples of this when they met with four different groups of children.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Childrens services are managing risks effectively for children in Leicester. Priority
areas for improvement since the previous inspection have been addressed,
particularly in relation to meeting the needs of homeless children at 16 and 17,
ensuring that children have an allocated social worker, and that assessments and
plans are completed for children in time.
Children and families who are identified as needing help and protection receive an
effective and prompt response from the 24-hour duty and advice service. Families
benefit from a wide range of early-help services, with the majority of families
receiving help when they first need it.
Children who need an assessment have one, though the quality of these is not
always good. Some assessments need better information gathering from other
professionals and more in-depth analysis of wider risks. The impact of this for some
children is that their written plans are not always clear about what needs to change
and within what timescale, resulting in delay in improving outcomes.
While assessments and plans for disabled children appropriately take into account
the whole familys needs, including brothers and sisters, the timeliness in service
response, the quality of assessments and the implementation of safeguarding
procedures to better manage risks are not yet consistently good enough.
Opportunities for children to participate in their reviews and planning need
improvement, as advocacy services of support have limited capacity thus not all
children can benefit from this.
Multi-agency meetings are generally well attended by partners, and information on
childrens needs and risks is shared fully. This effective communication and
partnership working makes a tangible difference to children in terms of risk reduction
and ensuring that all of their needs are met.
Not all privately fostered children have an individual assessment of their needs, and
visiting frequency does not always meet requirements. This means that some
privately fostered children are not seen and assessed quickly enough to identify
support plans.
Children who are identified as being at risk of sexual exploitation receive effective,
specialist, multi-agency responses. The service ensures that risks to children are
reduced. Children who are missing from home benefit from return home interviews,
which directly inform their safety plans.


Inspection findings
effective response when they need it. Significant work on improving the local
authority front door and partners understanding of thresholds means that
children who are at risk of harm are swiftly identified and protected. Having
early-help workers as part of an assured front door process ensures that
contacts who do not meet the social care threshold can be quickly diverted to
early-help services. The move to one contact telephone number in January
early help easily.
a consistent, timely response by qualified social workers out of hours.
partnership with health, education and external voluntary services, and most
families receive help when they need it. There is good use of advice points to
ensure a quick response to families with an urgent need and, in spite of rising
demand, there is currently no waiting for the early-help service. The vast
majority of children identified as needing increased intervention are stepped up
to social care from early-help services appropriately. This escalation is timely
and ensures that children receive more specialist support. There is good use of
the multi-agency support panel to inform decision-making.
the need for partner agencies to increase the number of early-help assessments
and lead professional roles that they undertake. This is in the context of rising
demand and a concern that children and families will continue to need to
receive services that meet their needs in good time.
quality, and thresholds are applied appropriately to identify the level of help
needed by children. Those identified as needing early help do not always have
a clear rationale recorded for this decision.
of strategy discussions take place on the same day or within 24 hours. There is
excellent attendance and engagement by other agencies, resulting in
purposeful information sharing, strong decision-making and actions to protect
children. Child protection investigations are completed swiftly and appropriate
decisions are reached. Children are protected effectively because of actions
taken.


needs of homeless children aged 16 and 17 since its last inspection. These
children receive a timely and appropriate intervention which results in the
provision of safe accommodation and services which meet their needs. The
joint protocol in place between housing and childrens services explicitly states
that bed and breakfast accommodation is unsuitable, thus it is not used. The
option for children to become looked after is appropriately considered in all
cases, and decision-making is informed by good-quality joint assessments.
Young people are aware of their options and helped to make informed
decisions.
consistently good enough. Some lack consideration of childrens history to
inform the assessment, resulting in gaps in knowledge of childrens family
backgrounds. Identity needs are not always recognised or explored, while
others lack depth and professional curiosity and so do not consider wider issues
of potential risk. Assessments are not always updated in light of childrens
emerging needs. There is considerable improvement in assessment timescales
for children, and in some stronger assessments research is used effectively in
the analysis of risk and the childs lived experience is at the centre of the
assessment. In these, there is good consideration of additional needs and wellinformed actions to reduce risk, but these are not consistently the case.
(Recommendation)
Some plans are too long and repetitive, omit timescales for action and are not
updated when needs change. This means that it is difficult for families to
understand what needs to change. Reviews of childrens plans do not clearly
focus on progress or what has changed in childrens circumstances. The lack of
dynamic assessments means that some plans lack inclusion of wider or less
immediate risks. Drift is therefore evident, leading to delays in some childrens
needs being met and risks reduced. (Recommendation)
The majority are timely and child-centred, and parents have an opportunity to
engage and contribute fully in meetings. Multi-agency engagement is good, but
reviews are not consistently preventing drift or securing improved outcomes for
all children. Chairs of child protection conferences have high caseloads, which
has a negative impact on their ability to add value, including their ability to
track childrens progress and engage children and young people effectively.
When plans are drifting, there is often a lack of escalation or challenge by the
child protection chair due to this lack of capacity. (Recommendation)


are appropriate and timely in the majority of cases. Some strong practice was
seen where the child in need plan helped families to sustain positive change,
with the team around the child continuing to provide effective support. For a
minority of children who were stepped down from a child protection plan, other
agencies commitment to attending reviews reduced. For these children, it was
only the tenacity of their social worker that prevented concerns from escalating
again.
families. Their intervention sustains positive change and improves outcomes for
children who are at risk of becoming looked after or have previously been
subject to child protection or children in need plans. These teams are a real
asset to Leicester children and families.
well, and see children regularly and alone. Social workers verbal feedback often
shows more insight into what children need and the risks posed to them than
the childrens records. In some cases, social workers consider identity, culture
and heritage well, and visit children in a variety of settings to gain a holistic
view of their life. This includes visiting disabled children in their short-break
settings and consideration of their additional vulnerabilities. Younger children
are not always given the opportunity to contribute to their plans, but older
children, particularly those at risk of child sexual exploitation or missing from
home, are engaged well in their own safety planning.
underdeveloped. There is a very limited advocacy resource for this group of
children, which means that only a few are able to benefit from it. This reduces
the ability of children to directly influence decisions affecting their lives.
(Recommendation)
service. Strategy discussions are not timely, for some disabled children, and are
not well attended by partners. This means that information about the risks to
the child cannot be fully considered or used to inform decisions. While
assessments consider the needs of brothers and sisters and the whole family,
there is inconsistency in quality and, in some, limited information from other
professionals about parenting capacity. This means that not all information on
support needs or risks is shared to create effective plans.
assessment conference offers valuable multi-agency information sharing and
risk planning. Children are central to risk planning, and actions to mitigate risk
are specific. These actions translate directly onto childrens files in most cases
and are actively followed up by social workers in subsequent work. Links with
other risk areas, such as parental mental health or substance misuse, are not
always evident and can undermine the effectiveness of plans.


engagement to reduce risk for children at risk of sexual exploitation and going
missing from home and care. Leicester City joined the county-wide multiagency child sexual exploitation hub in January 2017 and, as a result, there is
swift information sharing and decision-making. This leads to recognition of links
between other known adults and children, and wider risk identification and
actions to reduce risk. Children at risk of sexual exploitation receive skilled
direct work and support, with effective co-working between the child sexual
exploitation hub and childrens social workers, and this directly reduces risk.
Regularly reviewed child sexual exploitation risk assessments inform safety
planning, with coordinated multi-agency responses reducing risk.
home interviews after they have returned from being missing. This is not
consistently timely for those children who frequently go missing from home or
care, and performance data does not always accurately record that a return
home interview has taken place. When children engage with workers who
complete the return home interviews, the quality of discussion is of a good
standard and the information is appropriately passed to childrens social
workers to inform safety planning.
Prevent workers are engaged with children and young people and contribute
effectively to key decision-making. However, the extent of joint working or
decision-making was not clear on all childrens records. The identification and
response to children at potential risk of female genital mutilation require
improvement. In the past year, there have been some missed opportunities for
robust assessment and support services where female genital mutilation is a
risk.
education. Clear and comprehensive policies and procedures ensure that
reporting by the local authority and schools is timely and relevant. Concerns
regarding individual children are escalated appropriately, and there are good
communication and information services in place across relevant services and
agencies.
home educated. A number of families that have chosen not to engage with the
local authority have appropriate risk assessments in place to monitor childrens
welfare. For the majority of children who are home educated, home educators
are in touch with the local authority and receive a range of useful information,
advice and support.


individual assessment of need, but share assessments with their private
fostering carers. Combining childrens needs with those of potential private
foster carers does not ensure that there is sufficient analysis of their individual
needs or experience, resulting in potentially unassessed risk.
(Recommendation)
professionals and carers in Leicester have not been sufficient. Numerous staff
have taken on the role and functions of the designated officer over recent
months, and information on adults posing risks to children is not held in one
place, so it is not easily accessible. Strategy meetings do not consistently
involve education, and actions specific to the designated officer are often
unclear. Senior management are aware of these shortfalls and have taken
appropriate action. This includes the creation of a comprehensive recording
system and the successful appointment of a permanent designated officer. The
impact of these actions is yet to be seen.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Services for children looked after in Leicester have been sustained following the last
inspection, though they require improvement to be good. Children only become
looked after when they need to, and generally this happens at the right time.
Children on the edge of coming into local authority care receive good, intensive
support to enable them to remain with their families.
The majority of children looked after live in local, stable homes and have good
relationships with social workers and independent reviewing officers, who know them
well. There are still too many changes in social worker for some children, and this
prevents them from building a meaningful relationship.
Public Law Outline processes are increasingly effective, and the average timescale for
the conclusion of care proceedings continues to improve, overall.
The quality of most assessments and written care plans is not consistently good.
Some childrens assessments lack detailed analysis of how previous concerns inform
current and future needs. This results in some childrens plans lacking specific
actions and timescales, and not all are updated regularly to reflect childrens
changing circumstances and needs, leading to delay in actions to improve their
circumstances. Childrens diverse needs are well understood and met when they live
with carers who do not have the same cultural identity.
Initial health assessments and annual health reviews are not consistently timely, and
there are delays for some children in receiving child and adolescent mental health
services. The current capacity of the virtual school team is insufficient to meet the
needs of all children who are looked after by the local authority.
Children missing from care are tracked and monitored effectively. Anti-bullying work
with schools and youth services is a strength in Leicester.
Adoption services are strong. Permanence is achieved quickly, matching is very
effective and social workers prepare children well for their transition. Adopters are
positive about the level of support that they receive through the adoption journey,
particularly the quality of post-adoption support.
The local authority is in touch with almost all of its care leavers, and the vast
majority live in suitable accommodation. However, care leavers are not receiving
enough early help in planning for their transition into adulthood.


Inspection findings
taken at a senior level. When there are clear and immediate risks to children,
the local authority responds swiftly and effectively to secure their safety.
However, when risks to children are identified as chronic neglect, the decisions
for a few children to become looked after are sometimes too slow. The local
authority has recognised this, and has appointed a case progression manager
within the children in need service to track and monitor all cases to support
appropriate and timely decision-making.
edge-of-care intervention provided by the multi-systemic teams, resulting in a
number of children remaining safely with their families. The Public Law Outline
(PLO) is used effectively with families to address areas of concern. Preproceedings letters appropriately and clearly set out what changes families
need to make to safeguard their children. The case progression managers
tracking of cases supports improved timeliness of care planning for children.
improving, but their quality varies. Better assessments provide an analysis of
risks and of the capacity of carers to meet current and future needs and to
protect children. However, many viability assessments proceed to stage two
without a robust analysis of the carers likely capacity to keep children safe and
meet their needs. Subsequent full assessments then appropriately conclude
that children should not be placed with these family members on a permanent
basis, thereby creating delays in decision-making. (Recommendation)
January 2017. Social workers are supported effectively to improve the quality of
court assessments, statements and reports. Managers quality assure and
scrutinise the documents before passing them to legal services for review and
filing with the court. The Children and Family Court Advice and Support Service
(Cafcass) has noted this improving quality of work.
For the majority of children, care plans are accepted by the courts without the
need for expert or independent assessments. The timeliness of care
proceedings is improving. Working relationships with the courts and Cafcass
continue to improve. Senior managers are fully involved in the work of the local
family justice board, and Cafcass is a member of the local authority
improvement board. This is enabling effective working together to improve
performance and outcomes for children in the PLO process.


planned move supported by appropriate assessment and care planning.
Effective multi-agency support packages and regular monitoring ensure that
children continue to be safeguarded and their needs met. Return home plans
are appropriately agreed at children looked after reviews, ensuring independent
reviewing officer (IRO) oversight and senior management sign off. In a few
cases seen where older children choose to return home, there is a lack of active
planning by social workers to support a safe return home. Potential risks are
not always fully explored and understood, and therefore the support provided is
not always comprehensive. Despite this, no children were identified as at risk
because of these shortfalls.
enough. Assessments are generally timely, but vary in quality. Some children
have good assessments that consider their family background, provide detailed
analysis of risk and are updated when their circumstances change. Assessments
are used routinely to appropriately inform planning and intervention based
upon a holistic understanding of childrens lived experience. Some children have
assessments with an incomplete exploration of their history and limited
consideration of childrens changing needs. (Recommendation).
leads to variable quality in written care plans. Many lack detail, clarity and
timescales for expected action and change. Plans are not updated regularly or
always informed by an updated assessment, and this is not challenged
sufficiently by managers or during supervision of social workers.
(Recommendation)
where they live and in school. Direct work is undertaken to ensure that their
views are ascertained and taken into account, and for some children this has
informed their plans. The majority of children have meaningful relationships
with social workers and IROs who know them well. However, a number of
children have experienced several changes in social worker in a short period.
Despite the recently improved stability of workers, some children have not had
enough opportunity to develop trusting relationships with their social workers.
majority of children (93%) participate and engage in their reviews via advocacy
support or completion of a your views, your review consultation booklet.
Increased capacity within the IRO service and reduced caseloads enable
children to give their views to IROs between reviews, and the IROs footprint is
increasingly evident within childrens records, demonstrating a timelier overview
of progress between reviews and an increase in the challenge and escalation of
concerns.


care or education, effective multi-agency working ensures that support and
intervention are provided to children to mitigate risk. Children are routinely
offered return home interviews after they have returned from being missing
and, when they engage, the quality of information is good and helps to inform
childrens plans. Close partnership working between the youth offending service
and other agencies results in well-considered holistic support for children looked
after who offend.
into care have fluctuated over the last year. Consequently, children are not
having their health needs assessed or met in a timely manner, and this includes
children placed out of the local authority area. The local authority recognises
that this is an area that requires further improvement and has introduced a
tracker system to ensure that all requests for initial health assessments are sent
within 48 hours of a child becoming looked after. This positive action alongside
health partners, which has increased capacity within the children looked after
nurses team, has improved recent performance.
means that some childrens emotional well-being and health needs are not well
understood and do not inform health assessments. The child and adolescent
mental health service provides timely initial assessments. However, carers and
social workers report frustration at the time that it takes to access support. The
longest waiting time was 29 weeks. The impact of the delay in the provision of
service for some children is mitigated by access to a range of therapeutic
interventions provided by the children and family support team or through the
spot purchasing of individual therapeutic services and psychological
assessments.
improvement. Key stage 2 attainment has not improved overall, and
performance is weaker in reading and writing than last year. In mathematics
children reached their expected attainment level, and attainment in the
combined reading, writing and mathematics test was better overall. Key stage 4
attainment for five or more A*-C grades showed a narrower gap, at 38% in
Leicester, than that of statistical neighbours and nationally (42%). The progress
made by children looked after between key stage 2 and key stage 4, measured
using Progress 8, was less than the expected level. However, children looked
after in Leicester made better progress than children looked after nationally.


Attendance is monitored effectively and local data shows steady improvement,
at 91%. There were no permanent exclusions in 2015/16. A new electronic
personal education plan (ePEP), implemented in January 2017, is still being
embedded and the quality of PEPs remains variable. The completion rate has
improved significantly and at the end May 2017 stood at 90%. In all PEPs seen,
the use of pupil premium grant is closely linked to supporting the childs
achievement and learning goals.
of area, are subject to regular scrutiny and monitoring. All placements have
received quality assurance and health and safety and safeguarding visits to
ensure that children are not disadvantaged or put at risk. For those children
who are not in full-time education, the work to place them is swiftly and
appropriately prioritised.
of all children who are looked after by the local authority. The team is
comparatively small for the size of cohort and not all its members are on fulltime contracts. Consequently, development is limited, such as transition work
with children during the school holidays and focused help and support for foster
carers. (Recommendation)
awareness. These include developing ideas, priorities and activities to address
all types of bullying, particularly hate crime. For example, a city-wide ballot
reached 12,000 children involved in the survey Make your mark 2016. Young
people have been proactive in developing resources with workers in a range of
settings, including the Children in Care Council. The local authority guidance for
foster carers on bullying is comprehensive and is included in the foster carers
handbook. Good guidance and advice to all schools about cyber bullying and
internet safety are used effectively to help children and young people to stay
safe.
childrens heritage and cultural needs. However, while ethnicity is usually well
considered, diversity is viewed through too narrow a lens within assessments
and care planning. Social workers do not sufficiently explore childrens identity
needs in the broader context of their lived experiences, such as disability,
separation and loss.


improving, although it is not yet happening sufficiently quickly for all children.
While the local authority has recognised the need for development and created
the permanence progression panel and the permanence case manager post, it
is too early to evaluate their impact. The frequency of permanence planning
meetings is not always clear and there is insufficient tracking of the outcomes
of meetings to ensure that actions are completed. This has led, for some
children, to delays in securing long-term non-adoption permanence plans.
their needs effectively. Brothers and sisters are placed together, unless their
plans identify that this would not be in their best interests. Contact between
children and their family and friends is promoted well and reviewed
appropriately to ensure that it meets the needs of children.
completed in May 2017. This is the best performance in six years, and means
that foster carers are appropriately supported to help to care for children.
Foster carers have access to a thorough training offer, and a high number of
carers are completing the training support and development standards. Foster
carers are positive about the support that they receive from their social
workers. Support for the birth children of carers is delivered effectively through
an energetic sons and daughters group.
not consistently receive all the necessary information about children before the
placement begins. This has an impact on their ability to make informed
decisions and to have pertinent individual information about children to help
them to care for them. (Recommendation)
childrens rights and participation team supports it and works effectively with
the corporate parenting forum, particularly in contributing to surveys of children
looked after. Members attend the corporate parenting forum to share findings
and views and provide feedback on important issues. The Children in Care
Council has been actively involved in organising celebration events and is taking
forward a suggestion to hold an event for care leavers which will provide
information about support and entitlement.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
children adopted from April 2016 to March 2017. Adoption is considered for all
children, and at an early stage.
target their improvements, such as improving the consistency of child
permanence reports. A detailed improvement plan is in place, identifying the
necessary actions to improve the service further.
team of social workers led by committed and knowledgeable managers. Social
workers and managers know their children well and robustly track all of those
awaiting adoption. All children waiting have potential links with adopters.
Information about children and prospective adopters is shared promptly across
the East Midlands adoption consortium. This, together with the good use of
national links, helps to ensure that adoption permanence is achieved quickly for
children in Leicester.
Family finders are tenacious and, as a result, the local authority has been
successful in achieving adoption over the past year for brothers and sisters
together, disabled children and children from Black and Mixed ethnic
backgrounds. The ethnicity of children is considered sensitively when looking
for families, but is not a barrier to prospective adopters who have the skills to
meet the needs of children. The local authority demonstrates determination to
find the right family for children, even when this may take some time.
Inspectors were impressed by the never give up attitude to finding the right
family for children.
progress is being made in developing foster-to-adopt arrangements, with an
increasing number of carers approved and an increasing number of children
benefiting from such arrangements. Appropriate use of the care planning
regulations has enabled children to be placed with their brothers and sisters
while further statutory processes are undertaken, thereby minimising delay and
the need for placement moves.


evidence-based assessments which demonstrate the impact of parental
behaviour on children. However, there is a lack of clear recording by the agency
decision-maker on the rationale for these decisions. There are very few
changes to adoption care plans, meaning that the care planning is robust and
reflects the considerable efforts made to achieve adoption for children. The
reversal of decisions is mostly due to appropriate consideration of the suitability
of viable family members who had become known late in the planning process
and were able to offer appropriate care for children within the wider family.
personal histories, relationships and motivations for seeking to adopt children
are evident. Balanced and proportionate social work reports evaluate applicants
strengths and potential vulnerabilities. Regulatory checks and references are
undertaken and documented. Assessments are mostly completed within six
months, with any delays being triggered by applicants rather than by
shortcomings in the adoption service.
detail relating to individual children and their brothers and sisters, with
insufficient information relating to assessments of their needs being recorded.
Management audits have identified this variability and plans are in place to
improve consistency.
assessment process and the training provided. While challenging, the process
was thorough, and gave them confidence and a good understanding of the
needs of adopted children. Adopters felt that they were given a realistic
understanding of the kind of trauma that children looked after may have
experienced and the potential impact of this on children throughout their
childhood. Adopters from a wide range of backgrounds are approved, reflecting
the diverse ethnic communities in Leicester.
matching children. The needs of children are clearly identified, with thorough
analysis of how adopters can meet these needs. Areas of potential vulnerability
are less well defined, though support needs are identified and addressed
through the provision of a clear support plan to appropriately meet childrens
needs.
adoption work. Panel members closely examine reports prior to meetings,
devising incisive and pertinent questions for social workers and potential
adopters concerning matches and approvals. Panel minutes evidence scrutiny
and challenge. The panel comprises an experienced blend of professional and
lay members. All panel members are appraised annually by the adoption panel
chair and attend training and development events.


Assessments focus on what is right for them following their adoption. A
dedicated contact worker facilitates and supports both direct and letterbox
contact. Consequently, children benefit from maintaining relationships, when
appropriate, and receiving letters that will add value to their lives in terms of
their identity. When it has been important for children to maintain some direct
contact with key people, careful matching has secured adopters who
understand and support this contact.
prepare them to live with their future families. Life-story work is of a high
quality. It is clear, colourful and jargon-free, enhanced by the use of the childs
own words and drawings. Social workers in the adoption team are skilled in
undertaking direct work with children, helping them to understand their
histories and enabling them to establish attachment to their new family. This
helps children to settle quickly. Foster carers assist with introductions, helping
children who are adopted to develop secure attachments to their new parents.
There have been no adoption breakdowns, either before or after the making of
an adoption order, in the past two years. This reflects the care taken in
matching, the work offered to children and the effectiveness of adoption
support.
sessions, with 17 adopters being assessed at the time of the inspection.
Enquiries receive a prompt response, and staff in the adoption service
understand the profile of children waiting in Leicester, ensuring that the right
adopters are recruited to meet their needs.
support that they receive from social workers throughout their adoption
journey. Having the opportunity to meet with the medical adviser to discuss
potential lifelong or future needs of their child or children is greatly valued.
Post-adoption support is timely, and creative, sensitive work helps families to
meet challenges. Adoptive families benefit from a wide range of services, and
the team makes good use of the adoption support fund.
in a sensitive manner, inviting young people to access their files when they
reach 18 years of age to help their understanding of their early lives. They
contain sufficient detail for older children, with an exploration of how they came
to be living with adoptive parents. This will make childrens journeys though to
adoption easier to understand as they grow older.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement.
quality of service for care leavers. Personal advisers (PAs) in the 16-plus team
use their skills and experience effectively to support young people and to
develop positive, enduring relationships. Their work shows a good
understanding of the range and complexities of young peoples lives, including
those with mental health needs, those at risk of sexual exploitation, care
leavers in custody and those who have recently become parents. Recent data
shows that almost all care leavers are in touch with the service, and only two
were refusing to engage at the time of the inspection.
opportunities are helping to improve practice and to strengthen supervision
using reflective practice approaches. This is new work which is already
beginning to demonstrate a positive impact on some young peoples lives,
including a review of the pathway planning process and implementation of an
improved format. The voice of care leavers is more prominent in these plans,
with the best having a stronger focus on helping young people to make positive
choices. Caseloads are now more manageable, and work by managers is
ongoing to ensure that these are balanced so that the most complex cases are
spread equitably across the team.
Being safe and staying safe are the key themes discussed with them, which
they thought was helpful. Risks are carefully and individually assessed,
particularly so when considering the allocation of housing and moving towards
independence. Detailed discussions and interventions are, in most instances,
recorded succinctly and well in case notes. Management oversight is timely and
decisive actions are taken to support PAs when this is needed. Young people
said that they were usually able to have advice and support via mobile phone, if
not always immediately. They expressed concern that there are few
opportunities for regular face-to-face contact with PAs and no accessible place
to go if they need some urgent help or just space to touch base.
care leavers plans are insufficiently detailed and action planning is cursory. In
the better plans, decisions are clearly articulated, identifying who is to do what
and by when. Information about the involvement with and expectations of
relevant agencies and services is explained well. However, the new format is
long and repetitive, a view that both care leavers and PAs share. This is
therefore still work in progress, and managers were clear that ongoing
feedback from PAs and care leavers would be used to further amend and
improve the format and the process.


disabled childrens service and the transition team requires improvement.
Managers across teams acknowledge that the process starts too late for some
care leavers, often in their mid-17th year, giving them little time to prepare for
and explore options about their future needs and aspirations. Arrangements for
those care leavers who have the most complex needs, including learning
difficulties and disabilities, are prioritised so that their needs are assessed
earlier and the relevant services commissioned. (Recommendation)
with support, most have arranged local registration with a doctor, dentist and
optician. Specialist health services are available in the city, including sexual
health and drugs and alcohol services, but the lack of a central location for care
leavers to access this more sensitive and targeted provision disadvantages
them. Care leavers said that they did not feel comfortable attending generic
service provision so would choose not to, in some instances. PAs are vigilant,
and are proactive if appointments are not kept. Conversely, those care leavers
living out of the area are accessing appropriate support from relevant health
and specialist services, and this was well recorded in plans.
service is unsatisfactory. Medical and health records lack sufficient focus and
detail. Health summaries contain limited information from which young people
can learn about and understand their health histories and the types of support
and services that they have experienced in the past. There is little in the
summaries to explain family backgrounds or identify work undertaken on, for
example, relationships, risky behaviours or their emotional well-being, all of
which have been or may continue to be relevant to their lives. Pathway plans
give better attention to health issues, although young people feel that these are
not easily accessible to them. (Recommendation)
and there is targeted joint work between the 16-plus service, the virtual school
and Connexions to reduce figures in this group of care leavers who are not in
education, employment or training (NEET). Currently, 60% of care leavers aged
local data reports that 15 are at university. These care leavers are achieving
well at university, and the local authority is clearly ambitious for all care leavers
to reach their full potential. However, there is still much to do. A high
percentage of young people aged between 18- and 21-years-old are NEET. At
inspection. (Recommendation)


has been too slow to provide ring-fenced opportunities for its care leavers in,
for example, work experience, traineeships and apprenticeships across its
workforce. There are a number of good training schemes available at local
further education colleges and specialist training providers, but too often these
programmes do not lead to sustainable employment outcomes. Care leavers
said that they had attended some good courses over time, but that they never
felt confident enough or well equipped to go for jobs as a result. New funding
to improve youth employment, particularly for those who are more vulnerable,
has been secured and plans are in development.
event, and care leavers said that they looked forward to the opportunity to get
dressed up. Organised by the corporate parenting panel, attendance at these
events is good. All care leavers living locally have access to free leisure passes,
and these are well used. For those care leavers living out of the area,
discussions are taking place to ensure that a similar offer can be achieved in
other local authority areas.
inspection. Policies and guidance are appropriately targeted for young people,
professionals and those foster carers who wish to participate. All care leavers
are encouraged to consider this option prior to leaving care, and currently 20
care leavers have chosen to extend their fostering placement. More training is
being planned to support foster carers to offer staying-put arrangements with
those in their care.
wherever they live, but not always successfully. Care leavers in independent
housing spoke about their struggle to manage finances and to keep on top of
managing their homes. PAs have a key role in helping young people to manage
their finances and navigate the benefits system. Bespoke packages in
supported accommodation are effective in helping young people with additional
needs to develop their skills. More targeted work is required to support all care
leavers to become more confident and skilled in managing their adult lives
independently and successfully.
placement stability is good. Good partnership arrangements internally between
the 16-plus service, the housing department, and private and voluntary sector
landlords ensure that allocations meet agreed standards and requirements. The
range and quality of accommodation within the city is generally satisfactory or
better, with good examples of supported living accommodation and
independent tenancy opportunities. The city council has recently agreed to
waive the first two weeks rent when a care leaver moves into their first council
tenancy in the city so that they can settle in more quickly and start to manage
their finances responsibly. This is in addition to receipt of the leaving care
grant, and is commendable.


resulting in young people being allocated safe accommodation and with
appropriate services in place to meet individual needs. Prompt action is taken
on those occasions when agreements break down or become untenable. Risk
and protective factors regarding a young persons safety and well-being are
prioritised when accommodation and support are needed. Policy prohibits the
use of bed and breakfast type accommodation and none has been used in the
last 12 months.
Care Council, which a small number of care leavers attend. Care leavers know
about their entitlement to services and they receive good support to access
information about their legal rights, and the benefits and financial help that
they can receive. Advocacy by PAs and the childrens rights officers is used well
by care leavers, who are supported to complain when necessary, for example
about housing allocations, parental rights and access to services.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Corporate and political leaders have been very effective in working together to
improve services for children and families in Leicester City. As a leadership group
that knows its services well through carefully scrutinising regular and up-to-date
information about strengths, weaknesses and changes in performance, it has built
plans upon a firm foundation to deliver a clear vision for childrens services for the
future. The local authority agreed appropriate priorities following the last inspection,
which have resulted in improvements against each area that was identified and led
to safer services for children and families. These include improving initial responses
to referrals so that children in need of a social care service, or those who would
benefit from early-help support, receive assessment and services in a timely way.
The local authority established a detailed performance management and quality
assurance model that delivers high-quality information and data. Additionally, this
new model has supported a radical change in culture, due to managers at all levels
being regularly held to account for their areas performance.
Senior leaders have improved the wider culture of childrens social care. They have
moved it to an environment where staff feel safe, are keen to share concerns and
are open to learning. This cultural shift demonstrates the strength of senior leaders
in Leicester City and is a substantial improvement since the last inspection.
The local authority continues to have high use of agency staff. However, it has been
successful in recruiting permanent senior and team managers. Recruitment to
permanent social work posts is beginning to increase, including attracting a large
number of newly qualified social workers into the authority.
Senior managers and officers demonstrate a high level of commitment to their
corporate parenting role, and the corporate parenting forum is chaired effectively by
the lead member for childrens services. However, almost all other elected members
are not demonstrating that they have high aspirations for children looked after.
A relevant range of services is commissioned to support children and their families.
However, these are commissioned individually, rather than being agreed against local
need and as part of a broader commissioning strategy. Placement sufficiency is met
through a mix of in-house and externally purchased placements. The sufficiency
strategy does not inform current provision or future planning.
The quality of services for children looked after has been maintained effectively
during the period of improvement in the management of referrals, child in need and
child protection services. However, services for disabled children have not received
the same proactive oversight.


Inspection findings
services to children and their families improved following the last inspection.
Leaders have appropriately targeted their improvement plans, and this has led
to an improved response and intervention for children in need of social care
and for those who would benefit from early-help services. The strategic director
for childrens services has received solid commitment and support from the city
mayor and the lead member for children to successfully drive these
improvements forward. No children were found to be at immediate risk of
unassessed harm during this inspection.
childrens improvement agenda at a reasonable level to ensure that changes
can be sustained in the longer term. Investment has therefore been made in
tangible developments, such as the positive move to improved accommodation
for the majority of social work teams, providing social workers with laptops and
mobile telephones so that they can work effectively while out in the community.
Workers value these investments highly. Investment has also been made to
strengthen senior management capacity, quality assurance and performance
management. The local authority has appropriate plans to continue current
arrangements until consistently stronger practice is in place across childrens
social care.
frontline workers. This identified a need to change the culture and working
environment for staff to being open and safe. Changing this negative culture
quickly became a major priority for senior leaders. Through regular meetings
with staff, senior leaders, including the director of childrens services and the
lead member for childrens services, ensured that they fully understood and
responded to the issues raised. Development and learning opportunities were
also put in place. These include an exciting partnership with De Montfort
University to share skills and learning, and twilight training sessions to support
workers to refocus on their own development and to improve the quality of
their work with children and families. These elements led to a substantial
improvement in the culture of childrens social care. During this inspection,
inspectors found staff engaging in open dialogues with managers, and feeling
safe and confident to challenge issues.
These includes relationships across strategic boards such as the children, young
people and schools scrutiny commission, the Local Safeguarding Children Board
(LSCB) and the Health and Wellbeing Board. While the work of the LSCB and
scrutiny commission directly links with the improvement agenda in childrens
social care, it is unclear how the Health and Wellbeing Board influences the
childrens social care agenda. The chief operating officer now holds the LSCB
chair directly to account through regular meetings and review against their
agreed set of priorities. This is an improvement since the last inspection.


strategy. Over recent months, it has reviewed childrens and families needs
through updating the childrens and young peoples joint strategic needs
assessment, and has mapped current provision of services. However, it is only
at the earliest stages of considering its strategy going forwards. This is now a
key priority for the local authority. (Recommendation)
meet identified need, such as support for young carers and the highly valued
multi-systemic therapy. Many of these services have been commissioned
following good practice in consultation with children and partners from other
agencies, and contracts appropriately include requirements such as adherence
to safer recruitment and safeguarding practices. Outcomes are improving for
children and young people because of commissioned services. For example,
because of interventions through the domestic and sexual violence specialist
contract, schools reported a 79% increase in attendance at school for those
accessing support.
of the current population of children looked after or the anticipated demand
going forward. It also fails to consider the range of placements that are
required in order to meet the sufficiency duty. While this is clearly a deficit,
managers are minimising the impact for individual children through spotpurchasing external placements to meet their needs. (Recommendation)
attended by a wide range of officers who maintain an increasingly effective
oversight of services to children looked after and care leavers. The corporate
parenting forum engages directly with children and young people from the
Children in Care Council. Children and young people attend every meeting and
are supported to engage fully with discussions. The forum actively pursues
improvements to services for children looked after and care leavers. For
example, at its most recent meeting an exciting pilot was agreed to support
care leavers into their council tenancies by having a rent-free period to help
them to set up their new home. Performance information is provided to the
forum and is an area still in development so that it includes, for example,
placement stability data and greater exploration of return home interviews,
including the number being declined by children.
after or a commitment to their corporate parenting role, with only two elected
members attending the vast majority of meetings. The chair has attempted to
secure greater commitment from members, for example through identifying a
small group of members to take a special interest in children looked after and
offering specialist training, but this has not led to any improvements to date.
(Recommendation)


performance management culture, from a very low base at the time of the last
inspection. The change in culture is rooted in clear and reliable performance
data that is available to managers and leaders across the local authority, with
regular performance meetings and a performance board which holds managers
to account for their areas performance. The creative style of audits, both a
traditional style review of case records and observations of practice with
children and families, ensures that leaders and managers understand the
quality of the full range of work with, and for, children and their families. Highquality quarterly reports are in an accessible format for both political leaders
and officers. They draw on a wide range of information, including performance
data, audits and outcomes from complaints. This ensures that senior leaders
understand childrens social care very well, and they track changes in
performance swiftly in order to identify areas for proactive and focused action
in the following quarter.
management oversight are effective. Although widespread consistency in the
quality of work with children and families has not yet been achieved, it is clear
that compliance with key social work tasks has improved significantly since the
last inspection and that the quality of social work is beginning to improve. The
recording of decision-making by team and service managers has also
significantly improved since the last inspection, yet some further input is
required to gain consistency in the quality of management oversight.
need services, this led to a lack of tangible improvements in services to children
looked after. Importantly though, the quality of these services was maintained
during this challenging time, and adoption performance has seen some
improvement. The service for disabled children has experienced a high turnover
of staff, including managers, which has not led to robust child in need and child
protection practices. Following emerging findings from inspectors, the local
authority undertook further audits of childrens cases within the disabled
childrens service during this inspection and is now clearly sighted on the issues.
Senior managers are now considering how to ensure that these vulnerable
children receive improved and equitable services. (Recommendation)


understands the views of children and young people, including vulnerable
children. It also has effective mechanisms in place to ensure that their views
inform service developments. Children and young people who access the wellresourced participation service are provided with the training and support that
they need to engage fully in key strategic meetings, and young advisers are
financially compensated for their time. Roles include working as mystery
shoppers and young inspectors, and consulting on a range of projects, including
youth proofing documents such as the new reflective supervision tool. The
How will you hear me films are a very powerful resource, developed from
childrens and young peoples own experiences, to help professionals to reflect
on their skills in really listening to and understanding childrens views, wishes
and feelings. Children from the Children in Care Council are also well supported
to contribute to surveys of children looked after, to feed into the corporate
parenting forum, and to inform thinking and decisions within the forum.
Currently, training is underway to increase the pool of children and young
people able to sit on interview panels to ensure that these important decisions
reflect the views of children and young people.
relationships with the Children and Family Court Advice and Support Service
and the courts. The director of childrens social care and early help now chairs
the local family justice board. This has increased confidence among partners
that the local authority is serious about improving working relationships and
also that it is keen to be key partners in reducing avoidable delay in care
proceedings and delivering effective legal interventions for children. Local
authority officers also sit as members of the sub-groups linked to the board and
actively contribute to the sharing of good practice and developments in
training.
staff now receive regular supervision, and managers swiftly address aspects of
poor performance. Performance reviews are not undertaken for all staff, and
the follow-up of actions is not yet routine between one supervision session and
the next, which means that tracking progress for children is not always
sufficiently thorough.
team manager posts, and will have a near-full complement of permanent
managers by September this year. However, there is still high reliance on
agency staff, particularly in the single assessment teams and child in need
service. Additionally, some agency workers are in place to enable the new
single assessment team to function, and others fill the 0.5 posts put in place to
support social workers who are in their assessed and supported year in
employment (ASYEs). (Recommendation)


number of changes in social worker experienced by children by over 60% in the
past year. Furthermore, senior managers are seeking to reduce the impact of
social worker changes for children and they now ensure that, whenever
possible, transfers between workers are managed so that there is a handover
and sense of continuity for children. The local authority has attracted effectively
a large number of ASYEs to work in childrens social care, through targeted
recruitment and an improved offer of support during their assessed year. It has
also just agreed plans to offer apprenticeships to some early-help workers to
support them through to a professional qualification.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Julie Knight HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Jansy Kelly HMI
Team inspectors: Dawn Godfrey HMI, Shabana Abasi OI, Stella Butler HMI, Andy
Whippey HMI
Senior data analyst: Stewart Hartshorne
Quality assurance manager: Nicholas McMullen SHMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


