London Borough of Lewisham
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 26 October 2015  20 November 2015
Report published: 20 January 2016

Childrens services in the London Borough of Lewisham require
improvement to be good

Requires improvement

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Requires improvement

Executive summary
Childrens services in Lewisham require improvement to be good. While standards for
children looked after have been maintained and those for care leavers have
improved, those for children in need of early help and protection have deteriorated.
The Executive Director of Childrens Services, appointed in September 2015, has
been quick to identify deficiencies in performance and processes. The senior
management team undertook a self-assessment of the whole service to identify
areas of concern and those of strength. As a result, the new senior management
team has reached a realistic understanding of the challenges facing childrens


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


services in Lewisham. Their priorities, shared with and supported by senior leaders,
are to make sustainable changes and to retain the current skilled and child-centred
workforce.
Creating a culture and environment to promote sustainable change is a priority for
the new senior leadership team. An action plan has been developed that
appropriately prioritises the activities necessary to address shortfalls. For example, a
new information technology platform has been commissioned as a matter of urgency
and planning is well advanced to ensure that the case file audit programme is riskbased, proportionate and effective in addressing deficiencies in practice. Child
protection processes are also under review to ensure that they fully comply with
guidance. Some changes in practice have already been made.
Prior to the appointments of the present Executive Director of Children and Young
Peoples Services and Director of Childrens Social Care, the senior leadership team
went through a period of instability. This has created legacy issues within aspects of
the services that have declined or are poorly coordinated, exemplified by the current
early help offer. Corporately, the leadership and governance arrangements in
Lewisham have not been robust, or sufficiently rigorous, in challenging, monitoring
and driving social work practice to ensure that all services for children and young
people are good. Senior managers do not understand the quality of services well
enough because they do not consider a wide enough range of data.
Thresholds for those most urgently in need of protection are well understood by
statutory agencies in the borough. This ensures, for the large majority of children
requiring protection, that timely action is taken to recognise and reduce risk. The
application of thresholds for children in need are less well understood as pathways
are not embedded. The process to access social work services is overly complicated
and the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) adds complexity while not
functioning well to filter unnecessary work. Planning for children in need is an area
that requires improvement to ensure that desired outcomes are clear and that
progress can be monitored and assessed. Robust systems to monitor the
effectiveness of step-up and step-down arrangements between early help and
childrens social care are not currently in place.
Services for children looked after remain good, with almost all children and young
people benefiting from stable and secure placements. Social work practice is
effective in improving outcomes for children looked after. Effective leadership of the
virtual school enables timely identification of children when their educational
progress and attendance begins to give cause for concern. This helps the virtual
school to intervene in a timely way to offer additional support to children and young
people.
Adoption performance remains a strength and permanency planning is progressed
with appropriate urgency and thoughtfulness. Children with a plan for adoption are
well supported, as are prospective adopters and this promotes effective placement
matching. Care leavers value the good service they receive and almost all are in
touch with the local authority. Personal advisers provide consistent support and


guidance, and enable care leavers to plan effectively for their futures. Increasing
numbers of care leavers are attending further and higher education, including
universities.
Individual work with children and young people who are at risk of child sexual
exploitation or have been missing from home or education is often effective in
reducing risk. The local authority and its partners are, however, less effective in
sharing information to work and plan strategically for these children and young
people. This inhibits prevention and disruption work at borough level. Managers have
reviewed arrangements to track children missing from education and those who are
electively home educated. As a result, the local authority holds good information on
these groups, including up-to-date numbers of children, and has a good
understanding of the reasons for children missing education or being educated at
home
Performance management and quality assurance processes are underdeveloped.
They are based on unreliable data and do not always focus on services and areas of
practice in greatest need of improvement. Learning from audits is limited by plans
that are insufficiently specific, measurable and time-bound. Learning from complaints
and from feedback from children, young people and their families is limited and not
used fully to inform service improvement.
Commissioning arrangements are well established. Commissioned services are
routinely monitored and systematically reviewed to ensure that they meet current
and emerging needs.
Good attention is paid to the identity and diversity needs of children in every part of
the service. For children looked after and those requiring permanence, it is a
particular strength.
This executive summary should be read alongside the recommendations in the next
section of this report.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area

Children looked after in this area



Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates no childrens homes.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements for the
protection of children was in February 2012. The local authority was judged to be
outstanding.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
February 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since 1 September 2015.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since June
Children living in this area
 Approximately 67,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Lewisham. This is 22.9% of the total population (291,933) in the area (ONS
 Approximately one in three of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 22.7% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 24% (the national average is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 63.4% of all
children living in the area, compared with 25% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Black/Black British African (15.70%), Black/Black British Caribbean (11.70%) and
Other Black (8.3%).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 33.4% (the national average is 19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 27.2% (the national average is 15%)


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local invalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 26 October 2015, 1,254 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 26 October 2015, 369 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 377 at 31 March 2015.
 At 26 October 2015, 18 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from 31 at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, two serious incident notifications have been completed,
one has been transferred to another local authority and one has been referred for
consideration.
Children looked after in this area
 At 26 October 2015, the local authority is looking after 476 children (a rate of
at 31 March 2015. Of this number:
authority area
 six live in residential special schools3, all of which are out of the authority
area
 three live with parents, of whom none live out of the authority area
 six are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 29 adoptions
subsequently returned to be looked after
independent living
houses of multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or fewer per year.


Recommendations

Improve governance arrangements so that there is effective oversight, support
and challenge of childrens services by the local authoritys Children and Young
Peoples Select Committee and the Corporate Parenting Panel to drive and
monitor service improvement.


Review processes within the duty team to ensure that systems to manage
contacts and referrals, including domestic abuse notifications, are secure and
enable social workers and other professionals to keep children and young
people safe and protected, in a timely manner.


Ensure that a revised early help strategy is implemented so that early help is
effectively targeted, coordinated and evaluated so that families receive
appropriate support when need is first identified.


Take action to improve information and intelligence sharing across partners
regarding children at risk of sexual exploitation and/or going missing and use
this to improve prevention and disruption activity.


Improve performance management and information systems to ensure that
managers at all levels have timely, relevant and accurate performance
information to enable them to work effectively and deliver a consistently good
service.


Monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of step-up and step-down
arrangements between early help and childrens social care to ensure that
appropriate actions are taken to improve services.


Ensure that all plans for any child or young person receiving a service: focus
on reducing risk; identify the needs of all children in the family; and are
understood by parents and young people. Plans should be specific, measurable
and time-bound.


Ensure that initial strategy discussions include relevant professionals to inform
timely decision-making and planning in child protection investigations, as
required by guidance.


Ensure that life story work is completed for those children and young people in
long-term care who need to know and understand their life histories.


Summary for children and young people
 Since the previous inspection, leaders and managers have not maintained high
standards in safeguarding and early help services. Services have remained good
for children looked after and have improved for care leavers.
 Local councillors do not always make sure that services are working well for
children and young people. Managers do not use information well enough to
improve services for children and young people.
 The recently appointed Executive Director of Children and Young Peoples
Services has very quickly recognised the things that need to be done to improve
services, and has put in place good plans to make this happen.
 When children and young people begin to experience problems, they do not
receive help quickly enough.
 In some cases, social workers do not gain a full enough picture of childrens
needs. This means that some children experience delays in getting the help that
they need.
 When children are at immediate risk of harm, staff from the local authority make
sure that they get the help and protection they need.
 Social workers, personal advisers and other staff are enthusiastic and committed
to improving the lives of children and young people. When children and young
people are found to need the help of a social worker, they know the children and
young people they work with well.
 Social workers and managers do not always have a full enough picture of the
reasons why children go missing or when they are vulnerable to sexual
exploitation. This means that the risks to children are not always clear and makes
planning to keep children safe more difficult.
 Children continue to live with their families whenever this is what is best for
them.
 Social workers visit children looked after regularly. This helps to ensure their
safety and that their needs are being met.
 Support for the mental health of children looked after is available but some
children wait too long to receive the help that they need.
 Many children looked after make good progress in their education. There are few
absences from school and no children are permanently excluded or missing
education.
 Social workers and personal advisers maintain regular contact with care leavers.
They offer good support to young people based on their individual needs and
circumstances.
 Care leavers live in safe and suitable accommodation.
 Children who need adopting are found permanent homes that meet their needs
well. After they are adopted, they get good help and support to maintain contact
with parents and family members when this is in their best interests.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
The service for children needing help and protection in Lewisham requires
improvement. Although some early help services are resulting in positive outcomes
for children, these services are neither well-coordinated nor sufficiently targeted.
The duty system is unnecessarily complex, although children and young people at
risk of immediate harm receive an effective and timely service. There is, however,
variability in how other contacts are dealt with. Few progress to referral stage and
most are directed as contacts to early help services.
As a result of the way contacts are recorded, it is not always easy to fully capture
and understand childrens social care involvements. In some cases, this leads to
delay in responding to need. The current duty configuration means the multi-agency
safeguarding hub (MASH) adds complexity to the process rather than simplifying
decision-making and information-sharing.
Strategy discussions are generally held within appropriate timescales, although it is
an omission that health professionals and other partner agencies are not routinely
invited to share information and contribute to planning. Risk is appropriately
identified and addressed; however, child protection plans are often too detailed,
making it difficult to pick out the key issues to be addressed. Assessments are
variable in quality but the vast majority are adequate or good. Some creative direct
work allows children to share their wishes and feelings with professionals. Social
workers know the children whom they work with well.
The local authoritys response to children who go missing and those at risk of child
sexual exploitation, although inconsistent, is protecting children and young people.
Return home interviews are not conducted routinely. When they are, they identify
issues that led to the missing episode but these are not collated to build up a picture
of the young persons needs overall, or the cohort of young people as a whole. The
needs of children who are missing education are well understood, and proactive work
ensures that they are located and supported to return to school.
The children with complex needs team provides a comprehensive range of universal
and specialist services, which means that disabled children and their families receive
integrated support at the point of need. The family intervention project (FIP)
provides effective support to families and is the key element of the authoritys
response to troubled families and those on the edge of care.

Inspection findings

Although there are good examples of early help services that are valued by
families, their effectiveness is not being tracked by the local authority. This


lack of monitoring means that the local authority does not know how many
families are receiving these services, nor what impact they are having. In turn,
this means that they cannot know whether individual children and families are
receiving the right help at the right time. The early intervention service has
recently been reconfigured following a restructuring of services, but it is too
soon to assess the impact of these changes. Some early help services are
directly commissioned by the local authority, for example childrens centres
and targeted family support. These services are quality-assured through
contract monitoring arrangements and there is therefore a better
understanding of these services and their positive impact.

Work is taking place using Team Around the Child (TAC) and Common
Assessments Framework (CAF) processes, although there is insufficient
performance data available to measure the quality, quantity or impact of these.
The quality of CAFs considered by inspectors was variable. While the early help
operational procedure requires a TAC to have taken place prior to contacting
social care, in all but urgent cases, this had not occurred. This indicates that
partners are unclear about the referral pathways.


Cases that do not meet the threshold for childrens social care where an early
help intervention is recommended are not routinely tracked. Several cases
were seen where the recommendation had been that a TAC be convened but
this had not happened. Families were therefore not receiving a coordinated
multi-agency response, although it had been judged that this may be helpful to
them. Childrens social care do not check that a TAC has taken place. As a
result, in too many cases a further contact was made to childrens social care
within a relatively short space of time as early help work had not been
progressed.


The front-door duty social work system is unnecessarily complex; however,
during the course of the inspection, no children were seen who were left at
immediate risk of significant harm. Decision-making is generally both timely
and appropriate in identifying risk. The current system relies on individuals
working practices rather than being underpinned by clear and sound processes
and procedures. The committed and experienced staff in these teams work
well and in a child-centred manner to keep children and young people safe.


The Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH) does not operate as the first point
of contact and does not undertake agency checks on all contacts. Consent
from parents was evident in some case files, though is not routinely sought
before agency checks take place. Too many contacts are received from the
police that require no further action, although the processes to decide on
appropriate actions in these cases are unnecessarily cumbersome and timeconsuming. These factors highlight the need for the review of all front door
arrangements and thresholds currently being undertaken by the Local
Safeguarding Children Board.



Contacts generally become referrals only when they require a social work
assessment. This means that a considerable amount of work and informationgathering may be undertaken prior to a contact being accepted as a referral.
This could include agency checks and work undertaken by the missing person
liaison officer and the independent domestic violence adviser. In some cases,
this causes delay in the appropriate provision or signposting of services. The
true number of re-referrals is masked by this practice, as it is unlikely to be
comparable in process to many other local authorities. It also means that it can
be difficult to identify from the referral history those contacts that involved
providing information and those where there were more immediate concerns.
In some cases seen, there were delays in grasping ongoing issues because the
history had not been fully taken into consideration, although no children were
found who were at risk of immediate harm as a result.


Children who are at immediate risk of significant harm are well protected and
urgent action is taken to ensure that they are safe. Child protection enquiries
are managed well, and suitably qualified and experienced social workers
conduct these. Similarly, in the vast majority of cases seen, the police are
involved appropriately. Almost all strategy discussions involve a phone
conversation with the police. It is an omission that the local authority does not
routinely consider including health and other relevant agencies in these
discussions where appropriate, for example midwives for concerns regarding
unborn babies. In this regard the local authority is not compliant with Working
Together.


The emergency duty service prioritises childrens cases and communicates well
with day services to safeguard children and young people. The emergency
duty team has access to 24-hour legal advice. The teams limited capacity
occasionally leads to a delayed response in a small number of cases. Children
made subject to police protection out of hours are routinely placed with carers
by police officers due to the lack of social worker availability.


In cases where the risk of harm is less immediate, most children and young
people receive a prompt enough response. In some cases of pre-birth
assessments, there were avoidable delays in convening an initial child
protection conference (ICPC). This meant that for these children there were
delays between concerns being raised and the development of a multi-agency
child protection plan. Concerns are somewhat mitigated by evidence that the
assessment was seen as part of a support process and appropriate services
were put in place during the assessment process.


During assessments and interventions, children are routinely seen alone and
their views are gathered using a variety of methods. Inspectors saw some
creative use of direct work that ensured that children were able to express
their feelings, and to understand what was happening in their lives. The views
of children influence what is happening to them, and they are mostly reflected
within the records.



Social workers are enthusiastic and committed to improving outcomes for
children. They know the children with whom they work well and understand
their histories, the impact of parental behaviour and the presenting risks and
protective factors. This is not always fully reflected in assessment documents.
Risks and impact relating to domestic abuse, parental mental ill-health or
substance abuse are understood and addressed. Chronologies are not routinely
used well within assessments to identify key issues or incidents in a childs life.


Families who have no recourse to public funds receive a good service from a
dedicated team, which allows the necessary expertise in immigration law,
family support and housing to be harnessed into a single service structure. For
other children in need, the absence of formal structures to review child in need
plans means that it is difficult to see how coordinated provision of preventative
services is leading to positive outcomes for children. Nevertheless, it was
evident in the cases tracked by inspectors that outcomes had generally
improved for these children.


A functional multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC) arrangement is
in place for families experiencing domestic violence. A social worker from the
duty referral and assessment team attends the MARAC and gives information
as appropriate, although consistently good case recording does not support
this. It is not therefore always apparent from the childs file that there has
been previous contact with partners in the MARAC. It is also not always clear
what current or previous contact has taken place with families, making it
difficult for the attending social worker to be fully aware of all risks to children
from their parents violent behaviour.


Decisions made by child protection conferences are appropriate, although they
are not always held within prescribed timescales, and performance in relation
to this has recently dipped. Attendance from health partners is good, although
conference chairs report poor input from adult mental health and substance
misuse partners. Given the high number of cases where these factors
represent the presenting risks, this is of concern. There is no minute-taker at
review child protection conferences, so the chair is required to take notes and
provide a written summary. Chairs report that they are therefore unable to
fully use their skills to develop solutions to risk as they are engaged in notetaking.


Child in need and child protection plans address all needs and risks identified in
the assessment. While most are at least adequate, too few are good. Plans
that are not good are often too long and do not incorporate specific and
measurable outcomes. They do not separate out the key areas of risk and
there is no contingency recorded. Reviews are not always used as effectively
as they could be to drive forward the progress of the plan, meaning that, in a
minority of cases, issues are allowed to drift and there is insufficient challenge
to ensure adequate progress is being made.



There is a variable response to children who go missing and those who are at
risk of child sexual exploitation. Children missing from home who are not
known receive a return home interview from the missing person liaison officer.
Young people open to childrens social care, including young people who are
perceived to be at high risk, usually receive a return home interview. Where
these do take place, records of these interviews indicate that young people are
seen alone, and a detailed record provides an account of what caused the
missing episode. However, interviews are not routinely collated to build up a
picture of the individual young persons behaviour. Nor are they collated to
look at overall themes in order to feed into future service-planning.


A weekly multi-agency case tracking meeting is held to maintain an operational
overview of the young people considered most at risk from child sexual
exploitation. However, the meetings do not always track the absence of return
home interviews and notes from the case-tracking meeting are not consistently
transferred onto case records. It is not, therefore, easy to see what impact
these meetings are having on the day-to-day management of risk in these
cases, particularly as police as key partners do not always attend. The child
sexual exploitation risk assessment checklist, although developed, is not
routinely used. The recent creation of the post of specialist senior sexual
exploitation social worker has had some impact in terms of identifying risk and
raising awareness of these issues. However, it is early days and responses to
the risk of child sexual exploitation remain inconsistent.


The reasons why children miss education are well understood. The local
authority maintains an up-to-date list of all those missing education and a lead
officer for children missing education and a monitoring board are in place.
Monitoring meetings focus on those cases causing most concern and a high
proportion of interventions result in children returning to school. The
attendance and welfare service has been proactive in visiting 74 families whose
children had not taken up a secondary school place at the end of Year 6. As a
result, 67 of these children started school in September 2015.


The local authority has a good focus on children whose parents choose to
educate them at home, with a sound knowledge of the cohort. The reasons for
choosing elective home education are well understood. Staff are persistent in
ascertaining the suitability and effectiveness of the education that children
receive and have a strong focus on childrens welfare needs. In cases where
there are significant causes for concern, effective action is taken to promote
school attendance and childrens welfare.


When 1617-year-old young people present as homeless, an initial child in
need assessment is undertaken by housing, and mediation is offered. The
implications of becoming looked after are explored with young people. A
dedicated social worker assesses the young persons situation and provides
appropriate support.



Private fostering arrangements are identified well within the borough. Some
active awareness-raising has led to an increase in notifications. Recent
assessments seen were of a good quality. Inspectors reviewing these cases
found, on a number of occasions, children who had no adult who held parental
responsibility for them. This had been identified within assessments, but not
robustly addressed. During the period of the inspection, the local authority
formed an appropriate proposal to strengthen its response to such cases.


The designated officer, who is suitably qualified and experienced, effectively
manages, in a timely manner, allegations against people in a position of trust.
Effective management systems track the progress of all cases from the point of
initial consultation, ensuring that actions are promptly completed. The number
of allegations is rising, particularly referrals from schools. The role is highly
valued by headteachers, who appreciate the support and guidance given.

The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Effective edge-of-care support means that children are looked after only when
necessary, after all other alternatives have been fully explored. If their plan is to
return home, they do so with appropriate support in place. A permanent home is
secured for those children who need it as quickly as possible and they are provided
with placements that appropriately reflect their needs, with adults who help and
promote their health, education, culture, ethnicity and identity.
Social workers know the children they work with well and visit them regularly to
ensure their safety, progress their plans, and promote their well-being, leading to
improved outcomes. Children and young peoples views are reflected in their plans
and they are listened to. When children go missing, the risk is assessed and
measures put in place to keep them safe.
Child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) provide outreach support in
schools, foster placements and residential homes, including for those children who
live outside the borough, but some children wait too long to receive a service. Needs
are assessed and most children access services that promote and improve their
health outcomes. However, not all children have their need for substance misuse
services identified.
The virtual school provides robust oversight of attendance, progress and attainment,
and many children looked after make good progress from their starting points. There
are few absences from school and no children are permanently excluded or missing
education. Monitoring of the progress of children looked after continues post-16,
which helps them to secure appropriate education, employment or training (EET).
The LA maintains contact with almost all of its care leavers. Workers know the young


people well and maintain regular contact with them. They offer good support to
young people based on their individual needs and circumstances. Good support is
available through the weekly multi-agency drop-in, resulting in a high proportion of
young people in EET. Young people are supported well to think about and explore
university as an option and almost all young people live in suitable accommodation.
Adoption performance is a strength. Children and potential adopters are carefully
assessed and permanent homes are found that meet the needs of children. Postadoption support is effectively provided to children, adopters and birth parents. The
adoption panel reaches robust decisions for children. The panel chairs six-monthly
reports currently lack sufficient detail to support learning.

Inspection findings

Effective family support services for those children and young people on the
edge of care ensure that children remain within their birth family wherever
possible. As a result, numbers of children looked after have remained stable
over the last three years. Senior managers ensure that there is appropriate
and robust application of care thresholds and that all safe alternatives to care
are considered. At the time of the inspection, there were 467 children and
young people looked after. Children who return home to live with parents or
other family members do so with an appropriate plan of support.


A comprehensive and structured legal planning process guides social workers
to consider family members at the earliest opportunity when the local
authoritys plan is for permanency, other than with birth parents. Recording
shows timely consideration of permanence plans. All occur before the second
child looked after review, with appropriate discussions, challenge and
contingency parallel planning. Effective letters before proceedings reinforce the
opportunity for parents to consider wider family members to care for the child.
Letters to families legal representatives demonstrate a comprehensive
consideration of alternatives to care. Appropriately experienced and wellsupported social workers ensure compliance with the public law outline (PLO).
Thorough pre-proceedings preparation ensures that carefully considered cases
are presented in court.


Close monitoring of individual cases by local authority lawyers ensures
compliance with care proceedings timescales in most cases. The average
length of care proceedings is 32 weeks, due to a small number of complex
cases. More recent cases were heard within the expected 26-week timescale.
Reports for court consider the range of options for securing permanence for
children, giving weight to the most appropriate option for the child. The quality
of court statements is consistently good, minimising the need for further
expert assessments. Comprehensive viability assessments of family members
avoid unnecessary delay. Parenting assessments commissioned by a specialist
family centre produce high-quality reports, although the timeliness of a
minority cause some delay in proceedings. The Children and Family Court


Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and the local judiciary both report
positively about the quality of plans and performance of the local authority.

Children are visited regularly, including those placed out of the borough, within
timescales that are compliant with statutory requirements. Established and
positive relationships with their social workers help children and young people
to make progress. In almost all cases, there is good continuity of social work
support. Social workers and carers effectively help children to prepare for
permanence and ensure that they have a good understanding of where they
will be living and who their carers will be. Case records evidence tenacious
work that engages young people in their plans and reviews.


A specific anti-bullying strategy for children looked after provides effective
guidance to schools, childrens homes and foster carers on identifying and
responding to incidents of bullying. Incidents in school are rare due to
proactive monitoring of progress of all children looked after. The fostering
service successfully delivered seven well-attended workshops to foster carers
during 201415. This training appropriately explored celebrating diversity and
also helped foster carers to consider the effects of discrimination, prejudice
and stereotyping on children.


Identification of risk associated with children going missing is evident in
assessments, and plans are in place to reduce risk. Return interviews are
taking place but inconsistent recording does not provide an overview of risk, in
most cases seen. A lack of analysis at strategic level misses an opportunity to
understand patterns and therefore disrupt such exploitative activity.


Performance on initial and review health assessments (RHAs), development
checks for children under five, immunisations and attendance at dental
appointments has declined in the 12 months to March 2015, but remains
higher than statistical neighbours and the England average. In 201415, RHAs
dropped to 91.4%, under five development checks to 97%, and immunisations
to 88.8%. The service is addressing this and monitors performance at a
quarterly contract meeting, providing oversight of improving progress.
Additional dedicated nurse time and administrative support have recently been
provided to reduce a backlog of health assessments, of which there are
approximately 30 at the end of October 2015.


SYMBOL is the CAMHS service for children looked after. It consists of a team
of social workers, family therapists, a clinical psychologist, drama therapist and
consultant psychiatrist who work well together to meet need. Effective working
with the virtual school provides outreach support, consultation to foster carers
and training and consultation to professionals to improve outcomes. Lack of
capacity, due to a job vacancy, has resulted in children with identified mental
health needs waiting over two months to access services, therefore not
receiving help when they specifically need it. Numbers of children looked after
identified with a substance misuse problem are low. In 201314, this was 4%
(15 children); however, all these children received an appropriate intervention.



The virtual school team provides good oversight of the attendance, progress
and attainment of children looked after. Through close monitoring, the virtual
school team identifies quickly when the attendance of children begins to
decline and they start to experience problems at school. This enables staff to
put in place timely additional support that helps children to remain in school,
maintain their attendance and make progress. The majority of children are
placed in a good school and attendance at school is very good. Local data
show that in 201415 the average attendance of children looked after was
attendance has improved further to 95.5%.


Many children looked after make good progress from their starting points. Data
show that 60% of children looked after in the borough made the progress
expected of all children in 2013, compared to just 36% of children looked after
nationally. In the last academic year local data show that over half of children
looked after did so. Considering the high proportion of these children with
special educational needs, this demonstrates good performance.


The virtual school works effectively with its partners to help children stay in
school and keep them on track in their learning. As a result, fewer children
looked after are receiving fixed-term exclusions from school. In the last
academic year, 39 children were subject to a fixed-term exclusion, compared
with 49 in 201314. No children looked after have received a permanent
exclusion in the last two years, whereas the number of pupils being
permanently excluded from secondary schools has risen. Children who do not
attend a mainstream school are placed in registered alternative provision and a
arrived in this country are missing education while awaiting a school place.
They are actively engaged with individual learning packages that the virtual
school team has promptly put in place.


The virtual school effectively supports children and young people at key points
of transition. In September 2015, all those transferring to secondary school
began Year 7 at their first-choice school. The good monitoring of children
under 16 years old continues post-16. Young people are encouraged to
consider their next steps in learning through additional activities such as visits
to careers fairs. These activities help young people to broaden their horizons
and consider carefully their career options. All young people who completed
Year 11 in 2015 had in place an education or training offer. The small number
who are currently not in education, employment or training (NEET) receive
very good support to help them engage. Staff from the virtual school have
excellent knowledge of each young person and are very proactive in
supporting them towards education, training and employment.


For the small number of children looked after for whom published data are
available, their attainment shows a mixed picture. At the end of Key Stage 1,
childrens attainment in reading, writing and mathematics was below
comparators in 2013/14. At Key Stage 2 in 201314, childrens attainment


improved in reading and mathematics. Local data for the last academic year
show that, at Key Stage 4, 19% of children looked after achieved five GCSEs,
including English and mathematics. This was a good improvement when
compared with the 12% who did so in the previous year. While the attainment
gap between children looked after and their peers remains wide, in 2013/14 at
Key Stage 2, the gap closed significantly on all measures.

The virtual school has rightly identified that the quality of personal education
plans (PEPs) varies too much. Academic targets are not always prominent
enough or clear and the views of children are not always sufficiently recorded.
In response, the virtual school is providing training for social workers, foster
carers and designated teachers to improve the quality of PEPs. Children and
young people spoken to by inspectors reported that PEP reviews were a good
opportunity to check that they were on track in their learning.


The pupil premium is used well by the virtual school to support effective
borough-wide initiatives such as study support and Fast-Track, a programme
that targets 16- and 17-year-olds without an education place. At the weekly,
well-attended study group, children looked after receive additional help in a
relaxed and purposeful environment. They enjoy attending and told inspectors
how much they value this additional support that helps sustain their progress
well. The use of the pupil premium is closely aligned to the educational goals
of children looked after, and additional one-to-one support they receive is
effective.


Local authority staff effectively promote opportunities for children and young
people to pursue their interests. Children looked after have free access to local
leisure facilities. Staff, children and young people are supported by the council
to pursue fundraising activities that enable children looked after and care
leavers to participate in exciting overseas educational trips and holidays. These
trips provide them with excellent opportunities to develop their personal and
social skills, develop their sense of responsibility, broaden their horizons and
inspire them to achieve well.


Care plans seen by inspectors are of a good quality. They appropriately identify
all areas of need and risk. In cases seen, recent reviews mostly take place
within timescales (98.3% in 201415). Appropriate challenge is evident by the
independent reviewing officers (IROs) to progress care plans. In one example,
reduced risk was evidenced by a detailed assessment, which included clear
actions in relation to a young person who had been missing from their
placement. Another case evidenced an appropriate response to disclosure of
sexual abuse, with the assessment reflecting concern and clear management
oversight guiding actions.


The low number of formal safeguarding alerts by IROs (25 in the last 12
months) reflects good practice as most issues are progressed through informal
routes. Comprehensive monitoring by IROs captures themes and issues for
practice improvement considered by senior managers. For example, this has


led to changes to promote the better quality and consistency of the
interpreting service for unaccompanied asylum young people (UAYP) as well as
a clearly articulated staying put policy for foster carers.

The needs of children are carefully matched with skilled foster carers.
Thorough assessments of children, their needs, wishes and views are apparent
when considering appropriate matches. Placement workers within the fostering
service work efficiently to identify placements in a timescale to meet childrens
needs, including identifying appropriate cultural and religious matches.
Emergency placements are effectively identified where these are required. A
dedicated team in the fostering service provides good support to kinship
carers.


Once matches are agreed, children are prepared well for moving into their new
homes. This includes ensuring that they are able to maintain meaningful
contact with parents and family members when this is in their best interests.
Life story activity undertaken by foster carers helps children to understand
their past; however, it does not consistently lead to children having a
completed life story book in later life. Contact arrangements, facilitated by a
commissioned service, enable brothers and sisters to meet up with each other
in community venues.


The local authority effectively ensures that they have a range of placements
available to meet the needs of children through targeted recruitment and
support to their in-house foster carers. An independent agency delivering the
recruitment and assessment functions over the past three years has effectively
increased the pool of in-house carers for mainstream placements. In 201415,


At the end of October 2015, there were 148 fostering households and a further
with over half of these (24) being held as vacant for planned reasons such as
a young person remaining in placement under staying put arrangements or to
enable brothers and sisters to be looked after in the same placement.


The local authority has appropriately identified that it now has sufficient
numbers of mainstream carers and is exploring options to increase the number
of households able to provide good-quality homes for teenagers, brothers and
sisters together, children with complex needs and mother and baby
placements. Consequently, it has set a lower target to recruit 20 new fostering
households for 201516, with the aim of attracting carers with the skills to
take these more specialist placements. More recently, the local authority has
joined a London-wide group as part of a larger preferred providers list to
increase its range of placement options.


Reports to the fostering panel for approval of foster carers are sufficient to
inform appropriate decisions and have improved in quality over recent months.
The assessments of potential foster carers are of a good quality, providing a


thorough overview of essential information, together with detailed analysis and
appropriate recommendations.

Foster carers spoken to by inspectors said that they appreciated the support
they receive from supervising social workers. Regular supervision enables them
to reflect on the care that they are providing, and identifies specific training
needs. Experienced foster carers mentor newly approved applicants to provide
additional support when children first come to live with them. At October 2015,
the annual appraisals of foster carers that supervising social workers are
required to complete were not all sufficiently timely to meet the regulations,
with 18 of 155 delayed.


Two groups of the Children in Care Council, a younger group for children up to
term. This is facilitated by a participation worker who is held in fond regard by
the children and young people. Children and young people access social
opportunities to discuss their experiences, interact confidently with adults, and
make positive contributions to developing services for children and young
people looked after. Young people receive training to help them to be involved
in staff appointments, including the recent appointment of the Director of
Children and Young Peoples Services. They spoke positively about celebrating
their achievements at an annual event, organised by themselves and attended
by the Mayor and members of the corporate parenting panel.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

The local authority effectively considers permanence, including adoption, for all
children looked after under 10 years old, prior to their second review. During
year-on-year increase over the past few years (24 children were placed in
a little in the first two quarters of 201516, with only 10 children being placed.


The local authority is persistent when securing adoption for children with more
complex needs, with the majority being placed within 14 months of agreeing
their plan for adoption. Children successfully placed over the past year have
included a brother and sister placed together who have a challenging family
history, children with complex health issues, and a child with uncertain health
outcomes due to parental mental and physical health issues.


The local authoritys performance against the adoption scorecard is strong. Its
performance for 2011 to 2014, the most recently published scorecard data,
shows the time between children entering care and moving in with their
adoptive families was 547 days. This was lower than the England average of
they improved their performance and reduced this timeframe to an average of


improvement.

The percentage of Lewisham children who wait less than 18 months between
entering care and moving in with their adoptive family was 48% for the period
between 2011 and 2014, which is below the England level of 51% and above
statistical neighbours at 44%. The local authority data show improved
performance in 2012 to 2015, with 67% of children waiting less than 18
months to move in with their adoptive family from entering care.


The average number of days between receiving court authority to place a child
to be adopted and the local authority deciding on a match with an adoptive
family was 170 days during 2011 to 2014. This is lower than the national
average of 217 days and statistical neighbours at 253 days. Between 2012 and
to an average of 158 days between court order and identifying a match for the
child. The LA projects a slight drop in performance during the first two
quarters of 201516; they understand the reasons for this and are working
appropriately with three children who waited longer than average before being
matched with their adoptive placement.


Assessments for children and their families recorded within child placement
reports (CPRs) are thorough, with all information being carefully considered
and analysed by the childrens social worker. This includes careful
consideration of family history, culture, ethnicity and religion, as well childrens
developmental needs. These detailed assessments support robust matching
processes and feed into high-quality adoption placement reports (APRs).


The adoption service successfully uses a range of options for attracting and
recruiting potential adopters, including local papers and the local authority
website, the South London Consortium and targeted work with religious
groups. The local authority plans to recruit 27 new potential adoptive families
in 201516 and is on target to achieve this. The local authority appropriately
identifies that its priorities are to recruit: adopters for children of all ages of
African and African Caribbean ethnicities, and children of dual heritage; sibling
groups where the youngest child is over three years old; children over five
years old; and children with disabilities.


The local authority is diligent in exploring the possibility of dual registration, as
concurrent carers or foster to adopt, with all potential adopters during their
assessment and preparation phase. The vast majority decline to take this
option because of the risks involved of losing a child from their care, but two
couples have chosen to become concurrent carers.


The adoption team is persistent in identifying suitable and stable matches for
children with adopters and uses all resources available to secure these. This
includes considering in-house adopters, advertising with the London
Consortium and adoption register, and also undertaking exchange and activity


days. At the time of the inspection, the local authority was actively working
with 32 children who have an agency decision for adoption. Of these children,
adopters and four children are living with foster carers who are currently being
assessed as prospective adopters for them. The local authority is finding
families for the remaining eight children.

A skilled and experienced independent chair provides appropriate guidance and
challenge to panel members. Strong reports from social workers and robust
processes enable the panel to reach appropriate recommendations regarding
the approval of potential adopters and to make secure recommendations
regarding placement of children. The six-monthly report from the adoption
panel to the local authority is brief and lacks sufficient information to support
effective learning. There are some delays in the timeliness of agency decisionmakers decisions due to competing workload demands. Very recently, the new
Director of Childrens Social Care has appropriately agreed a new process to
streamline the timescale for the agency decision-maker, following panel
meetings.


Careful planning for introductions ensures that children move into their new
home at a pace that meets their needs. There is flexibility within adoption
services to ensure that the number of placement moves is minimised for
children, for example with panel and placement dates being brought forward
to prevent the need for respite placements. Adopters speak highly of the
preparation and support they receive prior to children being placed with them.


Effective support is provided to children and their potential adopters after
placements start, and continues to be available prior to adoption orders being
granted. For example, social workers have worked effectively with schools to
provide advice regarding attachment issues and appropriate behaviour
management for children in potential adoptive placements. Additionally, where
required to support placements, very regular support visits are undertaken
with children and their potential adopters to seek to resolve emerging issues.
This often includes undertaking some therapeutic play sessions to help children
settle effectively into their new homes. All social workers in the adoption
service have been trained in this approach. The flexible offer of support and
robust matching of children with potential adopters leads to secure adoptive
placements for Lewisham children. There have been no disrupted placements
for over two years.


A comprehensive post-adoption support offer is available to adopted children,
adopters and birth families. There is a generic offer of support to all, and
additional assessments are undertaken when additional needs are identified by
social workers or referred by families. The adoption support team operates a
duty system to ensure that all urgent referrals are allocated on the same day
and visits with families are undertaken quickly to identify and deliver
appropriate support. During 201415, the adoption support team received 94
new referrals: 17 from adoptive families, 22 from birth families and 56 from


adopted adults. There is also a range of training sessions available, which are
well-attended and highly valued by adopters. Workshops include subjects such
as education, attachment and health; there is evidence of the local authority
effectively acting upon feedback from adopters in delivering new workshops,
for example developmental trauma and social media.

The adoption support service also provides therapeutic and financial support to
families who have a special guardianship order. In 201415, the training
programme included workshops specifically targeted for special guardians and
included sessions such as contact, life story work and grief and loss.


An element of good adoption support is the joint work being undertaken with
CAMHS colleagues for the assessment and support of families in urgent need
of therapeutic intervention. In the past year, 12 families have received support
via this joint work, with a further four being referred to the adoption support
team to continue support when the CAMHS input came to an end. It is of note
that most families using this service are non-Lewisham adopters with children
placed by other local authorities more than three years ago, who now live in
Lewisham.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good

Social workers and personal advisers maintain contact with nearly all of their
care leavers. The latest available data shows that there are just two care
leavers they are not in touch with. Personal advisers know young people well
and maintain regular contact with them via text, email and visits, including
with young people who live outside of the area.


Personal advisers, social workers and key workers offer good support to young
people based on their individual needs and circumstances. For example,
personal advisers liaise well with care leaving services outside Lewisham and
broker practical help for young people to assist them with housing and
employment.


In cases sampled by inspectors, all young people had an up-to-date pathway
plan and these were mostly of good quality. The routine assessment of young
peoples needs prior to their 18th birthday means that pathway plans are
based on a recent social work assessment of need. Assessments customarily
address the key areas in young peoples lives, including the risks facing them
and the measures needed to ensure their successful transition to
independence. Inspectors saw good examples of re-assessments where young
peoples needs and circumstances had changed, such as a change of personal
adviser or a breakdown of their college placement.


Personal advisers routinely update pathway plans to reflect young peoples
changing circumstances. Advisers involve young people well in planning and


plans are based on the practical tasks necessary to help young people achieve
independence. Plans are generally of a high quality and the best plans set out
clear actions to respond to young peoples sometimes complex and changing
needs. A small minority of assessments did not identify well enough how
young peoples needs would be met.

Specialist staff for education, employment and training, benefits and
entitlements and substance misuse provide good support to care leavers at a
weekly drop-in session. A good proportion of young people are in education,
employment and training (EET). In 201314, 61% of 1921 year olds were in
EET, compared to just 45% nationally.


Young people at university benefit from support from the specialist careers
advisers. The virtual school and a specialist careers adviser effectively promote
higher education as an option through, for example, open days at universities.
As a result, an increasing number of young people attend higher education.
There are currently 38 care leavers at university. They receive a good package
of financial support, including the costs of accommodation during holiday
periods.


The vast majority of care leavers live in suitable accommodation. In 201415,
available to care leavers, including semi-independent and independent
accommodation and an increasing number of supported lodgings. A greater
number of care leavers are being effectively supported to remain with their
foster carers when they reach 18 years of age. In November 2014, just 11
young people were living with their foster carers under staying put
arrangements. By November 2015, the number has increased to 36.


Young people are only placed in houses of multiple occupancy (HMO) when it
best meets their needs. Inspectors visited two houses of multiple occupancy
and found that the accommodation was safe and of very good quality. Young
people in HMO receive support from visiting or on-site key workers. At one
house, the cultural needs of unaccompanied asylum-seekers are met well by
placing young people with similar experiences and backgrounds together. Key
workers and the virtual school effectively support young people to settle
quickly, become independent and engage in education. Staff understand young
peoples individual needs well and liaise effectively with other agencies to
ensure that young peoples educational and cultural and welfare needs are
met. Bed and breakfast accommodation is only ever used in an emergency and
when all other immediate options have been exhausted.


The nurse, social workers and personal advisers for children looked after
promote young peoples health and well-being effectively. All young people are
offered an annual health review by the children looked after nurse prior to
leaving care and receive a discharge letter with their full health history. This
helps care leavers access relevant health services and enables young people to


use this information to better manage their own health and seek specialist
advice where necessary.

Care leavers spoken to by inspectors were aware of their entitlements.
Financial support provided by the local authority supports young peoples
aspirations and transition to independence well. Care leavers receive a range
of entitlements, including a grant to equip their first home, access to a
discretionary learner support fund for those in further education and assistance
with travel costs and stationary. Those at university receive an annual
allowance that supplements their student loan.

Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Leadership, management and governance require improvement to be good. Progress
has not been sustained in all areas since Ofsted judged the local authority as
outstanding for safeguarding and good for children looked after in 2012. Elected
members, the chief executive and senior managers have not rigorously scrutinised
data or performance information to ensure that they have an accurate understanding
of the quality of practice in all areas of the service. This deficit is compounded by
delays in addressing long-standing issues with data reliability. Staff do not
systematically record all activity on the local authoritys childrens electronic case
system.
The local authority recognises the need for further work to achieve better
performance and quality assurance information, and consequently greater
consistency in management oversight. Performance information is not reliable and
therefore cannot be used to enable effective scrutiny of performance. Audit activity,
although occurring, is not used effectively to improve practice.
The new management team demonstrates a clear understanding of the challenges
ahead for the local authority. The focus has, by necessity, led to a review of service
responsiveness, including thresholds, the quality and timeliness of child protection
processes and the need to replace the electronic case recording system. Services for
children looked after remain good and have improved for care leavers.
The quality of early help work is significantly under-developed. There is no
coordinated overview of early help provision across Lewisham, and senior managers
do not evaluate impact. Arrangements for children who need help and protection
require improvement as services are variable and not all are good. Children looked
after live in homes where their needs are met well. Adoption is given appropriate
consideration for all children needing permanence. Assessments of adopters are
robust and timely. The authority has high aspirations for its care leavers and
supports them well.


Retention of a strong and motivated workforce is a key priority for the borough and
senior leaders give priority to recruiting and retaining skilled staff. The workforce
strategy and training plan are appropriately aligned. Training and support is effective
in promoting high morale within the workforce. The local authority has invested to
ensure that social workers have manageable caseloads that support this
achievement.
When children and young people go missing from home, care or education or are at
risk of sexual exploitation, the local authority and other agencies in Lewisham work
hard individually to prevent them from coming to harm. However, effective multiagency arrangements are not yet fully in place to ensure that these vulnerable
children are fully safeguarded.
Inspection findings

Leadership, governance and management arrangements comply with statutory
guidance. There are regular meetings between the Mayor, key officers,
members and the independent chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board
(LSCB). However, elected members and the chief executive are not always
effective in holding senior managers and officers to account in order to assure
themselves that childrens needs are identified and met. There has been a
delay in recognising some service shortfalls. The formal arrangements to
discharge the local authoritys childrens scrutiny function for help and
protection do not provide sufficient focus or challenge on aspects of the service
that require improvement.


A new Executive Director of Childrens services was appointed in September
processes that compromise conditions for good social work practice. Building
on these findings and those of the interim Director of Social Care, she
commissioned a thorough self-assessment of childrens services and alerted
senior leaders to areas of concern so that they could take action to address
these. With the active support of the recently appointed Lead Member, an
action plan has been produced to take this work forward.


The new leadership has already made progress in developing an open and
positively challenging culture. The local authority now knows its service deficits
and plans are in place to prioritise addressing these. In some instances, such
as compliance with Working Together guidance regarding the timeliness of
strategy discussions, practice deficits have already been addressed. The need
to include health and other partners more routinely in strategy discussions and
planning remains work in progress.


A service priority is the replacement of the information technology platform on
which the electronic records system sits as this remains a stubborn obstacle to
good practice and planning. Significant investment has been agreed to ensure


improvements to information technology. This will support social workers to be
more effective and efficient in their work.

The workforce itself is a considerable strength of the service within Lewisham.
Workers and managers improve outcomes for children and young people
despite deficiencies in performance management arrangements and the
absence of robust pathways for practice. Almost without exception, they were
found to be committed and enthusiastic in delivering child-centred practice to
improve outcomes for children and young people.


The local authority partnerships with other statutory and voluntary agencies
are strong and well established. There are effective working relationships with
partners on strategic boards, including the Local Safeguarding Children Board,
the Children and Young Peoples Strategic Partnership Board and the Health
and Wellbeing Board. Childrens needs are duly considered and priorities across
boards are appropriate and well aligned. The key priorities are set out within
the Childrens and Young Peoples Plan developed in collaboration with key
partner agencies and the voluntary and community sector. Children and young
people are consulted through youth-led commissioning groups, including those
involved in the Headstart project.


A Joint Strategic Needs Assessment is in place that informs strategic planning
for childrens services. It does not, however, give clarity in relation to
sufficiency of placements for children looked after to ensure that recruitment
and planning achieves an appropriate balance of local and in-house provision
to match need. The local authority is not sufficiently specific about the
identified groups of young people for whom placements may be required, and
has only recently set out what it plans to do to secure sufficient placements for
them.


The local authority has some systems in place to manage and monitor
performance in childrens social care, but this has been impeded by significant
difficulties in extracting accurate data from the childrens electronic recording
system, described by its own officers as antiquated. Performance monitoring
lacks rigour as reports are drawn from an electronic system that is recognised
within the authority as unreliable. The data presented is of limited value as it
cannot be fully trusted. It is of concern that a number of social workers and
managers have such a lack of trust with the system that they maintain their
own records. At various points throughout the inspection, the local authority
struggled to provide accurate data for some service areas.


In addition to the problems with quantitative data, qualitative information is
not being used well to support service development and drive improvement.
Not all services are being evaluated through audit. This means the local
authority does not yet have a full understanding of the impact all services have
on children. The audits undertaken by the local authority for this inspection
were variable in quality, with too great a focus on process rather than
outcomes. Nevertheless, in most cases there was congruence in the findings of


the local authority and the inspection team. This provides evidence that the
local authority recognises the fundamentals of good practice that need to be
standardised practice across the service.

The local authority has invested resources to ensure that caseloads are
manageable and that all work is allocated. Staffing levels have been
maintained, although there is a reliance on recently qualified social workers,
particularly in family social work teams. For these social workers, there is a
clear professional development framework in place. All newly qualified social
workers during their assessed and supported year in employment undertake a
comprehensive induction and a range of mandatory training and benefit from
protected caseloads. Newly qualified workers reported to inspectors that they
feel well supported in their teams.


The training plan links well to the workforce strategy. The revised workforce
development strategy demands better standards of practice and robust
management of staff performance. An effective range of opportunities are in
place to develop social workers skills and knowledge. Social workers reported
that training is readily available and of good quality. A career pathway for
social workers has been developed within a good workforce planning strategy,
informed well by an annual report and analysis of recruitment and retention
issues.


Supervision of social workers and managers does not consistently take place in
accordance with the local authoritys policy. Managers and leaders are visible
and accessible to staff, who report them to be appropriately knowledgeable.
However, inspectors still found some staff and managers failing to promote
basic social work standards. For example, there was not always evidence of
sufficient challenge of poor case recording or to ensure the updating and
meaningful use of chronologies. Similarly a number of plans are of poor
quality. Too frequently these were signed off by managers, suggesting such
practice is acceptable.


Partnership arrangements are generally effective and enhance the drive to
improve services and outcomes for children and young people. For example,
good systems and arrangements are in place to track and check the safety and
achievements of home educated children and children missing education.
Partnership working has led to a higher than average proportion of care
leavers moving into education, employment and training than that found
nationally.


Joint commissioning is a strength of the organisation. Sound commissioning
processes are delivered by a dedicated and experienced team of joint
commissioners in line with the commissioning cycle. Examples were seen of
strong needs analysis, development of specifications, procurement practice and
of evaluation, with an emphasis on collaborative commissioning methods.
Commissioning was at its strongest where joint commissioners held
responsibility for delivering the full commissioning process in partnership with


existing providers, for example the development of an extended CAMHS under
the national Future in Mind initiative.

Arrangements are less robust where the joint commissioner is responsible for
only part of the commissioning process, such as early intervention or looked
after children placements. In such instances, the partial and untargeted use of
joint commissioning expertise meant that the involvement of a joint
commissioner did not add sufficient value to the commissioning process as a
whole.


Strategic oversight of child sexual exploitation is disconnected and
underdeveloped. Information collated by the local authority on the number of
children who are at risk of child sexual exploitation or of going missing from
their family homes or care is limited. It is not used to inform planning to keep
individual children and young people safe, nor is it collated and analysed to
identify key themes that could ensure there is strategic planning to tackle
these problems. Work in this area by childrens services, the police and other
partner agencies are not well coordinated. Although there is an over-arching
strategy regarding child sexual exploitation, it is ineffective.


Lewisham is an active and committed participant in the work of the local
Family Justice Board. Relationships with Cafcass and the judiciary are strong
and, as a result, timescales within court proceedings consistently meet or
exceed expected targets.

progress of looked after children and care leavers and celebrates their
successes. Structures for the delivery of corporate parenting are in place and
established, with evidence of positive impact. However, the recently appointed
Chair of the Corporate Parenting Group acknowledges that more work is
required to facilitate the greater engagement of young people and sharpen the
scrutiny function in so doing. The children in care group has engaged in
addressing some issues of concern. One example of its influence was ensuring
that staff working within the care leaving service retained council phones to aid
communication when staff in other teams were having these withdrawn as a
savings measure.
which, in some instances, has resulted in positive changes in practice. These
have included contributing to senior management appointments and the
development of the younger children in care group. The children in care
council has had some impact in helping to improve services for children looked
after and care leavers.
childrens inspection (SLAC) 2012 have been met. However, the requirement
that child in need plans contain measurable actions and outcomes is yet to be
achieved.


from complaints is appropriately cascaded to managers. The local authority
appropriately made three serious incident notifications to Ofsted since the
previous inspection in 2012.
in place since 2012. There is evidence of strong partnerships, including a multiagency Prevent board and effective links with schools and colleges. These and
comprehensive training arrangements across the borough have resulted in
raised awareness among agencies and community groups, who share
information and intelligence to identify and help prevent young people who are
at risk of becoming radicalised. As a result, there has been an increase in
referrals to the Prevent team and to Channel meetings, and interventions
made to divert young people from radicalisation.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement to be good. Local
authority childrens service partners have lacked the capacity that would allow the
board to put an early help strategy in place in line with its business plan. This
omission, aligned to the absence of an up-to-date threshold document, contributes
to an overall lack of direction for early help services. The lack of a clearly identified
governance role for the boards child sexual exploitation (CSE) sub-group is
contributing to deficit in the multi-agency response.
Performance reporting is a particular weakness. Corrective measures have recently
been put in place to address this deficit, but a current lack of accurate reporting
has led directly to circumstances in which the board was unaware of several of the
areas of weakness in multi-agency practice identified by this inspection.
An effective forward plan ensures that the board regularly receives the reports it
requires in a timely manner. Key documentation such as the annual report and the
business plan is in place but is not generally well-aligned, and there is no clearly
identifiable set of strategic priorities threaded throughout the boards records.
Board meetings are not well recorded, and a high number of action plans means
that it is not always possible to link the boards records with its overall priorities.
Robust protocols ensure that the board is well connected with other governance
bodies and that its independence is assured. Partners demonstrate a strong
commitment to the board, and they have recently agreed an increase in funding.
Board meetings are well-attended and a significant strength is a culture of
challenge, which is appropriately logged and monitored.
Implementation of the learning and improvement framework shows signs of
considerable improvement following development activity undertaken last year.
Four thematic audits are programmed annually as a satisfactory auditing
programme and considerable effort has been expended to ensure that schools are
enabled to participate in the agency audit under section 11 of the Childrens Act
A satisfactory training strategy results in the delivery of a limited training calendar
delivered by approved trainers, and an extended evaluation process has recently
been introduced to ensure its effectiveness. The board is currently working with
young peoples groups to design a more user-friendly website. This will include
localising the boards policies and procedures and improving professionals
recognition of board activities.


Recommendations
Priority and immediate action
changes to frontline services as part of an overall review of the early help offer
within the local authority area.
align it with other groups within the local authority area.
interrogation of performance reports to provide a clear understanding of any
exceptions or deficits.
with the boards priorities.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
and undertakes a broad range of work to safeguard children in the local area.
Partners demonstrate a high level of commitment to the activities of the board.
For instance, they are providing further investment to the board at a time of
significantly reducing resources. This has allowed the board to employ a
development officer who augments the dedicated and talented board team in
delivering a wide-ranging business support plan. However, board members
accept that there is much more to do to assure themselves that frontline
services are being delivered in an effective way.
Board (ASB), leads the board. She has the trust and support of the multiagency partnership. They describe her as rigorous and systematic in aligning
the activities of the LSCB with the ASB, and in ensuring that actions are
satisfactorily completed. Well-attended board meetings are not well recorded
and, although actions are followed up from meeting to meeting to ensure that
they are completed, it is not always possible to determine how they relate to
the boards overall priorities for improvement.
business plan; however, these documents, and board documentation
generally, are not well aligned. The board operates appropriately to a forward
plan to ensure that it receives required reports, such as on private fostering or
elective home education. This high level of activity has resulted in a large
number of action plans. Where actions are clear, they are rigorously followed
up, but are not well-connected. More needs to be done to ensure that an
energetic board has a set of clearly understood strategic priorities threaded
throughout all of its activities.


partnership forums, such the Childrens Partnership and Health and Wellbeing
Boards. Clear accountabilities are in evidence between the boards independent
chair and the councils Chief Executive.
logged and their outcomes monitored. One significant recent example of this
came with the challenge by police partners to the operation of the MASH.
Specifically, this challenged the manner in which recording a series of contacts
dealt with by different referral and assessment team managers did not
consistently result in the build-up of intelligence in cases. This may be critical
in cases involving, for example, sexual exploitation or neglect, which are often
not identifiable through a single incident. As a result, the board has agreed to
an independent review of the duty service, but this had not begun before this
inspection made the same finding.
functions effectively. CDOP reports regularly to the board and produces a wellwritten annual report on themes and trends in child death. The chair of CDOP
is also responsible for the rapid response to childrens deaths and ensures that
they are understood well.
SCRs. The report format and action planning have been refined, and a
monitoring system introduced that makes it clear what actions remain to be
completed to deliver the improvements identified by the review. This good
practice is not yet used consistently across all board action planning. The
outcomes of SCRs are disseminated appropriately in line with a satisfactory
learning and improvement framework.
changes to services means that the board cannot be assured of what is
working well locally to ensure that families are receiving the preventative
services that they need. A briefing sent to the independent chair from the
recently appointed temporary board manager indicates the boards awareness
that this task has not been completed, but this had not been actioned before
this inspection began. This reflects an omission by the board to deliver this
business plan priority, caused by a lack of capacity within childrens social care
services to undertake the task. Similarly, the boards thresholds document
requires updating to reflect changes to early intervention services and to the
councils duty arrangements. These include reference to arrangements for
children in need under section 17 of the Children Act 1989, which is currently
lacking.
collated by the local authority and provided to the board on the number of
children who are at risk of CSE, or of going missing from their family homes or
care, is limited and lacks analysis. Information from interviews with children


who have been missing on their return is not used to inform planning to keep
individual children and young people safe, nor is it collated and analysed to
identify key themes that could help with strategic planning to tackle these
problems. Work in this area by childrens services and the police is not wellcoordinated by partners through the board. Notwithstanding an over-arching
strategy on CSE and children going missing, the strategic relationship between
the multi-agency sexual exploitation meeting (MASE) the Local Safeguarding
Children Board sub-group and the weekly operational meeting is confused and
still requires clarification.
particular weakness. Although the council is data rich, too much is unreliable.
The boards aspiration has been for its Monitoring, Evaluation, Scrutiny and
Intelligence sub-group (MESI) to interrogate these data and present the board
with an analysis on particular areas of interest, but this has not been delivered
successfully. The result has been that member agencies and the boards subcommittees self-report to both the main board and in the annual report. This
does not support an analysis set against agreed performance indicators that
would lead to a clear understanding of deficits in frontline practice. As a result,
the board was not fully aware of shortfalls in practice identified by this
inspection and this is a serious weakness.
put in place a robust performance framework, and the boards independent
chair has taken the chair of the MESI on an interim basis to make these
improvements. However, this recent arrangement had yet to show impact by
the time of this review.
identified appropriately by robust board processes such as the challenge log, or
to ensure local compliance with newly introduced national requirements. Audit
reports are completed satisfactorily, but each generates a separate action plan
that adds to the plethora of plans. Agency audits are completed appropriately
under section 11 of the Children Act 2004, and considerable effort and energy
has been undertaken to ensure the involvement of schools. This has proven
time-consuming and the board has now created a separate section 11 subgroup so that the MESI can concentrate on performance monitoring through
reports and audits.
website that is not an adjunct to the councils site as it was previously. This
correctly signals the Boards independent status. The board has engaged
effectively with young people on the design of the site as part of their
commitment to improve engagement with children and young people.
However, levels of recognition of the boards activities were low among
frontline professionals interviewed by inspectors. The board has already
recognised this, and firm plans are now in place to use the website to develop
awareness among frontline practitioners of the boards responsibilities for


training, serious case reviews, policies and procedures and other relevant
activities.
and further work is needed to ensure that generalised guidance is localised as
appropriate. For example, Lewishams professionals need to know specifically
what to do in the event of concerns over a case of suspected female genital
mutilation, without needing to contact the NSPCC national helpline.
mainly by in-house trainers approved under pan-London Safeguarding Board
procedures. Training is appropriately evaluated using a newly introduced
three-point evaluation methodology. This ensures that high levels of
satisfaction on the day are followed up three months later to make sure that
the learning has been put into effect. It is too early to evaluate whether this
methodology will demonstrate a positive impact on frontline practice. Short
lunchtime briefings are particularly successful in delivering the key messages
from serious case reviews to busy multi-agency professionals.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Sean Tarpey
Deputy lead inspector: Ian Young
Team inspectors: Anji Parker, Marcie Taylor, Jon Bowman, Anne Waterman, Tara
Geere
Shadow inspectors: Kate Malleson
Senior data analyst: Hywel Benbow
Quality assurance manager: Nicholas McMullen


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for children looked after and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


