Liverpool City Council

Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and

Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 20 May 2014  11 June 2014
Report published: 18 July 2014
The overall judgement is requires improvement.
There are no widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being
harmed or at risk of harm. The welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and
promoted. However, the authority is not yet delivering good protection and help and
care for children, young people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is requires
improvement.
The LSCB is not yet demonstrating the characteristics of good.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority requires improvement and is not yet good because

There is no clear, single master plan across Childrens services which allows
progress to be tracked or shows how all the changes taking place are helping to
improve services for children.


Performance management within Childrens Social Care is underdeveloped and
relies on manually generated data. This limits the ability of some senior
managers in Childrens Services to have a good enough window on frontline
practice


The turnover of social work staff is high and too many are agency staff. There is
no comprehensive workforce competency framework or performance appraisal.


The arrangements for early help are not fully embedded across agencies in
Liverpool who work with children, young people and their families.


The local authority needs to work with partner agencies to improve the quality of
partnership working in key areas including strategy discussions, MAPPA
arrangements and the embedding of thresholds.


Social workers caseloads are variable and some are too high.


Social workers supervision records are variable in quality, detail and frequency,
and do not show reflective practice.


The quality of assessment and intervention with children, young people and their
families is too variable and childrens views are not asked for or taken into
account in enough cases.


The local authority was unaware that referrals and assessments were unallocated
in one safeguarding team. Current arrangements mean that the local authority
cannot assure itself that similar unauthorised arrangements will not reoccur.

partners to enable the names of children missing from education to be shared
without parental consent. This means that these children are not supported.
account the views of children and their families and staff.
Parents (PwP) regulations; some with no assessment or plan.


standard.
duties, and caseloads of IROs are too high.
always carried out and done well enough after a looked after child has gone
missing.
remains too wide and personal education plans contain insufficient information
about levels of progress being made.
have to wait too long to get specialist help.
to be achieved, making evaluation of progress difficult.
has agreed that a child should be adopted. Managers are not sure they know
about all children where adoption may be a potential option. Some adopters
experience too much delay between their initial enquiry and next steps.
understood by the young people. Services for care leavers over the age of 18 are
insufficient and require review and improvement.
sufficient good quality performance information. Their strategic and delivery
plans are not sufficiently outcome-focused, specific or measurable.
future patterns of need or supply, and the draft commissioning strategy lacks
sufficient detail.


The local authority has the following strengths
interventions were having an impact and making a difference to childrens lives.
support for children and families. This often results in positive, sustained change.
move across local authority borders are provided with help and support.
resulting in increased enquiries from partner agencies, including 12 advance
notifications from a local language school.
exploitation with schools has had a positive impact and there has been an
increase in disclosures from young people of sexual exploitation, particularly
since the roll out of a powerful theatre production to secondary schools.
report children missing promptly. The local authority provides good support for
children who are known to be receiving elective home education (EHE).
performance in achieving legal orders for children more swiftly.
children within the city or in neighbouring authorities, enabling most looked after
children to have continuity of support from professional staff who know them.
and friends instead of strangers, when they cannot remain at home. The use of
Special Guardianship Orders (SGOs) is increasing.
age. Their progress is carefully tracked.
looked after children. Initiatives to raise the attainment of looked after children
are successful, for example, the reading project which starts at reception age has
resulted in this group improving their reading levels significantly.


staff about the trauma and attachment issues experienced by looked after
children. This helps school staff to better support looked after children.
the number receiving fixed term exclusions continues to decrease. Nearly all
children attend good or better schools and no child is attending inadequate
provision. Attendance of looked after children in primary and secondary schools
is high and better than the Liverpool average.
service development through regular access to senior council officers who attend
the meetings and progress pan-council initiatives.
community. For example, there are currently nine same-sex couples at different
stages of the approval and matching process. Feedback on the adoption support
team confirms it is well regarded by families and meets their needs.
schools of the needs of adopted children.
programmes for care leavers, supported by information, advice and guidance
workers up to their 19th birthday. Care leavers who attend university are well
supported financially and practically.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
The inspection did not find any areas for priority and immediate action.
Areas for improvement
police to Careline and improve Childrens Services attendance at MAPPA
meetings.
that key information held by those agencies is fully taken into account when
deciding on next steps. All section 47 enquiries and their outcomes must be
clearly recorded on the childs electronic record.
caseloads, in line with their experience and role.
its aims of reducing caseloads, enabling good quality social work practice, and
improving workflow across the service.
and of risks, take the childs experience into account, and result in clear,
evidence-based plans to meet those needs.
conference chairs and IROs, and managers, should be developed to utilise and
aggregate their knowledge of practice to contribute to improving standards of
practice.
managers are clear about its offer and its eligibility criteria. Children and young
people should be aware of this service and encouraged to use it.
information can be shared in relation to children known to health services but
who may not be on a school roll.
example by providing the adoption panel with aggregated data on performance,
including the quality of reports, timeliness of life story work, and the views of
adopters about the adoption process; and systematically track all looked after
children once they have had their second statutory review to ensure that drift
and delay in permanency planning are minimised.
where children are placed for adoption, that their life story book is available to
them and their adopters when they are placed.


and views are clear. This should include improvements in identifying, recording
and responding to childrens diverse backgrounds so that their identity becomes
more central to understanding, identifying and meeting their needs.
be consistent, robust, properly recorded on both the workers supervision file and
the childs file and include evidence of reflective practice. This should include
informal supervision and case direction.
themes regarding children and young people who have gone missing from home
and care. This should include compliance monitoring of return interview
completion and quality.
Regulations should be supported by full risk assessments and clear support plans
to ensure that they are thriving and their needs are being met. Care orders
should be discharged where the local authority considers it no longer needs to
share parental responsibility.
ensure that all looked after children are provided with timely specialist mental
health services when this has been assessed as being required.
in achievement between looked after children and all pupils in Liverpool in
primary and secondary schools.
people understand and find useful, informed by up-to-date assessments; good
access to independence preparation programmes; accessible information about
their entitlements; more suitable accommodation, with sufficient support where
required, including the option to remain living with their foster carers; and an
increased leaving care grant.
year-old care leavers who are NEET and increase the number of 16 and 17 yearolds attending further education courses. Ensure that the most vulnerable care
leavers over the age of 18 years are known and provided with targeted services,
including swift access to emotional and mental health services and addressing
their high levels of being NEET.
account of future projected demands. This includes the Children and Young
Peoples Plan and the Sufficiency Plan for looked after children. Plans must be
outcome focused, specific and measurable to drive forward improvements.
the earliest opportunity.


by performance management information which is accurate and up-to-date and
provides insight into the activities of childrens social care. It should focus on
ensuring that children receive a minimum standard of social work service and
that practice developments are informed by the experiences of children, young
people and families, including learning from complaints.
and responsibilities so that staff and managers at all levels within childrens social
care understand their respective responsibilities and what they are accountable
for.
arrangements that deliver a stable workforce which reflects the diversity of the
local population, and should include an effective workforce competency. Account
should be taken of the need to support managers at all levels by building their
capacity.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how professional
staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness of help and
care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked to children,
young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to understand
what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well it is doing
and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help, protect and
look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and two
Additional Inspectors from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Sheena Doyle
Team inspectors: Nigel Parkes, Janet Fraser, Judith Nelson, Debora Barazetti-Scott,
Stella Butler, Nick Stacey and Dominic Porter-Moore.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area


Approximately 88,911 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Liverpool. This is 19% of the total population in the area.



Approximately 33% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty (the
national average is 20%).



The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 29% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 27% (the national average is 15%).



Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 16% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.



The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British, Black or Black British and Mixed.



The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 11% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 7% (the national average is 14%).



Levels of deprivation in Liverpool are particularly high and many wards are
ranked as being in the most deprived 1% to 10% nationally. Household income
during 2012 was the second lowest of the eight core cities in England and fell by
over 700 between 2011 and 2012. Almost 40% of households are living at or
close to the poverty line. Child poverty is significantly higher than the national
average, with approximately one in three children living in poverty, whereas the
national figure is one in five.



and attainment at the end of the Key Stage Four is above the national average.
In school inspections, pupil safety and safeguarding are judged as at least good
in the majority of cases.

Child protection in this area


At 21 May 2014, 4,277 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from 4,079
at 31 March 2013.



At 21 May 2014, 431 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 342 at 31 March 2013.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.




At 21 May 2014, five children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This figure is similar to the 31 March 2013 figure, when the data was suppressed
(five or less).

Children looked after in this area


At 21st May 2014, 1,000 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 111 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 957 (108 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2013. Of this number:
authority area
authority area
area



In the last 12 months:
 there have been 48 adoptions
subsequently returned to be looked after
moved on to independent living

now living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections


The local authority operates three childrens homes. Two were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.



The previous inspection of Liverpools safeguarding arrangements was in April



The previous inspection of Liverpools services for looked after children was in
April 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.

Other information about this area



The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since August 2012.

These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.




The chair of the LSCB has been in post since January 2014.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
requires improvement
support children and families at times of significant stress or crisis. There is good
partnership working with, for example, disabled childrens services, housing staff,
police and health partners. This enables individualised, multi-disciplinary
packages of support for children and families that often result in positive and
sustainable changes for them. Parents, children and professionals value the
support provided, and parents who spoke to inspectors said of the service: 'our
lives have turned around, 'it stopped things from getting completely out of
control', and 'helped me find my confidence again. Feedback about the newly
formed family support team around the schools is positive, but this service is
too new to see its impact.
significantly over the last two years. After a slow take up by partner agencies,
most are now using the CAF effectively to ensure the right level of help is
provided quickly. The quality of plans has also improved. In most instances cases
are closed appropriately when outcomes have been successfully achieved or
stepped up for more intensive interventions or to statutory services when
necessary. Effective liaison between the Merseyside CAF co-ordinators ensures
continuity of support for children and their families who move across local
authorities.
(EHAT) which will replace the CAF from September 2014. 41 EHATs have been
completed which is promising. The EHAT is scheduled to go live in schools at
the beginning of the Autumn term 2014, and school staff are positive about the
early help tool and the preparation they have received.
promptly to requests for information and services. All decisions are made by
suitably qualified social workers and signed off by social work managers.
However, the quality of information provided by partner agencies is variable and
is sometimes poor. This leads to unnecessary work in the already very busy
team. The volume of contacts and referrals remains high. Understanding and
application of the Responding to Needs threshold document is not yet fully
embedded.
are sent in batches, and in one case seen, a situation of significant violence,
there was a delay of several days before the notification was received. Such
delays have the potential to leave children at risk of harm.
safeguarding teams within two days is not met in all cases, resulting in some
children not receiving the services they need promptly. However, in those cases


seen by inspectors where there was delay, no critical safeguarding concerns
were identified.
although the sequence of events is sometimes unclear. Strategy discussions are
not always held at the outset, and often only include childrens social care and
the police, which means that key information held by other agencies is not
considered at this point. Child protection enquiries (section 47 enquiries) are
completed, but in some cases are not recorded, and the record of action taken is
not always sufficiently detailed. In contrast, the co-located joint investigation
team (JIT) hold prompt strategy discussions with the police, which include
relevant health information, and these are recorded well.
Caseloads are variable and in some teams they are too high. Caseloads vary
from 29 to 45, with one social worker noted as holding a caseload of 54 children.
A pilot duty system is being trialled in part of the service to address this. Early
signs are promising but it has yet to be rolled out across the whole of childrens
social care and its sustainability is unknown.
and support to children, young people and their families. Inspectors saw
individual examples of the positive impact of their work, for example in helping
parents to better meet their childrens needs or to improve home conditions.
families is variable, ranging from inadequate to good. The quality of some child
in need cases (section 17, Children Act 1989) shows limited understanding of the
impact on children of domestic abuse, parental mental ill-health and substance
misuse. Records also lack consistent analysis of risk, protective factors and
childrens needs. In contrast, some good examples of holistic assessments,
consideration of children and young peoples needs and risk factors were seen.
occurred, resulting in children being appropriately safeguarded whilst parents
needs were also met. Liaison with substance misuse agencies also occurred in
some cases seen. In other instances, there was too much emphasis on the needs
of adults in the household, insufficient triangulation of positive parental selfreporting of circumstances, and weak identification of risk and analysis.
consistently better than in the safeguarding teams, where caseloads are high.
Whilst no children were identified by inspectors as currently unsafe, significant
drift and delay was evident for some children and was identified in the local
authoritys own audits.
workers. In some cases there is evidence of good direct work with children,
using a range of resources, such as games and drawings, to gather their wishes
and views and help understand their experiences. However this was not


consistent, and in other cases childrens views were not given sufficient
consideration. Translators are used and documents are translated into other
languages when needed. Consideration of children and young peoples individual
characteristics such as their ethnicity, religion, culture, gender and sexual
orientation is variable. In some instances, careful consideration of these issues,
together with the risk of forced marriage and complex health needs, is evident,
but in other cases, insufficient attention was paid to these issues.
the findings of a recent Ofsted survey, and training is currently being rolled out
to practitioners. Some children and young people have been exposed to neglect
that has been insufficiently addressed in the past, leading to children being made
subject to repeated child protection plans. There is evidence that risks to these
children are now being better addressed, but the local authority and its partners
will need to monitor the impact of this strategy and training to ensure future
effectiveness.
contain both new referrals and cases previously allocated to social workers in the
team but deemed to require closure, pending managerial agreement. There was
no easy way of distinguishing between these two groups. This system meant
that children requiring further assessment or services were effectively
unallocated until reviewed by a manager. The local authority took immediate
action once inspectors brought this to their attention, reviewing all the children,
which resulted in appropriate actions. Inspectors also found very high caseloads
in this team, affecting social workers ability to undertaken good practice and
record it in a timely way. These arrangements are not replicated in other teams
and senior managers have now taken steps to appropriately reduce caseloads
and enable case recording to be completed.
by initial child protection conferences. Of the 35 initial child protection case
conferences held since 28 April this year, only three have been late, by a short
time and for valid reasons. The vast majority of core groups are held on time and
attended by partner agencies. Review conferences take place regularly. One very
good example was seen by inspectors of two childrens schools proactively and
creatively facilitating contact between two siblings living with their respective
fathers.
individual cases, for example by escalating concerns in relation to risk or poor
practice. However, there are no arrangements in place to aggregate their
findings and report these to senior managers as part of a continuous
improvement process. This is a missed opportunity to identify trends and
contribute to improving practice. The local authority is aware of this and intends
to incorporate their contributions into the new quality assurance framework.
currently five. Good evidence-based awareness-raising activities have taken
place. Although this has not yet resulted in more children and young people


being identified as being privately fostered, it has led to an increase in enquiries,
including 12 notifications from a local language school regarding future
placements.
or care receive a co-ordinated multi-agency response. The Director of Childrens
Services has been proactive in promoting the visibility and importance of CSE,
resulting in most schools being actively engaged. This has led to an increase in
disclosures from young people of CSE, and an increase in cases considered by
the multi-agency child sexual exploitation panel (MACSE), particularly since the
recent roll out of a theatre production to secondary schools.
Systems for reporting children missing off roll are well-established and used by
schools, children centres, and alternative education projects. The database is
updated on a daily basis and procedures implemented swiftly and effectively. The
children missing education (CME) team is well represented on all multi-agency
groups, including the multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC), multiagency response to guns and gangs (MARGG), MACSE and the Fair Access
Panels. This ensures that children at risk of missing education through
permanent and fixed term exclusions are known, and action plans that include
home visits are implemented swiftly to reduce the risk, or potential risk, of harm.
The CME co-ordinator works well with colleagues in other local authorities,
tracking families who move between them, ensuring that these children are kept
safe and protected from harm.
instances of domestic abuse, with appropriate attendance from childrens social
care representatives and partner agencies, including those providing alcohol and
substance misuse services. An improvement plan is in place and includes actions
to raise practitioners understanding of MARAC. Services are available to support
victims of domestic abuse, including the Freedom programme and independent
domestic violence advocates (IDVAs). In one case seen, a comprehensive
package of support was in place which was improving outcomes. However, there
is insufficient IDVA capacity, which could lead to children, young people and their
families not receiving an appropriate or timely service.
protection arrangements (MAPPA) meetings, which manage serious offenders in
the community, is not yet good, with an attendance rate of 58 out of 80 at level
However, where young people are the subject of the MAPPA meeting, there is
good attendance by childrens social care representatives.
provision, as a result of exclusion or an arranged move, are effectively and
regularly managed through the two primary and secondary Fair Access Panels.
This ensures that children who are experiencing difficulty in mainstream schools
are moved swiftly and safely to tailored provision that can more appropriately
address their behavioural and emotional needs.


receiving elective home education (EHE), and provides good support to those
willing to receive it. 160 children were registered for home education in this
academic year, 23 of whom are known to childrens social care and 45 of whom
have subsequently been placed in education provision.
number of children being home educated who are known to health services but
unknown to education and other local authority services. At the present time,
there is no information-sharing protocol between the local authority and health
partners to enable these childrens names to be shared routinely, and privacy
legislation is regarded as preventing information sharing without parental
consent. Health partners report that consent is often withheld. The local
authority is rightly concerned about the potential safeguarding risks to these
children, who are living in the area, potentially missing from education, but not
being offered EHE services.
professionals working with children. Referrals are received from a wide range of
statutory and voluntary agencies and progress against agreed actions are tracked
by the local authority designated officer (LADO).
generally good. Social workers said their managers are both visible and
accessible, with much informal case discussion being held; however, this is not
recorded on either the childs file or the supervision record. Formal supervision
records are variable in terms of quality, detail and frequency and contain little
evidence of reflective practice.
protection case conferences by an advocacy scheme.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence requires improvement
services provide an instant response to young people and families in crisis and
where coming into care is an increased possibility. The service is flexible and
workers will support families outside office hours. 72 out of 76 children referred
between February 2013 and March 2014 were successfully supported without
requiring accommodation by the local authority.
meetings. In all but two cases a plan was agreed. There are currently four
trained FGC co-ordinators. Fifteen family support workers are also receiving
training in order to embed the system in other areas, such as post-adoption
support. The service is anecdotally reported to be successful in approximately
which is a shortfall.
the revised Public Law Outline (PLO) timescales. Effective, robust processes,
which routinely include access to good legal advice, are in place to consider
whether cases should enter pre-proceedings or an application for a care order
should be made.
are not seen to be reducing sufficiently. The quality of court reports is good and
improving, and applications are lodged in a timely way. This is contributing
positively to reducing the length of care proceedings and counteracting previous
drift and delay in care planning. The vast majority are supported by Childrens
Guardians and accepted by the courts, and Liverpools performance is regarded
positively by both Cafcass and the Designated Family Judge.
a child are considered carefully, challenged appropriately and made at a suitable
level of seniority. There are appropriate arrangements for urgent cases.
Decisions are informed by good quality legal advice. Inspectors did not see any
cases where children came into care when they should not have done.
placed at home with their parents under Placement with Parents (PwP)
Regulations (The Care Planning, Placement and Case Review (England)
Regulations, 2010). There are currently 186 children in this category, of whom
home for over two years without a plan to discharge the care order, which
suggests drift and delay in care planning. The local authority is making some
progress in this area and has recently begun to utilise an agreed accelerated
process for discharging legal orders where appropriate. Since 1 January 2014,
five care orders have been discharged with a further 22 discharges agreed by
local authority managers but not yet finalised in court.


currently too variable in quality. On some childrens files, no relevant assessment
or plans can be found. On others, the assessments and plans range in quality
from poor to good. Overall, the local authority is not consistently supporting a
safe return home for all children for whom this is the plan.
children either within the city or in neighbouring local authorities. Only 52
children and young people are placed at a distance of over 20 miles, and all such
placements require senior manager consideration and authorisation. Suitable
placements are identified promptly via the local authoritys participation in a
regional consortium for foster care placements and a parallel arrangement for
residential placements. Children who are placed in neighbouring local authorities
benefit from continuity of social worker and school placement. They also benefit
from well-established and effective professional networks, notification processes
and information sharing, for example, between looked after children nurses in
each area. The local authority service to support the education of looked after
children (LACES) also provides support for children attending schools in
neighbouring local authorities.
line with statutory visiting timescales and this is monitored by IROs and team
managers. Children are seen alone by social workers. In most cases, children are
able to develop a good relationship with their social worker. Children who have
greater needs, or are experiencing a multiplicity of problems, are seen more
frequently, demonstrating sensitive and responsive social work support.
their brothers and sisters, if they do not live together. Contact is often facilitated
by foster carers and family support workers and sometimes by schools, with
arrangements being made that are most suitable for each childs circumstances.
Childrens views are taken into account when planning and reviewing contact
arrangements.
were seen during this inspection. Some social workers use a variety of creative
techniques and strategies to help children express and explore their views,
wishes and feelings. This helps children to understand why they are looked after
and what their care plan means. However, not all children who would benefit
from direct work or life story work were receiving this, including children who are
going to be adopted.
statutory visiting forms are not always sufficiently detailed, so the picture of the
child and their voice does not come through. In most records there was evidence
of comments about how the child presented during the social workers visit,
comments from carers, and what the child said; however, such recording is
variable in quality and consistency. In some cases it was clear that childrens
wishes had been listened to and taken into account in their plans. The local


authoritys audits of tracked cases and the recent quality assurance audit of
looked after children cases also identified variability and deficits in these areas.
consistently identified and recorded. This means their heritage and identity needs
are not sufficiently central to understanding, and as a result there are shortfalls
in this aspect of care planning. For example, in one case seen by inspectors, a
childs dual heritage status had not been sufficiently acknowledged and taken
into account in her assessments and plans. However in other cases, the support
for children in this regard was positive, for example, support for a young person
with special educational needs to take part in activities from which they have
greatly benefitted and, in another case, a foster carer has been pivotal in helping
a young person to maintain contact with their birth family in Africa.
but they are not consistently informed by an up to date assessment of childrens
needs or their progress. The current care plan template on the electronic
recording system does not encourage social workers to improve their practice in
this area, and this is recognised by the local authority.
Nearly two thirds of children and young people attend their own reviews, and
IROs make good efforts to see children just prior to their reviews. The service
has proactively sought feedback from children, parents and carers with a view to
increasing their participation rate. This has led to better written materials,
helping children to understand what the service can do for them, what their
rights and entitlements are, how to complain, and how independent visitors and
advocates can help them. The service learns from feedback to improve practice,
and some young people co-chair their reviews or take the minutes.
high, typically 100 to 110 children, and the service lacks sufficient administrative
support. IROs do not routinely meet children between their reviews, and are
unable to ensure that recommendations from reviews are distributed and
followed up promptly. They undertake basic monitoring after reviews and
escalate concerns when necessary, but they do not have a quality assurance role
and do not influence or hold to account members and senior officers as the
corporate parents for looked after children. This is a missed opportunity to
capitalise on the overview and expertise that the service can offer.
risk of sexual exploitation or who are missing from care receive a co-ordinated
multi-agency response. Return home interviews are carried out by social
workers. However, there is no monitoring system in place ensure that interviews
are always held and done to a sufficiently good standard, or to build up
intelligence and capture themes from these interviews to inform future
safeguarding practice.
managed by a private contractor. The recruitment target has been missed and


this, coupled with attrition for other reasons, has resulted in a net decrease of inhouse carers. However, the local authoritys sufficiency duty is met by effective
placement finding by the Placements North West (PNW) consortium. The
consortium can identify suitable places in childrens homes as well as
independent foster carers, ensuring that childrens future placements match their
needs.
objectives are to be achieved. The plan should include clear timescales, ascribing
responsibilities, and specifying reviewing arrangements to enable clear oversight
of progress. The service does not have an effective performance management
tool to monitor compliance with training and development requirements for
foster carers and address any shortfalls in compliance robustly.
discussion and challenge. For example, one set of carers had their approval
varied recently pending their demonstrable commitment to training. Other carers
have been re-assessed by an independent social worker following concerns about
their quality of care. Approvals are signed off by the agency decision maker in a
timely manner.
Training is available for foster carers and covers a wide range of relevant issues.
However, not the local authoritys foster carers meet the minimum stipulated
training and developmental standards. A friends and family support group has
been set up to build professionalism and encourage mutual support, as this
group of carers have traditionally been the most resistant to attending training.
Training is being further encouraged by the introduction of a new payment
framework linked to skills. However, management oversight of carers
compliance with training and development requirements is hampered by the lack
of a tracking tool which consolidates all the training attended by carers. A
database is currently in development to address this shortfall.
specialist training for more experienced carers. Carers report feeling generally
valued and part of the professional network, and all were aware of delegated
authority issues.
trained, which will help the local authority to ensure wider placement choice and
matching for looked after children from minority ethnic communities.
review meeting, which is a missed opportunity to better understand the reasons
for placement breakdown, and to learn lessons and inform continuous service
improvement and matching arrangements.
only 9% of children experienced three or more placements, which is better than
statistical neighbours and the national average.


and friends. At March 2014, 30% of looked after children were living with family
or friends. These carers spoke positively about the support they receive. The use
of Special Guardianship Orders (SGOs) to achieve permanence for children is
increasing; it was 3% in 201011 and 10% in 20122013, which is a positive
trend and is higher than the England average. This is well supported by a policy
which means that families can receive ongoing support, including financial
support.
histories and low levels of attainment but go on to make satisfactory or better
educational progress for their age. In 201213 attainment at age 11 years and at
gaps between looked after children and all pupils in Liverpool remain too wide.
The three year trend at Key Stage 2 and Key Stage 4 shows that these are
narrowing, albeit too slowly for 16 year-olds. A key factor is the
disproportionately high number of looked after children (62% of the total cohort)
who have some form of special educational need. For example, in 20122013, of
the 58 looked after children aged 16 years who were eligible to take GCSEs, nine
(17%) achieved five GCSEs including English and mathematics and 41 of this
group (71%) were predicted not to achieve higher grades due to their additional
learning needs. Despite the gap in attainment between looked after children and
their peers, there has been an overall improvement of 4% over the last four
years, which is the same rate of improvement as for Liverpool pupils overall.
year on year. In most cases they are used well to support the educational and
academic progress of young people. However, some plans contain insufficient
information about levels of progress and the planned learning targets are too
generic. LACES is aware of the discrepancies, and staff regularly audit PEPs and
provide feedback to the designated looked after children (LAC) teachers in
Liverpool schools and schools outside the city where looked after children are
placed. The PEP is used very effectively to monitor pupil premium expenditure.
Clear guidance is provided to schools and alternative education provision
suggesting how the award should enhance the learning experience for children.
Tracking and monitoring the progress of this group inside and outside the city is
prioritised by LACES, and is well supported by school designated teachers and
the local authoritys team of school improvement officers.
potential for looked after children are well established, and evaluations of these
programmes show that the outcomes are steadily improving levels of progress.
For example, evaluation of the reading project shows that those children who
received support improved their reading levels significantly over the two year
period. Innovative research and training by LACES in understanding trauma and
attachment issues is beginning to shape strategies and approaches for teachers
and teaching staff.
attending inadequate provision. No looked after child has been permanently


excluded for over three years and those receiving fixed term exclusions are also
decreasing in number. In January 2014, 24 secondary pupils were placed in
alternative education provision, which delivers tailored programmes that address
specific emotional, behavioural and social needs. They attend school for 25 hours
a week and these hours are often further enhanced by additional tutorial
sessions or after school activities.
out of area, ensures daily checks and swift action. Attendance of looked after
children in primary schools is high and better than the Liverpool average.
Secondary school attendance is also slightly better than the Liverpool average.
Persistent absence figures for secondary pupils who are looked after is slightly
higher than the national average, but the trend shows a steady reduction in
these figures over the last four years.
schools and alternative education projects across the city. The database is
updated on a daily basis and procedures implemented swiftly and effectively. Of
found and 36 cases were followed up further by the CME team.
receive a free leisure pass. The children in care council is involved in reviewing
its use for looked after children and care leavers. Inspectors saw several
examples where children are being encouraged and helped to take part in
activities which they enjoy.
health team. They benefit from prompt initial health assessments and advice at
regular clinics at Alder Hey hospital. Review health assessments happen in a
timely way and are carried out by suitable health professionals. Health reviews
take place in a variety of venues which take account of preferences expressed by
children and carers. Timeliness of health reviews and treatment is very good,
with 93% of assessments, 92% of dental appointments and 90% of
immunisations completed on time. As a result, childrens health needs are met
promptly. Health professionals routinely provide reports for looked after children
reviews and attend these reviews as appropriate.
to social workers, carers and other professionals. These services help to meet
childrens lower level needs. The single point of access at Alder Hey hospital is
designed to ensure that referrals of looked after children are assessed swiftly and
offered services, including signposting to local voluntary groups and consultation
with specialist practitioners. However, looked after children with more complex
needs experience unacceptable delays in receiving specialist support from mental
health practitioners. Inspectors saw cases and heard from staff about instances
where the delay in meeting childrens mental health needs was having a
detrimental impact on the stability of their care placement. There is an urgent
need for the local authority, health commissioners, and providers to improve
access to these services for looked after children.


CAMHS as the provider does not currently provide information about Liverpool
children; it only provides composite data relating to all the local authorities who
access its services. This means that the local authority cannot track and monitor
the timeliness of response and whether treatment and services have been
effective in meeting childrens needs.
membership consists primarily of older looked after children. The participation
worker is aware of this and is working hard to engage younger children through
a newsletter and group sessions during school holidays.
looked after young people and provides them with access to an allocated
advocate. The service has a particular focus on safeguarding arrangements for
looked after young women who are pregnant or have a child, offering support to
the young women and their children in relation to domestic violence. Young
people's evaluation forms reported that they found the service useful, but
information about common themes and outcomes of advocacy engagements is
not available and this is a shortfall.
teams is satisfactory. Childrens case files showed evidence of management
oversight and decision making. However, these records are usually brief, taskfocussed and do not show reflective consideration of the child. Social workers
receive regular formal supervision which is of satisfactory quality, and have easy
access to valuable informal but unrecorded advice, direction and consultation
from their line managers. A further strength is that additional oversight of
practice is provided by the pre-proceedings panel, legal decisions and
gatekeeping panel, and the fostering and adoption panels.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is requires improvement
continue to improve adoption services in Liverpool. They have benefitted from
independent reviews of the service and are implementing recommendations from
these. Senior managers are also clear about the need to improve the service and
several initiatives are in place seeking to achieve this. However, the adoption
improvement plan is not resulting in improvements in performance.
family following court approval. It currently takes 842 days from the point of a
child coming into care and then moving to their adoptive placement; the current
national threshold (20102013) is 608 days. This means that Liverpool children
wait an additional 234 days to live in a permanent family. There has also been a
reduction in the number of adoptions from 55 in 20122013 to 46 in 20132014.
too long to identify a suitable family, and performance is deteriorating. Indeed,
there has been an increase in the number of days it takes from court orders


being made to children being placed, from 150 days to 190 days. There is
emerging evidence that timeliness has begun to improve over the past six
months. The local authority argues that its performance is skewed by virtue of its
commitment to continuing to search for suitable adopters for children who are
traditionally hard to place because of their age and/or complex needs.
family finding is active. Adopters in training and approved adopters report that
adoption social workers have early and appropriate discussions with them about
potential matches. This demonstrates a determination to find potentially
permanent adoptive matches as quickly as possible. The adoption service is
recruiting carers from diverse sectors of the community. There is an overrepresentation of minority ethnic children in the looked after population but an
under-representation of minority ethnic children who have a plan for adoption.
The local authority does not know what factors are contributing to this
discrepancy but has recently appointed a temporary adoption development
worker to explore this issue and assist in determining the underlying causes.
Findings are not expected until the end of the year.
service are not yet confident that they are aware of all children at their second
review where adoption may be a potential option. Also, there is no readily
available performance information on the completion of life story work. This
means that the local authority cannot be sure that all childrens life story books
are started and completed at the right times or that the book accompanies the
child to their new family.
evidence that some adopters have been asked if they are willing to consider
being approved as concurrent or foster to adopt carers. However, the local
authority acknowledges that there is more to do to promote this arrangement as
a viable option for more children.
invited to an open evening or able to join a training programme  one carer
reported waiting for three months before participation in preparation work could
begin. This delay risks potential adopters seeking other avenues for approval
and, consequently, the local authority recruiting insufficient adopters to meet
demand. Once engaged in the training process, adopters report positively on the
quality of assessment and preparation training. However, the service does not
systematically capture feedback from those participating in the adoption approval
process, which is a missed opportunity, and therefore the service is not able to
evaluate the quality and effectiveness of its recruitment, training and assessment
activity.
the small sample of cases considered by inspectors, the process from application
as prospective adopters to approved adopters was completed within six months
for all of them.


team provides direct work with children and parents, support groups, and a
telephone advice line. The team can also refer children to the looked after
children CAMHS team for assessment and support. In 20132014, 133 packages
of support were provided. Currently 38 children are receiving support. The postorder support team evaluates its services via feedback forms from parents and
children. Aggregate findings indicate that parents and children value highly the
support they receive and the help is appropriately targeted. The teams
facilitation of a conference earlier in 2014 resulted in Liverpools schools having
more awareness of the support needs of adopted children.
chairperson. Panel minutes are of a good quality and reflect the contents of the
reports before panel. The panel provides appropriate scrutiny and challenge,
although currently the adoption panel advisor role rotates between three
adoption managers, which risks inconsistent or different advice being given.
permanency reports prepared by social workers are improving. However, there is
more to do to embed this awareness and the local authority is part-way through
ensuring that all its social workers have had training in permanency planning. In
most cases, planning is sensitive to issues of ethnicity and other aspects of
diversity. The agency decision maker is thorough and prompt in considering
panel recommendations and ensuring that the arrangements are robust.
such as feedback from prospective adopters or social workers who attend panel,
adopters evaluation of the service, or the status of life story work at point of
placement. This lack of qualitative data impairs the ability of the adoption panel
to contribute towards driving improvements in the local authoritys adoption
services.
appointed a dedicated family finder. The authority has also identified the need to
improve and update its adoption service website to make it more adopter
friendly.
The graded judgment for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
requires improvement
and personal advisors, who carry manageable caseloads. They report that the
service is accessible, welcoming and their workers give them good support and
advice, including when they disengage or drift into chaotic behaviours.
are not yet meaningful documents that track measurable outcomes for care
leavers. The plans capture young peoples needs but do not translate these into
future accountable actions that are understood by young people. The local
authority recognises these deficiencies and is reviewing the format and content


of plans in consultation with young people. Staff have received recent training in
effective pathway planning, however there is no oversight or evaluation from
IROs of the quality of pathway plans.
missing. Careful collation of data means that risks to young people are known,
assessed and responded to appropriately. This includes monitoring missing
patterns, risks of sexual exploitation, risks from contact with family members
and young peoples offending and substance misuse. Social workers and personal
advisors know their young people well and maintain regular contact with them. A
significant minority of care leavers are parents and there is considered attention
both to the parents welfare needs and prompt and effective referral to
safeguarding teams in respect of the children where this is appropriate.
care leavers report feeling unsafe in their accommodation. Semi-independent
accommodation is of variable quality and is commissioned through a regional
framework for care leavers aged 16 to 18 years of age. Most care leavers live
independently in private rented accommodation at 18 years of age, and too few
remain living with their foster carers. The local authority has recently instituted a
number of measures to improve the level of support for care leavers living with
private landlords, but it is as yet too early to see impact. The number of 19 to 21
year-olds reported as living in suitable accommodation has declined to 77%,
indicating a need for more supported accommodation options for care leavers
over 18 years of age, particularly those with greater vulnerabilities.
year olds, but the service is unable to measure the quantity, quality and
effectiveness of this work. Independence skills are often referenced in pathway
plans but these generally do not state how they will be developed.
bespoke, young person-friendly written information is produced. Care leavers are
signposted to national organisations which provide some information. The service
provides financial support for care leavers who are not eligible to claim welfare
benefits, but care leavers are not systematically advised of their financial
entitlements, or information such as accommodation, education, employment
and training pathways. The leaving care grant is currently low at 1,200 but
inspectors were advised that there are plans for it to be raised to 2,000.
care leavers, and the local authority funds two information, advice and guidance
workers who advise care leavers up to their 19th birthday. Some care leavers
report that the local authority supports and advises them effectively. 31 care
leavers attend university and they are well supported financially and practically.
Approximately 50% of 16 to 18 year old care leavers attend further education
courses supported by a bursary to encourage their attendance.


spikes of 55% of 20 year-olds and 49% of 18 year-olds who are NEET. This issue
requires further analysis and targeted interventions, particularly in light of the
further forthcoming raising the participation age (RPA) requirements. Staff
working with older care leavers described challenges such as long term
disaffection, histories of poor engagement in school and emotional and mental
health issues as being the most significant barriers to care leavers engaging in
and sustaining education, employment or training. The local authority and its
partners have been slow to assist these harder to reach groups of care leavers to
overcome their significant barriers to learning and engagement.
considered by social workers and personal advisors. Needs are generally well
documented in case notes and pathway plans, although specific actions often
lack accountability, frequently relying solely on the young person to follow up.
The looked after children nurse provides regular drop-in sessions and assists in
signposting older care leavers to appropriate services. There are effective
substance misuse reduction and sexual health pathways. A health passport for
care leavers has been recently devised but has not yet been implemented.
through CAMHS provision, which includes regular consultations for social
workers, personal advisor and carers. Some short-term direct work with care
leavers is also provided. The transition to adult services is supported by both
CAMHS and dedicated transition workers in the adult service. However, there is
little evidence of effective mental health and emotional wellbeing provision for
care leavers aged over 18 years who do not meet the threshold for adult mental
health services. This is particularly notable in the group of care leavers aged over
care leavers. The regular Children in Care scrutiny meeting allows care leavers to
influence service development through regular access to pan-council senior
officers. Recent examples of influence include the development of a council rent
guarantor scheme for care leavers in private rented accommodation and
apprenticeships across the council. Care leavers welcome and value access to
senior leaders and the follow up work they undertake. The achievements and
progress of care leavers are celebrated appropriately by the local authority.
care leavers is under-developed. Both quantitative and qualitative information to
evaluate and improve service delivery are absent. There is no information on
more vulnerable cohorts of care leavers, such as those with significant mental
health difficulties, those with housing needs, or offending or substance misuse
patterns. Therefore, managers are unable to evaluate the quality of service
provision and identify shortfalls, either at individual case level or on a servicewide basis.


Leadership, management and governance requires improvement
Significant factors such as the findings of the thematic inspection of early help,
continuing high volumes of contacts and referrals to childrens social care, and
widespread differences across partner agencies in understanding the thresholds
for statutory services, have informed the change programme appropriately.
However, capacity is an issue at all levels, the pace of change is too slow, and
high caseloads for some social workers is having a negative impact on the quality
of social work provided.
from home is commendably small, the number of children who are being looked
after by the local authority remains high, placing a severe financial burden on
already stretched budgets.
guidance. The Director of Childrens Services, who is responsible for childrens
social care and education services, manages a committed and energetic senior
leadership team and provides strong leadership. External partners, including
schools, provide support for issues of common concern, such as the need to
strengthen early help.
understanding of the major challenges facing childrens services in Liverpool.
They are taking action to address identified shortfalls and service pressures. A
neglect strategy has been developed, early help is being transformed, a new
electronic information system has been commissioned and there are plans to
reconfigure how childrens social care is structured in order to improve the
experience of, and outcomes for, children and young people. However, the
absence of an overarching narrative in the form of a single master plan, which
pulls together the different strands of activity, makes it difficult for partner
agencies at all levels of seniority to make sense of the big picture, track progress
and challenge appropriately.
accountability between the Childrens Trust Board (CTB), the Health and Wellbeing Board and the LSCB. However, the lack of good quality qualitative and
quantitative performance management information, strategic and delivery plans
that are sufficiently outcome focused, specific or measurable, inhibits scrutiny
and blunts critical challenge. Without clear accountability and written timelines
within plans, the ability of partners to hold each other to account is limited.
source of information about local needs as well as current and future priorities.
While the priorities identified within it have helped to inform the development of
the Children and Young Peoples Plan, the links are not fully established as
evidenced by the sufficiency statement. This document is descriptive rather than
analytical, and provides no meaningful information about future patterns of need
or supply.


more robust. Commissioning activity is currently fragmented. Procurement has
been outsourced and is being managed by Liverpool Direct and the draft
commissioning strategy lacks substance and detail. The latest information about
placements managed through the Placements North West (PNW) contract is not
disaggregated and does not provide meaningful financial or other data on
Liverpools take-up of the contract. Discussions with health partners about the
development of joint commissioning are well advanced.
children placements. However the post will also monitor independent fostering
and residential placements that are not part of the PNW contract, which will
affect the capacity of the role to act as a change agent.
assistant cabinet member chairs the Corporate Parenting Board which the lead
member also attends. The Board is informed by the work of the crossdepartmental scrutiny panel led by the Children in Care Council, leading to
improved outcomes for this group of children and young people.
meets regularly with the independent chair, who provides strong challenge.
There is a similarly robust relationship between the Chief Executive and the
independent chair of the LSCB. Performance management is seriously underdeveloped. Significant limitations with the existing electronic childs case
recording system means that there are serious failings, with little or no real time
performance management information available. Frontline managers are reliant
on paper-based systems to monitor caseloads and track progress. The childrens
electronic recording system causes delay and frustration and does not support
performance management or the day-to-day work of social workers. Staff find it
difficult to navigate the system and lose work when the system crashes. The
local authority is aware of the problem and its many negative impacts; however,
the planned replacement system is not scheduled to go live for another year,
leaving the service with an inadequate electronic recording system until that
time.
an effective window on frontline practice; such as the quality of safeguarding
social work practice and management oversight. They are dependent on the
vigilance of service managers and on data that is generated manually, collected
by over-stretched front-line managers or on data that is generated
retrospectively by the strategic intelligence team. This impedes the scrutiny role
of middle and senior managers, and affects senior leaders ability to identify and
respond quickly to issues and concerns as they emerge. This makes it difficult to
provide proactive, as opposed to reactive, challenge.
quality assurance unit bringing together IROs, independent conference chairs,
the child sexual exploitation coordinator, complaints team, participation officer
and the strategic intelligence team is intended to address that shortfall, but is not


yet in place and does not appear to bring any additional capacity to quality
assurance overall. A comprehensive quality assurance framework has been
developed and new, easy-to-use audit tools which are child-centred are in the
process of being introduced. In the past 12 months, 269 individual case file
audits have been completed across the safeguarding, looked after children and
leaving care services. This has led to summary reports being produced and
action plans developed. However, the process itself is not yet embedded. The
contracts of the two independent auditors who have been carrying out that work
are due to end in August and it is unclear whether existing managers in the
service have the skill and capacity to fulfil this role. Learning from complaints
also needs to be strengthened.
responsibilities, including significant operational duties. This hampers their ability
to provide strategic leadership and oversight. There are limited devolved
responsibilities to tiers of managers in the service, insufficient capacity building
within the service and no attention currently given to succession planning. The
Principal Social Worker role has been delegated to the lead for quality assurance,
who reports directly to the Assistant Director rather than the DCS. This
potentially limits the independence and the challenge to the service that this role
can offer.
which tends to be task-centred rather than reflective. Although inspectors saw
some good examples of effective supervision and support leading to highly
focused interventions and improved outcomes for children and young people,
this was not always the case. Similarly, the quality of the challenge provided by
independent conference chairs is not consistently good, as evidenced by the
variable quality of child protection plans, most of which are neither outcomefocused nor measurable. IROs workloads, which are above the national average,
limit their ability to provide an appropriate level of critical challenge in some
cases.
by the local authority have appropriately protected caseloads and more frequent
supervision and management oversight of casework. However, the workforce
includes inexperienced agency social workers with caseloads that are too high
and who lack the benefits afforded to permanent employees who are newly
qualified. This contributes to poor assessments and planning for some children.
remain unacceptably high and are having a direct impact on the quality of
practice. The creation of a joint investigation team in the north of the city has
helped to improve the quality of section 47 enquiries, but the creation of this
team has been at the expense of the safeguarding and support teams in the
north of the city. The early help agenda has yet to impact on the volume of
contacts and referrals in the social work service.
control, the turnover of staff is 7.6% in corporate parenting teams and 13.1% in


safeguarding teams; the North West average is 11%. At present all vacancies are
being filled by agency workers; of the 271 social workers employed by the local
authority, 45 are employed on agency contracts. This equates to 16.6% of the
social worker workforce and is above the North West average of 9%. At the
same time, the racial and ethnic profile of the workforce does not reflect the
diversity of the local population. This has implications for the cultural
competence of the workforce to respond to children and young peoples diverse
needs.
comprehensive workforce competency framework and no systematic use of
performance appraisals and personal development plans. Led by the Chief
Executive, work is underway to develop a multi-agency competency framework,
but there is further work to be done. The absence of a central database
capturing workforce learning and development is a key impediment. At the
present time, basic processes are in place, for example, monthly checks ensure
that social workers have continuous registration with their professional
registering body. Social workers report that the size of their caseloads makes it
difficult to find time to undertake training and therefore fill the requirements of
registration renewal.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for children
and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or serious
failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The welfare of
looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum requirements are in
place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good protection, help and care for
children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are widespread
or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm or
result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare safeguarded and
promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The effectiveness of the LSCB requires improvement
Areas for improvement
of additional help and support and Children in Need whose needs have been
assessed under Section 17 of the Children Act 1989.
streamlining the various datasets which the performance management sub-group
is currently using.
to ensure independent critical challenge.
quality assurance role of the LSCB.
partners learn from the experiences of children and young people.
effective.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
working which benefits children and families has increased over the last six
months but is not yet embedded.
lacked strategic direction, it is now compliant with statutory responsibilities. An
able and experienced independent chair has been appointed and in a short time
good progress has been made in progressing core business. However, the LSCB
still needs to be more effective in holding itself and others to account and has
yet to fully realise its potential to affect the planning, development and scrutiny
of services.
underpinned by a three-way memorandum of understanding. The LSCB chair


meets regularly with the Director of Childrens Services and with the Chief
Executive. A written record is kept of these meetings.
Sub-groups have been reconfigured and issued with revised terms of reference
which reflect the priorities set out in the LSCBs business plan. The Board is well
constituted. Tangible evidence of partners commitment to the LSCB is provided
by partners chairing of the sub-groups. The LSCBs business planning process
has been thoroughly overhauled, with overarching priorities for the next three
years being agreed. There are plans that in the future each priority will be
supported by an annual delivery plan. The current business plan requires
updating but provides a clear sense of purpose and direction, is outcome-focused
and measurable, and reflects local needs and national priorities.
increasingly providing effective leadership and promoting partnership working.
The LSCB has identified the need for an overarching narrative in the form a
single master plan, which pulls together the different strands of improvement
activity, to make it easier for partners to understand the overall direction of
travel.
Responding to Need, but needs to make sure that there is greater clarity about
whose needs will be met at level three and level four of the framework. The
issue of consent also needs to be given greater prominence. The LSCB also has
good oversight of the development and implementation of the early help and
neglect strategies.
good critical self-awareness, emphasised the importance of monitoring the
quality and effectiveness of safeguarding in individual agencies and provided
good information about identified pressure points in the childs journey. There is
a shared commitment to continuous improvement.
child sexual exploitation, the introduction of the single assessment and, more
recently, decisions in respect of publishing a particularly sensitive SCR report.
The minutes also show the attendance record of Board members in a way that is
open and transparent and facilitates challenge.
his challenge to childrens social care over the shortcomings of the neglect
strategy delivery plan and the high number of cases that, at one stage, were
reported as being unallocated.
section 11 audits of their safeguarding compliance on a self-assessment basis.
The validity of those self-assessments will be tested through a scrutiny and
challenge session planned for July. Given the complexity of the local health
landscape, the clinical commissioning group plans to submit a section 11 audit on


behalf of health partners. Looking ahead, health partners need to complete
individual section 11 audits, and discussions are already underway about how
best to achieve this.
While LSCB members recognise their responsibility to monitor the effectiveness
of frontline practice, including early help, the Boards performance management
arrangements are under developed. The data set is developing but is not yet
reliable or multi-agency. This undermines the Boards ability to hold each partner
equally to account. The LSCB should consider whether the current chair of the
performance management sub-group is able to sufficiently facilitate independent
critical challenge given that most performance management data currently being
scrutinised is from their agency.
(CDOP), which is effective in identifying, reviewing and responding to learning
from child deaths.
in line with statutory guidance. Good use is made of CIRs, and the way in which
the learning from reviews is distilled and disseminated has improved over time.
Lessons from the most recent reviews are clear and explicit, and the LSCB has
developed an effective action planning template and tracking tool. However, the
LSCB does not currently audit or evaluate the implementation of SCR action
plans, although there are plans to do so in future through the critical incident
sub-group.
LSCB has been involved in the development of an action plan in response to the
areas for improvement identified by a recent audit of contact, referral and
assessment arrangements in childrens social care, its broader quality assurance
role is under-developed. In the past the LSCB has carried out a significant
amount of multi-agency audit activity, but not in a way that was targeted or
focused. The new audit task and finish group has recently started to audit a
limited number of individual case files in order to get a sense of the childs
journey, but this work needs to be developed further.
from the experiences of children and young people. While there is a link to the
Children in Care Council on the LSCB website, the voice of the child is not strong.
This is one of the Boards top priorities and there is work in progress intended to
achieve this.
neglect but there have been problems with the take-up of these courses by
professionals and about the availability of trainers to deliver them. In the
absence of an agreed multi-agency workforce competency framework, which is
still at the development stage, the LSCB is not in a position to monitor and
challenge the take-up of training by individual professionals or partner agencies.


While there are plans to evaluate the impact of training on professional practice
and outcomes for children, this is also not yet in place.
particular, capacity for the Board is an issue as well as funding. The long-term
financial viability of the Board is dependent on increased contributions from
partner agencies, and discussions are taking place about how best to achieve
this.


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they need
to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care of
children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust and
rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics of
good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective arrangements in
place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It does not
understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to identify
where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.

To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


