Luton Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
And
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 January 20164 February 2016
Report published: 29 March 2016

Childrens services require improvement to be good

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Luton require improvement. Senior managers and leaders
recognise that the help and support that children and families receive is not good
enough. They have spent most of the last 12 months putting in place the systems,
structures and processes needed to address the shortcomings and deliver sustainable
improvements. More work is required before services for children can be considered
good.
Governance arrangements have been strengthened. The volume and quality of
performance management information have improved, as has the level of scrutiny
and critical challenge. However, although the help and support that children receive
from childrens social care is improving, it is not yet good enough.
Early help services have been restructured to strengthen the interface with childrens
social care. The number of early help assessments has increased significantly. A
good understanding of the thresholds for access to childrens social care ensures a
prompt response to contacts and referrals in the vast majority of cases. Professionals
are able to get advice and guidance from social workers based in the duty team, but
feedback to referrers on the progress of referrals is poor (Recommendation).
Consent is routinely sought and recorded. Child protection investigations are timely,
although strategy meetings are not always used to best effect to shape these
investigations. Although inspectors did not identify any children who were at
immediate risk of significant harm, they found delays in the start and completion of
assessments. Most assessments require improvement.
While most core groups and child protection conferences are well attended, the
chairs of child protection conferences are not consistently providing the right level of
critical challenge. Child protection plans are not sufficiently child-centred, focused on
outcomes, specific or measurable. However, partner agencies work well together to
safeguard and protect the children and young people. Information is shared
effectively. The voice of children is not well reflected in case records and
assessments.
Strategic and operational arrangements have been strengthened significantly in
response to the thematic inspection of child sexual exploitation in late 2014. There is
increased awareness at all levels of the risks associated with sexual exploitation.
Close cooperation between the local authority and the police, and good awareness
and understanding among partners of the threat of radicalisation, have led to an
increase in referrals to the Channel panel from early intervention services.
Further work is required to make sure that all children are offered return home
interviews (RHIs). The information gathered from those RHIs that do take place is
being used effectively to safeguard and protect children. The absence of a shared
database on child sexual exploitation and children who are missing from home and
care and education, makes it difficult to maintain an effective overview and


undermines the ability of agencies to respond proactively.
Private fostering is still not being given a sufficiently high profile.
When it is not safe for children to remain at home, appropriate protective action is
taken, although pre-proceedings work requires improvement. Inspectors saw no
evidence of children being looked after who did not need to be.
A product of poor-quality assessments, child care plans lack clear timescales, are not
sufficiently focused on outcomes and do not reflect well the wishes and feelings of
children and young people. Independent reviewing officers do not consistently
provide the right level of critical challenge. As a result, reviews are not always
effective in progressing plans for children.
The majority of children live in good placements, which meet their needs and help
them to achieve. For some children, there is drift and delay in making decisions
about placements because of a lack of urgency and understanding of the importance
of permanency planning.
Most children looked after attend a good or outstanding school. Effective use of
personal education plans (PEPs) means that in most cases there is a good link
between academic and personal targets. School attendance is good. Exclusions are
low. Attainment is improving.
While the completion of health assessments is in line with comparators, initial health
assessments are not being completed in a timely fashion. Placement choice is not
improving quickly enough. A shortfall in suitable foster placements is making it
difficult to place sibling groups together.
Adoption is not routinely considered for all children who are unable to return home
safely. While the number of adoptions has increased and timescales are improving,
children are still waiting too long to be adopted. Prospective adopters are well
prepared and assessed. Adoption breakdowns are extremely rare, owing to good
post-adoption support.
Most care leavers say that they feel, and are, safe. The majority of pathway plans
are good and care leavers are well supported to develop independent living skills.
Care leavers have access to a good range of accommodation options. The number of
young people who are not in education, employment or training is comparatively low.
Although they receive good-quality information about their rights and entitlements,
further work is required to ensure that all care leavers receive a health passport.
The average size of social workers caseloads is falling, but remains high in the
referral and assessment team. Social workers are not yet consistently receiving highquality supervision and there are weaknesses in the level and quality of management
oversight of practice. For some children and families, frequent changes of personnel
have had a negative impact on childrens ability to build and maintain meaningful
relationships with their social workers and have contributed to drift.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)



Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding services for children
and young people was in April 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was also in April 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The local authority operates one childrens home. This home was judged to be
good in its most recent Ofsted inspection.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services has been in post since July 2014.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since
September 2015.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 54,700 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Luton. This is 26% of the total population in the area.
 A significantly higher proportion of the local authoritys children are living in
poverty, compared with regional and national averages.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 18% (the national average is 16%)
 in secondary schools is 20% (the national average is 14%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 61% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian and Asian British and Black and Black British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 52% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 48% (the national average is 15%).
Additional contextual information
 Luton is in the top quartile of England authorities for child poverty and is the 47th
most deprived local authority in the country. One in four (14,769) children in
Luton live in poverty, using the national definitions. The levels of deprivation

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


affecting children in Luton are high, with several wards having output areas in the
top 10% most deprived areas in the country.
 More than 120 languages are spoken in Luton. Half of all school children do not
speak English as their first language.

Child protection in this area
 At 30 November 2015, 1,916 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 30 November 2015, 158 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 241 at 31 March 2015.
 At 30 November 2015, two children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from five at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, nine serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted. Five serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at the
time of the inspection.

Children looked after in this area
 At 30 November 2015, 388 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 71 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 399 (73 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015. Of this number:
authority area
 seven live in residential special schools;3 all of these children live
outside the authority area
area
 In the last 12 months:
returned to being looked after

These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


on to independent living
 one young person ceased to be looked after and is now living in a
house of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Significantly reduce the average size of social workers caseloads in the rapid
intervention and assessment team.


Ensure that professionals routinely receive feedback on the response to, and
progress of, referrals that they have made to childrens social care.


Ensure that all staff receive regular, high-quality supervision that is
appropriately challenging and provides a robust audit trail of decisions taken
and action agreed. Ensure that managers have appropriate training to support
this.


Ensure that, as key agents of change, the chairs of child protection
conferences and independent reviewing officers act as passionate advocates
for children and young people by consistently providing rigorous oversight and
robust challenge.


Ensure that all assessments: are of a consistently good standard; take full
account of the needs, wishes and feelings of children; effectively consider the
impact of equality and diversity; include a robust analysis of needs, risks and
protective factors; and provide clear recommendations.


Ensure that all plans are easily accessible, focused on outcomes, specific and
measurable.


Ensure that strategy discussions include an appropriate range of professionals
and agencies, including health partners, and are used effectively to inform
and shape child protection enquiries.


Ensure a more robust approach to the use of the Public Law Outline in preproceedings work so that progress is effectively monitored and maintained
and families understand what is required and expected of them.


Ensure that there is a suitable range of placements available to meet the
current and future needs of children looked after, not least so that siblings can
be placed together when appropriate.


Ensure that senior managers and leaders make best use of existing
information and data about children who are missing from home, school or
care and those who are at risk of exploitation, including child sexual
exploitation.


Ensure that adoption performance data and trends are rigorously analysed in
order to understand why older children and children from some ethnic
minority communities appear less likely to be considered or placed for
adoption.



Ensure that life story work is completed with children who are in the process
of being adopted, so that they are well prepared before they move in with
their adoptive families.


Summary for children and young people
 Children and families in Luton are able to get the help and support that they need
when they first need it.
 Schools are particularly good at trying to make sure that children and families get
the help they need quickly.
 Grown-ups are working hard together to try to stop people hurting children or
young people or getting them to do bad things.
 The local authority and the police are working well together to keep young people
safe from potential radicalisation.
 Children are not yet getting a good enough service from childrens social care.
 Social workers protect children when they are in danger, but some children and
families have to wait too long before they get other kinds of help.
 Social workers talk to children and young people, but sometimes they do not
listen properly.
 Some social workers have too much work to do, which stops them from doing a
good job.
 Some childrens social workers keep changing, which makes it hard for children
and young people to get to know and trust their social workers properly.
 Things are getting better, but managers need to do more to make sure that all
children and families get a good service.
 Most children and young people who are not able to live with their own families
are living with foster carers.
 There are not enough foster families who can look after brothers and sisters
together.
 It is not always easy for children and young people to understand who is going to
do what to help them or when.
 In order to keep children safe, Luton Borough Council and the police need to do
more to make sure that they use the information they have about children who
are missing from home, school or care or who are at risk of being sexually
exploited.
 When it is not safe for children and young people to go home ever, some of them
have to wait a long time before they find a new family.
 When the time comes for young people to leave care they get lots of help and
support to prepare them for independence.
 Some young people are able to stay with their foster families, even beyond the
age of 18 years.
 Many young people who used to be in care are going to college or university, but
they do not always get enough information about their health histories.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Children benefit from effective early help services, which have been restructured to
strengthen the interface with childrens social care. As a result, the number of early
help assessments has increased significantly in the last year. Arrangements to
escalate cases to social care when risks increase have also been strengthened.
Good understanding of the thresholds for access to childrens social care means that
most referrals are appropriate and timely. Professionals are able to get advice and
guidance from social workers based in the duty team, although feedback to referrers
on the progress of referrals is poor. Contacts and referrals are responded to
promptly in the vast majority of cases. Consent is routinely sought and recorded.
While child protection investigations are timely, strategy meetings are not always
used to best effect to shape them. Inspectors did not identify any children who were
at immediate risk of significant harm, but did see evidence of delays in the start and
completion of assessments.
Most assessments require improvement. A lack of robust analysis is a common
problem. The voices of children and young people are not well articulated in case
records or assessments. Direct work with children does not appear to be a consistent
feature of social workers practice. The quality and effectiveness of management
oversight needs to be strengthened.
Core groups and child protection conferences are well attended. Information is
shared effectively and partner agencies work well together to safeguard and protect
children and young people. However, the chairs of child protection conferences do
not consistently provide the right level of critical challenge. Furthermore, child
protection plans are not sufficiently child-centred, focused on outcomes, specific and
measurable (Recommendation).
Close cooperation between the local authority and the police, and good awareness
and understanding among partners of the threat of radicalisation, has led to an
increase in referrals via early help to the Channel panel.
While information and intelligence from return home interviews (RHIs) are being
used effectively to safeguard and protect children, further work is required to make
sure that all children who go missing are offered RHIs. The absence of a shared
database on child sexual exploitation and children who are missing from home and
care and education, makes it difficult to maintain an effective overview and
undermines the collective ability to respond proactively.
Private fostering is not being given a sufficiently high profile. Equality and diversity
are not consistently well considered in all cases.


Inspection findings

Well-developed early help services ensure that children, young people and
families are able to get the help and support that they need to tackle
problems as soon as possible. An arrangement with the local airport provides
a young carers service, weekend and summer support schemes for children
with disabilities and youth groups for young people from the Bangladeshi and
Pakistani communities. A range of sexual health and drug and alcohol services
are commissioned through a well-established joint commissioning
arrangement, as is the local child bereavement and trauma service.


The Flying Start programme, which is part of the early help strategy, is
bringing together childrens centres, health visitors and school nurses
alongside other early help services, including the early help hub. The aim is to
strengthen the focus on prevention and early intervention by developing a
more integrated approach to services for children aged five years and under.
With an extensive consultation programme already underway, plans are well
advanced to restructure the seven childrens centres and 16 satellite hubs in
order to deliver a more robust core offer of services. With good links to health
visitors, the support workers for young fathers and young mothers are
increasing the level of engagement with young parents. Working closely with
school nurses, a dedicated health and schools coordinator has had a
significant impact in taking the public health agenda into schools and
improving the quality of personal, social and health education (PSHE) by
making sure that it encompasses radicalisation, child sexual exploitation and
mental health.


Schools recognise the importance and significance of early help. They provide
effective early support to families when need is first identified and/or direct
them to other early help services as appropriate. With family support workers
funded by, and based in, schools, the number of early help assessments
(EHAs) has more than doubled, from 525 in 201415 to 1,191 in the first nine
months of 201516. Of the 1,191 EHAs, 45% were generated by schools.
Schools and other partners are increasingly willing to take on the role of the
lead professional, coordinating help provided for individual children and their
families.


Early help services have been restructured to ensure a better fit with
childrens social care. The early help hub, established in September 2015,
provides advice and guidance to partners, sorts and filters EHAs to ensure
that children and families get the right support and facilitates a team around
the child when the needs of the child or family require a more coordinated
response. Weekly allocation meetings ensure sufficient management
oversight. When risks increase, cases are escalated appropriately to childrens
social care. As confidence in the effectiveness of early help increases, partners


are less inclined to make inappropriate referrals to childrens social care. This
enables social workers to concentrate on those children and families who need
their help and support the most.

Timely and effective work delivered by early help services at tiers two and
three is improving outcomes for children and families. Flexible working hours
mean that the Stronger Families team is able to provide intensive support
when it is most needed.


Families with no recourse to public funds are well supported while they try to
confirm their immigration status. They are given accommodation and financial
assistance to prevent them and their children from becoming destitute.


Thresholds for access to childrens social care are well understood and
applied. Professionals are able to access advice and guidance from social
workers in the rapid intervention and assessment team. Children and young
people who are at risk or in need of social work intervention are identified and
referred appropriately to childrens social care by partner agencies. In almost
all cases seen, the quality and timeliness of referrals were appropriate.
However, a small minority of referrals lacked sufficient detail. This meant that
further information had to be obtained by the duty social worker before it was
possible to make a decision about the most appropriate response, resulting in
a short delay for the children and families concerned.


Suitably qualified social workers with effective management oversight make
decisions. A timely and appropriate response to the majority of contacts and
referrals ensures that there is a steady throughput of work. Consent is
routinely sought and recorded. However, referrers do not consistently receive
feedback on the progress of referrals. A letter template is being developed for
this purpose, but it is not yet available for use. Headteachers were particularly
critical about the feedback from childrens social care, which they described as
poor. This impacts on the ability of schools and other partners to know what is
happening and track progress.


When safeguarding issues and concerns are first identified, the initial response
is timely. Decisions about whether or not to carry out a section 47 enquiry, on
a joint or single agency basis, are appropriate in almost all cases. Inspectors
did not see any evidence of children and families being subjected to child
protection procedures unnecessarily. However, most strategy discussions
involve the police and childrens social care only and are not well used to
shape, inform and plan investigations. This was not seen to impact on
childrens well-being or safety (Recommendation).


With easy access to the local authoritys electronic case management system
and good links to daytime services, the emergency duty team, shared with the
two neighbouring local authorities, provides a timely and effective response to
referrals outside of normal office hours.



While most social workers are able to talk knowledgeably about childrens
wishes and feelings, case records do not always make it clear that children
have been seen and seen alone by their social workers. Inspectors saw limited
evidence of direct work with children and, despite having been given direct
work tool bags by the local authority, social workers were not always able to
describe what tools they would use to help them understand and make sense
of childrens experiences. For some children and families, repeated changes of
personnel have made it difficult for them to build and maintain meaningful
relationships with their social workers. This has contributed to drift and delay
in implementing plans, hindering efforts to promote change within families.


Senior managers have had some success in reducing the average size of social
workers caseloads, particularly in the neighbourhood teams and the children
with disabilities team. However, caseloads remain stubbornly high in the rapid
intervention and assessment team, where approximately a third of the staff
are employed on agency contracts. As well as having an impact on the quality
of work, high caseloads are also contributing to drift and delay in the start and
completion of assessments. As a result, some children and young people have
to wait longer before they receive the help and support that they need
(Recommendation).


Assessments require improvement. While social workers recognise significant
harm and identify and respond to immediate risks, their assessments are not
consistently well developed and lack robust analysis. In some cases, risks and
strengths are not described clearly enough. In other cases, less acute risks are
not fully explored. The voice of the child is frequently absent and it is not
always evident that childrens wishes and feelings are being taken fully into
account or being used effectively to inform their plans. This is particularly true
when there is more than one child in the family and assessments fail to
differentiate clearly between the needs of individual children
(Recommendation).


Most child protection plans require improvement. The template used is not
child-friendly or easily accessible. Outcomes are not clearly articulated and
plans lack specific and measurable targets and/or timescales with which to
assess progress and hold partners to account. However, this was not seen to
impact on childrens well-being or safety (Recommendation).


Most core groups and child protection conferences are well attended.
Information is shared effectively and, despite the limitations of child
protection plans, agencies work together well to manage risks and deliver
better outcomes for children. However, progress between reviews is limited in
some cases, sometimes because there has been a change of social worker.
This means that some children remain on child protection plans for longer
than they need to.



Some good examples of child in need plans were seen, particularly in the
children with disabilities team. These plans were clearly focused and regularly
reviewed, leading to good outcomes for children and young people.


Step up and step down arrangements are effective, although the relevant
procedure, updated in October 2015, has not yet been fully implemented. A
representative from the early help team now attends the weekly case transfer
meetings in childrens social care. Furthermore, a 10-day case transfer rule
has been introduced to ensure that cases continue to be held by the
transferring team until children and families have been introduced to their
new social workers. However, inspectors saw a small number of cases where
the transfer had gone ahead without the benefit of a formal handover
meeting. This risks compromising continuity and is not helpful for children and
families.


The local authority has adopted a whole-systems approach to electronic case
management. This is in recognition of the need to ensure that managers are
able to exercise robust oversight of the experience and progress of individual
children as they move between early help and childrens social care services.
Social workers will have online access to early help assessments within the
next few weeks, increasing their understanding and awareness of children and
families case histories.


The level and quality of management oversight in the rapid intervention and
assessment team and the neighbourhood teams is not sufficiently robust.
Further work is required to ensure that all social workers receive regular, highquality supervision which offers opportunities for reflection and critical
challenge in equal measure. Currently, the focus is primarily on compliance
rather than quality. Nevertheless, inspectors saw evidence of drift and delay
(Recommendation).


Multi-agency risk assessment conferences are effective in sharing information,
identifying risks and developing appropriate responses to protect children
affected by domestic abuse. There is good attendance at these conferences
by a range of partner agencies, including childrens social care. Attendance by
childrens social care at multi-agency public protection meetings is less than
good. Lack of consistent attendance at these meetings inhibits the flow of
information and intelligence and limits childrens social cares contribution to
public protection planning.


The risks associated with radicalisation are clearly seen as a safeguarding
issue. Strong partnership working at both a strategic and operational level
between the local authority and the police is having a positive impact. The
number of referrals to the Channel panel has increased from 21 in 2014/15 to


Male and female Channel interventionists are being deployed sensitively and
intelligently to assess potential vulnerabilities and help reduce risks. Channel


partners recognise that they need to improve the recording and reporting of
their impact and effectiveness.

The local authority maintains a list of children identified as missing from
education. Once children missing from education are known to the local
authority they are monitored and action is taken to escalate any concerns.
Schools play their part by notifying the local authority when pupils are taken
off roll or fail to arrive at the time of admission. Education welfare staff are
active in trying to resolve non-attendance directly with parents. At the time of
the inspection, 13 children were known to be missing from education. Senior
managers responded swiftly and took decisive and well-considered action
upon the discovery of two private education providers who were breaching
the law in respect of registration or not operating safely. Senior managers
have put in place a range of measures to address the issue of children who,
though not technically missing, are not in education. This includes the
development of a single central register of providers of education and
childcare, which will enable colleagues to check providers status and provide
information about the most recent regulatory visits.


Parents who choose to, or are thinking about, electively home educating their
children are given up-to-date information. This covers, for example curriculum
guidance as well as information about parents obligations and the action the
local authority may take if it is not satisfied that children are being
appropriately educated. The local authority also maintains, as best as it is
able, a current list of children who are being home educated. The local
authority recognises that parents are not under any legal obligation to notify it
if their children are home educated and that some parents prefer to avoid all
contact with the local authority.


While children who go missing from home are offered return home interviews,
the way in which these interviews are recorded makes it difficult for the local
authority to assure itself that the existing arrangements are sufficiently robust.
Currently, there is no direct correlation between the number of children who
go missing, the number of missing episodes and the number of interviews
offered and completed (Recommendation).


Over 1,000 staff from across the council responded to a recent survey on child
sexual exploitation by saying that they knew what to look for and who to tell if
they suspected a case. A dedicated team provides a single point of contact for
issues and concerns about child sexual exploitation, missing children and
domestic violence that do not meet the threshold for childrens social care.
Members of the single point of contact team undoubtedly know what is
happening on a day-to-day basis and are effective in mobilising appropriate
help and support. However, in the absence of an integrated approach to data
on children who are missing from home, school and education and those who
are at risk of child sexual exploitation, the local authority cannot be assured
that it has a coherent overview or that it is able to identify trends, patterns
and possible connections. While risk assessments are being completed and


most cases result in appropriate protective action, assessments are not being
updated with sufficient regularity (Recommendation).

In one case seen by inspectors, a good awareness of the issues relating to
female genital mutilation and effective sharing of information led to a swift
protective response, resulting in a successful application for a female genital
mutilation prevention order.


Arrangements for responding to allegations about adults in positions of trust
are satisfactory. Appropriate action is taken to protect children. However, the
lack of a bespoke system to record and monitor the progress of cases means
that the level of critical scrutiny is limited. More work also needs to be done to
increase awareness of, and engagement with, faith communities and with
voluntary and other community groups. Currently, most of the referrals to the
designated officer are from schools.


With access to good-quality information about their rights and entitlements,
homeless 16- and 17-year-olds are supported to make informed decisions
about whether to accept help and support under section 17 or section 20 of
the Children Act 1989. Although not always completed by a qualified social
worker, assessments are routinely signed off by a team manager. In one case,
the assessment identified an issue regarding forced marriage, which led to an
appropriately protective response. Six of the seven cases sampled resulted in
young people being offered suitable accommodation; the seventh young
person was supported to remain in their family home.


Private fostering is not, and has not been, given a sufficiently high profile. At
the time of this inspection, there was only one child who was known to be
living in a private fostering arrangement; two fewer than in September 2015.
More needs to be done to ensure that children who are living informally with
people to whom they are not related are properly safeguarded.


Issues associated with equality and diversity are not consistently well
considered in all cases, although inspectors did see some good use of
interpreters with children and families. In addition, some services are provided
in community languages, including the Freedom programme.


Currently, very few children or young people are making use of the advocacy
service to enhance their participation in, and contribution to, child protection
conferences. The most recent quarterly return shows that only four young
people exercised their right to complain.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Decisions to look after children are made appropriately and the immediate risks to
children are well considered. Most children live in stable placements and increasing
numbers are achieving permanence through special guardianship orders. However,
for many children, progress towards the development of a long-term plan leading to
permanence is too slow. Assessments do not analyse childrens needs sufficiently
well and the resulting plans lack focus and clear timescales for change. Visits to
children are not planned and purposeful, making it harder to move plans forward.
Most children who go missing from care have a return home interview, although
some interviews are not undertaken quickly enough. The response to children looked
after who are at risk of sexual exploitation requires improvement; assessments and
plans are not updated regularly enough in all cases.
The virtual school works well with partners to promote childrens achievement.
Personal education plans are of variable quality, with some good examples seen.
There is still more work to do to ensure that the attainment of children looked after
more closely matches that of their peers, particularly at GCSE.
Childrens reviews do not consistently drive plans forward. While independent
reviewing officers have begun to escalate concerns more frequently, this has not yet
had a significant impact on the quality of practice. Placement choice is not improving
quickly enough. The local authority understands what placements it needs but
progress has been too slow, particularly for groups of brothers and sisters. However,
a high proportion of children are living in family placements.
When children are unable to return home or to their families, adoption is not
routinely considered as a permanent alternative option and some children are waiting
too long to be adopted. The adoption panel provides effective scrutiny and has
challenged the inconsistent quality of child permanence reports. Life story work is of
good quality but is not being completed before children move to live with adopters.
Effective post-adoption support services are provided in a timely manner.
Support given to care leavers is good. Most care leavers have effective pathway
plans to prepare them for independence. Young people speak positively about the
services and support they receive, including good-quality housing. Education, training
and employment opportunities are actively promoted. Young people are encouraged
to achieve. Health support is developing; however, care leavers are not yet taking up
all the support that is available to help them stay healthy.


Inspection findings

At 31 March 2015, 400 children were looked after by Luton Borough Council.
This represents a rate of 73 children per 10,000 of the population, slightly
lower than the rate for similar local authorities. At the time of the inspection,
there were 388 children looked after, a reduction of 3% since March 2015.
The proportion of children looked after under voluntary agreements is in line
with national figures. Last summer, the local authority audited these cases in
order to assure itself that their legal status was appropriate. This resulted in a
number of cases entering proceedings.


In most cases, children and young people are looked after appropriately; risks
both from others and from their own behaviour are well managed. Inspectors
did not see any cases where children were looked after who should not have
been.


The pre-proceedings process under the Public Law Outline is not sufficiently
robust in progressing plans for children and making clear to parents what
changes they need to make. Inconsistent monitoring and review contributes
to drift and delay in many cases. Letters before proceedings are too long.
They lack focus on outcomes for children, do not always set out clear, realistic
timescales and do not list actions in priority order. This makes it difficult for
parents to understand what they need to do to stop the local authority going
to court (Recommendation).


While care applications are accepted by the courts, the quality of statements
and care plans is not consistently good. Assessments of family members are
completed in good time and those seen covered the required information well.
The average length of care proceedings has reduced from 50 weeks in 2013
weeks, but is in line with the latest national figure of 29 weeks. Cafcass
reports that the standard of the local authoritys work is improving.


When children return home, risks are assessed appropriately beforehand in
the majority of cases. However, once children return home, they do not
always benefit from effective, focused child in need plans to support and
direct ongoing work, drive progress and ensure that the right resources are in
place to meet their needs. Despite this, the number of children returning to
care for a second or subsequent time is low; only eight of the children looked
after at the time of the inspection (2%) had been previously looked after.
Inspectors saw no evidence to suggest that this was a product of risks to
children being overlooked.


When children go missing from care, return home interviews are routinely
undertaken, although in some cases delays in making the referral for an
interview mean that children are not seen until sometime later. This limits the
effectiveness of return home interviews as tools to help understand why
young people go missing and to help reduce the risks of this happening again.


Once completed, return home interviews describe the reasons for young
people going missing well enough to allow identification of risk factors.

The response to children looked after who are at risk of child sexual
exploitation requires improvement. No cases were seen where the risk to the
child or young person had not been recognised. On the contrary, those
working with children are well aware of the risks associated with child sexual
exploitation and know how to respond when risks are identified. However, risk
assessments are not consistently updated. As a result, the local authoritys list
of children looked after who are at risk of sexual exploitation is not totally
reliable. Some young people remain on the list even when the risks have
receded or no longer apply. This means that the local authority does not have
an up-to-date picture on which to base its strategic and operational responses
(Recommendation).


Only a very small minority of cases demonstrate effective and timely decision
making. In some cases, there are significant gaps in supervision records and
limited evidence of management oversight, sometimes over a period of
several months. Supervision records do not demonstrate that supervision is
effective or challenging; supervision notes are brief and descriptive, lack
evidence of reflection and do not give clear timescales for actions. For some
children this has contributed to drift and delay in achieving permanence
(Recommendation).


Most assessments of childrens needs require improvement; they were judged
to be good in less than a third of cases tracked by inspectors. In some cases
seen, there was no recent, relevant assessment to demonstrate that the local
authority had fully understood the childs needs. Additionally, the quality of
analysis is often poor. Better assessments seen made good use of history to
understand childrens circumstances and set out risks well (Recommendation).


The poor quality of assessments is reflected in the poor quality of care plans,
which are good in only a very small minority of cases. Care plans lack clear,
focused outcomes and timescales, are not updated to reflect current
circumstances and are not sufficiently comprehensive. In some cases, key
outcomes are not addressed. Children and young people are not always
supported to understand their care plans and are not always engaged in
producing or implementing them (Recommendation).


Permanence is achieved without delay for only a small minority of children.
Not all children have detailed permanence plans, and inspectors saw little
evidence of the use of parallel planning. When permanent placements, or
plans for permanent placements, break down the response is inconsistent.
Children are not always helped to understand what has happened or why and
in some cases alternative permanent arrangements are not put in place
quickly enough within the childs timescales.



While social workers know the children they are working with well and are
able to articulate childrens wishes and feelings, the voices of children, young
people and families are not well reflected in case records. They were absent
altogether in over half of the cases tracked by inspectors. Similarly, while
statutory visits are taking place, the way in which they are recorded reflects a
lack of purpose, with little evidence of meaningful work being carried out with
children. It is difficult to see how assessments and plans are influenced by
what children say and feel. Conversely, when talking about the children they
are working with, it is readily apparent that social workers know the children
well and are adept at articulating childrens wishes and feelings
(Recommendation).


Children have access to advocates who help them contribute to their looked
after reviews and support them well when, for example there are issues about
family contact or difficulties in their placements. Young people and carers
speak positively about the advocacy service. Eight young people have
independent visitors and some of these relationships are long-standing.
However, a further eight young people are waiting for an independent visitor
to be identified. In some cases, this is because social workers had not
provided enough information for a match to be made.


An established virtual school team maintains good contact with schools both
within and beyond the local authoritys boundaries. The virtual school team
links well with partner agencies and increasingly with childrens social care to
support and strengthen the education of children looked after. Educational
outcomes for this small cohort were slightly improved in 2015, with seven of
the 17 children eligible (41%) achieving level 4+ in reading, writing and
mathematics. This compares favourably with previous years but falls well
below the 73% for all Luton children. At GCSE, five of the 33 pupils (15%)
achieved at least five GCSEs at grades A* to C compared with 12.9% the
previous year. While these are incremental improvements, the local authority
recognises that the poor educational attainment of children looked after is still
a concern.


The majority of children looked after attend a good or outstanding school.
Decisions made by virtual school staff about school placements are informed
by childrens social and emotional needs balanced with childrens need for
stability. School attendance is good and exclusions are low, comparing
favourably with statistical neighbours.


The virtual school team is effective in promoting childrens wider social and
emotional development through enrichment activities, trips and personal
support. Its interventions to support children are timely and carried out in
close cooperation with designated teachers. The virtual school team also
provides effective training and networking opportunities for designated
teachers. These events are well attended.



Personal education plans (PEPs) are useful in informing the planning of
childrens education albeit with some marked variability in their quality. The
better plans provide a sufficient depth of analysis, read coherently, achieve a
balance of detail and brevity and make good connections between academic
and personal targets. Some plans include helpful comments from virtual
school staff, giving additional weight to the actions agreed in the document.
Attendance at personal education planning meetings by carers and partner
agencies is good, invariably leading to a better, shared understanding of the
childs needs. Improvement and forward planning by the virtual school are not
yet sufficiently well developed as evidenced, for example by the weak
application of data in relation to childrens progress (Recommendation).


There is a clear and coherent approach to using alternative education to meet
childrens needs. The range and diversity of provision, whether therapeutic or
activity-based, is good. The local authority maintains an up-to-date list of
alternative education placements, with the right level of detail, including
reasons for referrals and hours of access to education. It keeps a tight grasp
on the quality of alternative provision and supports and challenges its
providers well.


Knowledgeable local authority staff support schools well in relation to antibullying and e-safety work. Local research and good networks ensure that
schools are well informed about the nature of young peoples risk-taking
behaviours. The local authority provides responsive support to schools
through staff development, bespoke guidance and the offer of curriculum
opportunities, as well as through theatrical productions designed to raise
childrens awareness about personal safety.


Looked after reviews pay good attention to childrens health and well-being.
The completion of annual health assessments has improved significantly and
is now in line with national figures. Recognising that too few initial health
assessments were being completed on time, the local authority is taking
decisive action with its health partners to rectify the situation. Children whose
mental health and emotional well-being is a concern receive an effective
response from the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service (CAMHS).


Children benefit from a range of leisure activities, which helps them to enjoy
and achieve. Sports and leisure activities are considered as part of looked
after reviews, although where it is reported that children do not have any
extra-curricular interests, discussions could and should be more robust. Foster
carers have a clear understanding of delegated authority, although the terms
of this are not consistently updated to reflect changing circumstances.


The majority of children live in good placements with carers who meet their
needs, help them to achieve and show commitment to them. Of those children
looked after at the time of the inspection, 40 (10.3%) had had three or more
placements in the previous 12 months. This is in line with Lutons past


performance and with the most recently available figures for similar local
authorities.

Just under half (48%) of children looked after are placed beyond the local
authoritys boundaries. Almost a quarter are living more than 20 miles from
home. However, children are encouraged and supported to maintain contact
with the people who are important to them, even, for example, when children
are living some distance from family and friends. When contact needs to be
supervised, the local authoritys contact centre provides a safe environment in
which it can take place.


Most children (84%) are living in family placements. There are 20 children
(4%) placed with their own parents, in line with the most recent national
figures but slightly below those for similar local authorities. Of those 20
children, six (30%) live beyond the local authoritys boundaries.


Although sufficiency needs are well understood, progress in meeting them has
been slow. The local authority recognises that it needs to recruit foster carers
from just beyond its borders, where the housing stock makes it more likely
that potential carers will have a spare room available. However, the fostering
service has not yet managed to recruit the right mix and range of foster
carers required to meet the current and future children looked after
population in Luton. The lack of in-house placements is mitigated to some
extent by well-established arrangements for commissioning external
placements. However, it is not always possible for brothers and sisters to be
placed together (Recommendation).


In a third of the cases seen, looked after reviews were not sufficiently
effective in progressing plans for children, either because actions were not
being completed between reviews or because a lack of specificity made it
difficult to progress actions. In some cases, independent reviewing officers
clearly know children well and have a good understanding of their needs.
While independent reviewing officers are now escalating concerns to
managers more frequently, the impact of this on the overall quality of the
work has yet to be felt. Independent reviewing officers caseloads are in line
with statutory recommendations. With some joint training having taken place,
working relationships between childrens Cafcass, childrens guardians and
independent reviewing officers are contributing to the general reduction in the
average length of care proceedings (Recommendation).


Overall, the quality of case recording is poor, with key discussions and
decisions missing from many childrens records.


Young people are rightly proud of the achievements of the young peoples
panel (YPP), which is Lutons equivalent of a children in care council. Working
closely with the Corporate Parenting Partnership Board, young people have
comprehensively rewritten and re-issued the pledge. Individual members of
the YPP have gained a lot from their participation, and elected members are


showing good commitment to, and engagement with, the panels work.
However, while the work of the panel has the potential to impact positively on
the wider population of children looked after and care leavers, it is not yet
fully developed.

In half of all cases, examples were seen where needs arising from diversity
had been considered well. These included issues associated with the
maintenance of contact with the birth family, placement with a family member
and situations where sexuality or choices about religious observance were
bringing young people into conflict with parents. In the weaker cases,
diversity was not explored or addressed thoroughly.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement

The local authority has taken decisive action to improve the work of the
adoption team, to increase understanding and awareness at all levels of the
importance and significance of permanence planning and to reduce the length
of time that children have to wait between entering care and being placed for
adoption. There is evidence of improvement, but there is still some way to go.


Adoption is not routinely considered as a permanent alternative option for
children who are unable to return home or to their families. Four of the 13
children (31%) who have been adopted in 201516, and 11 of the 61 children
(18%) who are currently in the process of being adopted, were aged five
years or over at the time of the inspection. This compares favourably with the
national average of 5%.


White British children continue to make up the single largest ethnic group in
Luton. In 201516, 46% of the children who were adopted were White British.
By contrast, children of Pakistani origin, who feature prominently in the looked
after population, only accounted for 3% of those who were adopted in the
same year. The local authority has not yet rigorously analysed its adoption
figures to understand why some groups of children are less likely to be
adopted than others (Recommendation).


Fewer children are being adopted in Luton than elsewhere. In 201415, 25
children who left care (13%) did so by way of an adoption order. Although
higher than for the previous year, when 9.1% were adopted, this is still lower
than comparators (17%). So far in 201516, the number of children looked
after who have been adopted has fallen and it is predicted that only 16
children will have been adopted by the end of the year. However, the number
of children who achieved permanence by way of a special guardianship order
has increased year on year. The local authority is aware that it needs to do
further work with its own staff and the judiciary to make sure that adoption is


actively considered and rigorously pursued for all children for whom it is the
right option.

The local authority has had some success in finding suitable adoptive
placements for brothers and sisters. In 201415, 10 of the 25 children
adopted were members of a sibling group. In 201516, six of the 13 children
placed for adoption to date have been placed with a brother or sister.
Together or apart assessments are comprehensive, analytical and include
clear recommendations about future placements. However, at the time of this
inspection, seven of the 17 children waiting for an adoptive match were
waiting to be placed with brothers or sisters.


The local authority is not afraid to pursue adoption for children with complex
needs. In 201415, 20 of the 25 children who were adopted had been
identified as being hard to place and two of those currently waiting for
adoption are children with disabilities. Inspectors also saw examples of
children with a range of emotional and physical health needs for whom the
plan was adoption.


Children in Luton are waiting too long to be adopted. The 201114 three-year
average for the length of time between a child entering care in Luton and
moving in with their adoptive family was worse than comparators and
exceeded the performance threshold of 547 days by 187 days. In 201114,
moving in with their adoptive families, well above statistical neighbours and
England averages (52% and 49%, respectively).


However, adoption timescales are improving. According to the local authoritys
own unvalidated performance data, at the end of September 2015, the
proportion of children who had waited more than 18 months between entering
care and moving in with their adoptive families had fallen to 54%.


Until recently, permanence planning has not been given sufficient focus, with
the result that too many children have experienced delays in being matched
and in moving in with their adoptive families. The average length of time
taken between the local authority receiving court authority to place and a
match being found has increased from 42 days above the threshold for the
period 201114 to 108 days above the threshold in 201215. According to the
local authoritys own unvalidated performance data, this had dropped slightly
to 101 days above the threshold in 2015. In only four (29%) of the 14 cases
tracked by inspectors was permanence achieved without delay. In a large
majority of childrens cases seen by inspectors, permanence planning
meetings had not taken place at the required intervals and there was an
absence of effective oversight by managers and independent reviewing
officers. The local authority has introduced a number of measures to
strengthen its adoption performance, including the use of a permanence
tracker and the early allocation of family finders in an attempt to improve


performance. However, it is too soon to see the impact and effectiveness of
these measures.

Family finders know children well. The quality of childrens profiles, including
photographs, is good. As well as looking for families in Luton, family finders
use a number of different sources, including a local consortium, the adoption
register, publications and exchange, to try to find suitable matches. When
potential matches do not proceed, for whatever reason, family finders actively
review those cases in order to identify whether, for example the style and
content of information provided in profiles and reports contributed to the lack
of progress.


In the past year, only one child with a plan for adoption had their plan
changed from adoption and then only in response to the childs health needs
and the length of time they had been waiting. This compares favourably with
the period 201114, when 15 children (14%) had their plans for permanence
changed from adoption, and indicates a more robust approach to adoption.
This is an improving picture and reflects positively on the impact of the
director of childrens services in her role as agency decision maker (ADM).


The recruitment of adopters has been given renewed focus. Marketing
materials have been refreshed and advertising strategies revised. However,
the local authority is still failing to attract adopters for older children and, in
sufficient numbers, for groups of brothers and sisters. At the time of this
inspection, nine couples and three single adopters from a variety of ethnic
backgrounds were waiting to adopt. Only two of these households were
willing to consider brothers and sisters and all, apart from one couple, were
looking for children under the age of five.


The local authority is developing a more targeted approach to the recruitment
of adopters, recognising that as a relatively small authority it needs to work
closely with neighbouring authorities to extend its reach. Work to develop a
regional approach through Adopt East has started, but this is still at an early
stage and there is no immediate evidence of its impact.


The preparation and assessment of, and support for, adopters are very
thorough. Adopters spoken to talked positively about the initial response from
adoption social workers. Prospective adopters are provided with useful
information and given plenty of opportunity to talk through their concerns.
Assessments include detailed information about adopters strengths and
vulnerabilities and take full account of the possible impact on birth children
and/or children adopters have already adopted. Adopters described an
assessment process which really made them think about key issues and
enabled adoption social workers to gain a thorough understanding of
adopters circumstances and potential.



Fostering to adopt and concurrent placements are not yet sufficiently well
developed. Only two foster to adopt and one concurrent placement have been
made during the last 12 months.


While the adoption panel is led by an experienced chair, includes members
with first-hand experience of adoption and has good access to legal advice
and medical expertise, it does not fully reflect the diversity of the local
community. Currently, the panel does not include anyone from an Asian
background and its members are all women. Efforts are being made to
broaden the panels membership. In the interim, the minutes of adoption
panel meetings reflect rigorous scrutiny of adoption cases, leading to clear
reasons and recommendations. The panel is able to show that it has analysed
and challenged adoption practice appropriately, including for example the
variable quality of child permanence reports (CPRs).


The rationale for decisions made by the ADM is clear and well recorded. The
ADM meets regularly with the chair of the adoption panel to discuss and
review practice and performance. She is also working closely with the newly
appointed panel adviser who, among other things, has been charged with
ensuring that in the future CPRs contain up-to-date information and provide
the right level of detail to enable adopters to have a full understanding of
childrens histories, including childrens birth families.


Life story work is not completed soon enough for children who are being
adopted. In all of the three cases seen by inspectors, no life story work had
been done directly with the children to help them make sense of their own
history and prepare them for a move. Life story books are not completed until
several weeks after a child has been placed, so that photographs and
information, which could assist and support a childs transition, are not readily
available to their prospective adopters. However, once completed, the quality
of life story books and later-life letters is good; they are informative and
written sensitively and well, in a way that makes it easy for children to
understand (Recommendation).


The quality and effectiveness of post-adoption support is good. As part of the
preparation process, prospective adopters are routinely given information
about post-adoption support, which is also promoted via a quarterly
newsletter. Adoption support plans, completed when children are matched,
are appropriately detailed and clearly set out entitlements to support over
time. In the last 12 months, five successful applications have been made to
the Adoption Support Fund for therapeutic support. Most post-adoption
support is provided through a commissioned service that works with adopters,
adoptees and special guardianship order carers and provides adoption
information, counselling and support to birth families. As well as offering a
range of services, including life story work, the commissioned service also
runs regular training events. In 201415, the service worked with 63 families
and individuals; it has continued to work with 33 of those this year. Support
for a further 10 families has been agreed. The local authority has also helped


a number of adopters to access time-limited one-to-one support from a
buddy or specialist parent consultant via Adoption UK.

Birth families routinely receive information and advice about post-adoption
support, including the contact details for the national helpline Birth Ties, which
supports birth families. In tracking and sampling cases, inspectors saw
evidence of leaflets being discussed with, and where appropriate translated
into other languages for, birth families. With assistance from the postadoption support officer, 130 families are using the letterbox system to stay in
touch with their children and/or their childrens adoptive families by
exchanging written information. Inspectors saw examples of effective support
being given to birth parents to assist them in writing their first letter to
children who have been adopted.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good

The local authority is in touch with 217 (99%) of its care leavers. It works well
with partners to help care leavers successfully manage the transition into
adulthood and achieve independence. Social workers and personal advisers
are thoughtful and passionate about their work and take time to build trusting
relationships with care leavers. Care leavers are encouraged to have high
aspirations, make wise choices and develop realistic and achievable plans for
the future. Care leavers describe the support that they receive as brilliant and
really helpful and talk about the difference it has made to them, not least in
terms of their post-16 education.


Almost all of the 219 care leavers have an up-to-date pathway plan. Most
plans are reasonably comprehensive; they address care leavers needs and
identify appropriate actions to help them to be safe, do well in their education,
training or employment and achieve independence. Young people are fully
involved in the development of their plans and most are actively involved in
their six-monthly reviews. However, while the majority of pathway plans are
focused on outcomes, they are not always sufficiently specific and
measurable. In some cases, clearer timescales are required to ensure that
progress can be measured and monitored effectively. Additionally, oversight of
pathway plans is limited and often consists of little more than a quick paper
review during supervision. In a small minority of cases, management
oversight failed to identify a lack of progress, which in two cases seen by
inspectors resulted in delays in finding and securing suitable accommodation
for the young people concerned (Recommendation).


The local authority uses the preparing for adulthood planning documentation
effectively to assess the ongoing support needs of young people with
disabilities. They represent 5% of the care leaver population. Two personal
advisers, specialising in transitions, work closely with adult health and social


care services to ensure that transition assessments and plans are completed
before these young people reach 18 years of age. This helps to achieve a
seamless transition to adult services. While there was little evidence of the use
of pathway planning materials, support or oversight for these young people
from a care-leaving perspective, the continuing care and support
arrangements that are put in place are sufficient to ensure that their transition
to adult services is well managed.

Completion rates for health assessments are steadily improving and are now
in-line with national targets. However, health professionals acknowledge that
there is still more to do. Workers actively encourage young people to maintain
healthy lifestyles and offer appropriate challenge when, for example, young
peoples sexual activity involves an unnecessary degree of risk. However, it is
clear that some care leavers are choosing not to make full use of the support
provided or to take advantage of the annual health assessments routinely
offered to all children in care and care leavers. Conversely, evidence was seen
of care leavers, involved with the youth offending service, who were making
good use of support provided by the drugs worker to address their misuse of
drugs. Evidence was also seen that care leavers, including unaccompanied
asylum-seeking young people, are accessing counselling and intensive mental
health support provided by CAMHS, despite the fact that there is not a
dedicated service specifically for care leavers.


Despite the recent development of health passports, care leavers are not
consistently being given comprehensive, detailed information about their
personal health histories on, or immediately after, their 18th birthdays. With
the support of the care leavers information panel, work is underway to rectify
this situation. However, at the time of the inspection, not all young people
had access to essential health information at the point at which they were
leaving care.


The 16+ team is using the independent living assessment and pathway plan
checklist effectively to help care leavers prepare for independence. Developed
in conjunction with young people, carers and other professionals, the checklist
enables young people to identify, with support, the areas that they need to
work on. Plans are then drawn up to ensure that the practical and emotional
help and support that the young people require is provided at each stage.
Young people say that they value and appreciate this staged approach to
independence; the support provided by social workers, personal advisers and
key workers has taught them how to pay bills, learn to cook and look after
themselves. In some cases, preparation for independence involves a series of
planned moves from one type of accommodation to another. Rather than this
being a negative experience, young people told inspectors that they welcomed
this approach: it recognises young peoples progress and achievements and
provides incentives for them to continue to develop their skills, knowledge and
experience as they work gradually towards independence.



Personal advisers generally support care leavers over the age of 18 years.
Social workers work predominantly with 16- and 17-year-olds but, where
appropriate, they continue to support the most vulnerable young people
regardless of age, including those who are at risk of sexual exploitation, face
mental health challenges or are at risk of offending. Close working
relationships with accommodation and education partners ensure that care
leavers receive good wraparound support. Partners reported that 16+
workers are good at keeping them informed of what is happening and are
active in implementing care and support plans, organising appointments and
responding to legal or financial matters. Partners also reported that 16+
workers are very supportive at times of crisis. Young people hold their support
workers in high regard. One young woman, who was considered to be at risk
of sexual exploitation, was hugely appreciative of the fact that the social
worker from the 16+ team maintained contact with her even after she had
moved to another area.


Inspectors saw evidence of workers going to great lengths to re-establish
contact with care leavers who chose not to stay in touch. For example,
workers visit the care leavers families even when the young people concerned
refuse to see or speak to workers directly. As a result of this persistent
approach by workers, only two former relevant care leavers, both of whom
are aged 20 years and currently living with parents or relatives, have refused
to have any contact with the local authority.


The local authority is active in supporting young people in staying put with
their foster carers. The young peoples guide on staying put makes it clear
that care leavers are able to stay with their carer(s) until they are ready to
leave, any time up to the age of 21 years. Foster carers are able to access
training on working with young people. Particular attention is paid to
communication and preparation for independence courses in order to ensure
that carers have the right knowledge and skills and continue to provide
ongoing care and support for young people who choose to stay with them.
This increased focus on staying put means that currently 10 of the 48 care
leavers aged 18 years (21%) are still living with their foster families as part of
a staying put arrangement. Plans are in place to increase the numbers of care
leavers who stay put; 21 of the current cohort of 50 17-year-olds who are
looked after (42%) are planning to remain with their foster carers after their


The local authority commissions a range of suitable accommodation
exclusively for Luton care leavers and young people aged 16 or 17 years who
have been assessed as being homeless. Use of bed and breakfast
accommodation is extremely rare because the 16+ team has access to
emergency accommodation. Personalised support packages are provided in
response to the individual needs of young people, including those who are
from diverse backgrounds and/or those who are more vulnerable, including
young people with histories of offending. Young people told inspectors that
they are living in good-quality, suitable accommodation in areas where they


feel safe. Young people are supported to move to more suitable
accommodation or locations if they feel unsafe or are unhappy about the area
in which they are living.

When difficulties arise, workers provide practical and emotional help and
support to assist young people in working through the challenges. As a result,
no care leavers have been evicted within the last 12 months because of
problems with their accommodation. In some cases, young people are
supported to move to accommodation where there is a higher level of
support. For example, instead of being evicted, one young man, who had
been assessed as representing a risk to other young people in the same
property, was moved to another property managed by the same housing
provider.


A specialist social worker supports unaccompanied asylum-seeking young
people while their immigration status is under review. Support includes health
and counselling support in response to the physical and emotional trauma that
some of these young people have experienced. Each case is different and the
response is person-centred. For example, every Sunday, one housing provider
took a young person to attend an Eritrean Orthodox church in Suffolk.


Care leavers aged 18 years or over are given priority access to
accommodation provided by the housing department in Luton. Once they are
accepted onto the housing register and start bidding for housing, these care
leavers are usually able to get a council tenancy within two or three months.
The success of this scheme is partly due to the fact that social workers,
personal advisers and housing providers put a young persons name forward
only when they are confident that the young person is ready for independence
and have the evidence to support their assessment. As a result, care leavers
become council tenants when they are ready to take on that responsibility and
not before. In the case of some young people with criminal records, there was
reluctance on the part of the housing department to allocate council tenancies
to them while they were still the subject of community orders. Despite
petitioning by the 16+ team, these young people had remained in
accommodation commissioned by the 16+ team until their orders had expired.


When young people are ready to live independently, they are offered a degree
of choice about where they live and who they live with. While most opt to
move into their own council accommodation, that is not always the case. One
young person who was certain that she did not want to live on her own was
helped to move into a flat with a group of friends.


Care leavers are encouraged and effectively supported to go into further or
higher education, employment or training, including apprenticeships.
Arrangements are in place to ensure that all Year 11 care leavers have a
secure destination by the start of Year 12. A large majority of the personal
education plans sampled by inspectors were good and ensured that young
people were aware of the educational and other options available to them.


Two appropriately skilled personal advisers, with networks across the sector,
are available to support young people up to the age of 25 years.

In December 2015, more children looked after and care leavers aged 16 to 19
years were not in education, employment or training (NEET) than their peers:
considerable fluctuation because cohort sizes are small. It rose to 20% during
the course of 2015. Many of these young people find the move to
independent living challenging. However, they are known to, and well
supported by, personal advisers.


The proportion of care leavers in higher education has risen steadily and the
local authority provides an appropriate level of financial support. Currently, 28
care leavers are doing a degree course. The number of apprenticeships
available to care leavers has increased.


The local authority celebrates carer leavers successes. Even the smallest
achievements are recognised and acknowledged, as evidenced by the annual
celebration event for care leavers; last year it paid tribute to the achievements
of 60 young people.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
The quality of help and support that children and families receive is not yet good
enough. While senior managers and leaders now have a clear sense of purpose and
direction, and are taking decisive and appropriate action to improve performance and
drive up practice standards, it is too early to be able to evaluate the impact of many
of the changes that have been made.
Action has been taken to increase accountability by strengthening critical challenge
and scrutiny. Governance arrangements provide clear lines of reporting and
accountability. A more robust approach to performance management and quality
assurance means that managers are better able to understand what is happening at
the front line. However, the quality of service and audit action plans is variable.
Mature joint commissioning arrangements have increased, and are increasing, the
focus on outcomes. However, sufficiency remains a problem; a shortage of foster
carers makes it difficult to place sibling groups together. The corporate parenting
role is not yet fully developed.
Close cooperation between the local authority and the police, and good awareness
and understanding among partners of the threat of radicalisation, have led to an
increase in referrals to the Channel panel via early prevention and intervention
services. Strategic arrangements have been strengthened considerably in response
to the November 2014 thematic inspection of child sexual exploitation, which the
local authority took part in. However, the absence of a shared database on child
sexual exploitation and children who are missing from home, care and education
makes it difficult to maintain an effective overview and undermines the ability to
respond proactively.
While information and intelligence from return home interviews (RHIs) are being
used effectively to safeguard and protect children, further work is required to make
sure that all children are offered RHIs.
There are weaknesses in the level and quality of management oversight. Some social
workers are not receiving regular supervision, and the quality of supervision provided
is variable. Independent reviewing officers and child protection chairs do not
consistently provide robust and effective scrutiny and critical challenge.
While the workforce development strategy has generated a lot of activity, the
absence of a coherent action plan means that the activity is not well joined up.
Although the average size of social workers caseloads is falling, it remains
stubbornly high in the referral and assessment team. In some cases, frequent
changes of personnel have had an impact on the ability of children and families to
build meaningful relationships with their social workers and contributed to drift.


Inspection findings

The local authority has had three different directors of childrens services since
the last inspection. It recognises that the service it currently provides to
children and families is not good enough. Following a period of critical
reflection, senior managers and leaders have spent most of the last 12
months strengthening the systems, structures and processes needed to
address the shortcomings and deliver sustainable improvements. With
increased openness and transparency, a robust self-assessment and a clear
sense of purpose and direction, decisive action has been, and continues to be,
taken to improve performance and drive up practice standards. This has
included robust action to tackle poor performance. A number of staff have had
their contracts terminated and some have decided to leave.


An improvement board, chaired by the chief executive, is overseeing the
implementation of the local authoritys strategic improvement plan for
childrens services. There is good cross-party support and elected members
have allocated significant additional resources to support the change
programme. A new computer system and an increase in social work posts
mean that staff now have the tools and the capacity to deliver a better
service, although the average size of social workers caseloads remains
stubbornly high in some areas.


Governance arrangements are well established, with clear lines of reporting
and accountability. The chief executive is active and involved. There is good
engagement from elected members, leading to increased scrutiny, as
evidenced by the setting up of a childrens services review group (CSRG),
which reports directly to the overview scrutiny board. However, while
members of the CSRG now have a good understanding of the work of the
children and learning department, it is too early to evaluate the groups
impact.


Close working relationships with the clinical commissioning group and the
police, at both a strategic and operational level, are starting to make a real
difference. There is good buy-in from partners, particularly schools. Although
there is still more work to do, the response to child sexual exploitation has
been strengthened considerably. There is increased awareness and
understanding of the risks; policies, procedures and frameworks are more
robust and the sharing of information has improved. With a strong focus on
community cohesion, and an extensive programme of WRAP (workshops to
raise awareness of prevent) training, there is increasing evidence of the
impact and effectiveness of the Channel panel in dealing with the threat of
radicalisation.


The Health and Well-being Board is becoming more focused, with good
engagement by key partners. While some progress has been made in
response to the increasing problem of obesity, particularly among children,


the local authority and its partners are in the process of developing a neglect
strategy. However, this seems quite tardy, given the local authoritys own
estimate which suggests that 21,000 children in Luton are affected by at least
one of the elements of the toxic trio of parental substance abuse and mental
ill-health and domestic abuse.

As well as providing a reasonably comprehensive picture of local needs, the
latest joint strategic needs assessment offers a clear and concise set of
strategic recommendations. With two cross-cutting and three age-specific
themes, children and young people are given due prominence. The focus on
making sure that 0- to 19-year-olds have a healthy start in life chimes well
with the vision of the Childrens Trust and the ambitious programme of activity
that is being delivered under the auspices of the Flying Start strategy to
develop an integrated service for 0 to 5-year-olds.


Mature joint commissioning arrangements, as part of a long-standing section
contracts to deliver a range of services, including sexual health and drugs and
alcohol services, in response to identified need. However, progress in
implementing the 201417 sufficiency strategy is slow. There is a clear
mismatch between the supply of, and demand for, foster carers which, for
example makes it difficult to place sibling groups together in suitable family
placements. This results in some children living further away from home than
might otherwise be the case (Recommendation).


Outside of the formal commissioning arrangements, but no less significant, is
the relatively unique arrangement with the local airport, which funds around
disabilities. Relationship managers, rather than commissioners, working with
the two main consortia of voluntary sector providers are developing an
increased, and increasing, focus on outcomes.


The corporate parenting role is not yet fully developed. While the Corporate
Parenting Partnership Board has been renamed and restructured, and its
membership extended to include young people, foster carers and a range of
partners, it does not yet have the performance management tools to monitor
and drive forward the implementation of the pledge, which was developed in
collaboration with young people.


Recognising the need to increase the impact and effectiveness of the Local
Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB), the director of childrens services (DCS)
was instrumental in recruiting and appointing a new chair and business
manager. As well as meeting regularly face-to-face with the LSCB chair, the
DCS also attends the quarterly review meetings that the chair has with the
chief executive and the lead member. Robust reporting arrangements ensure
an appropriate degree of accountability.



The volume and quality of performance management information have
improved considerably since the introduction 12 months ago of a new
performance management and quality assurance framework. Middle and
senior managers now have access to a range of reports which give them a
direct line of sight to what is happening at the front line. The chief executive,
lead member and leader of the council routinely review the directorates
performance scorecard. However, further work is required to ensure the
accuracy and reliability of the data. Currently, the data are not weighted or
ranked in order of importance. The local authority needs to concentrate on
those performance indicators that will make the most difference to children
and young people, eradicate drift and delay and have the biggest impact in
terms of achieving lasting change in organisational culture and working
practices.


A more systematic approach to the use of audits is helping to drive
improvements although, for children, young people and families who are using
childrens social care services, the pace of change is slow. The quality
assurance and performance panel ensures that there is robust follow-up on
individual case audits that are judged inadequate. It also plays a key role in
making sure that audit findings are translated into improvements in practice
and processes. For example, lessons learned from audits led to the
introduction of guidance for practitioners on written agreements with families
and to the rewriting and relaunch of the supervision policy. However, there is
still a long way to go to secure lasting improvements at the front line. When
supervision practice was last audited in September 2015, it was found that
only 67% of social workers were receiving regular supervision and that the
quality of supervision provided was less than good in 60% of the cases
audited.


Senior managers recognise that the standard of practice and performance is
not where the local authority wants it to be and where children, young people
and families have a right to expect it to be. They are continually looking for
ways to improve and the approach they take is outward looking. Luton is an
early adopter of the Graded Care Profile, has been accepted for early take-up
of a reunification programme and is, along with a number of other local
authorities, due to pilot the new social work accreditation scheme. The
principal social worker is visible and active in trying to raise practice standards
and provides a valuable source of two-way communication between middle
and senior managers and front-line staff. However, while there is no shortage
of service and audit action plans, the quality of these plans is variable. They
are not consistently focused on outcomes, specific and measurable. This has
the potential to limit the effectiveness of the plans (Recommendation).


Cafcass reports that the standard of the local authoritys court-directed work is
improving. The average length of care proceedings has fallen but, at 30
weeks, is still above the national target of 26 weeks. Relationships between
Cafcass, childrens guardians and independent reviewing officers are described
as positive, with evidence of some joint training.



Management understanding and control, at both a strategic and operational
level, is not yet sufficiently robust. Senior managers do not have a direct line
of sight to vulnerable children, including those who are considered to be at
risk of child sexual exploitation. There is a need to strengthen the
arrangements for monitoring the offer and take-up of return home interviews.
Independent reviewing officers and chairs of child protection conferences are
not consistently providing the right level of critical challenge. Social workers
do not have access to regular, high-quality supervision and performance
appraisal is not well embedded. Oversight of casework decisions is not
sufficiently child-centred or challenging (Recommendation).


Partly as a result of the investment in, and restructuring of, early help
services, the average size of social workers caseloads is falling, though not
quickly enough in the rapid intervention and assessment team. At 12.6%, the
staff turnover rate is comparatively low, but the local authority continues to be
heavily dependent on agency staff. With a vacancy rate of 22.9%, there are
currently 39.4 full-time equivalent social workers on interim contracts covering
support for newly qualified social workers (NQSWs) by co-working more
complex cases with them. The local authority has invested significantly in
NQSWs, 22 of whom are doing their assessed year of employment. It is also
making good use of the Step Up to Social Work Programme; the local
authority has 10 participants. However, a reluctance to pay the going market
rate is making it difficult to permanently recruit independent reviewing officers
and chairs of child protection conferences with the right levels of skills,
knowledge and experience. While the workforce development strategy has
generated a lot of activity, the absence of a coherent action plan means that
that activity is not well joined up. Furthermore, a lack of effective engagement
and activity by human resources has limited the impact of the strategy.


Training is responsive to identified needs and increasingly being delivered
flexibly rather than being wholly reliant on traditional classroom teaching.
Social workers have good access to a range of training opportunities,
including, for some, post-qualification training at the local university. How best
to evaluate the impact of learning on individual performance is currently under
review. In the absence of a well-embedded performance appraisal system or a
robust competency framework in childrens social care, what is not clear is
how middle and senior managers make sure that the right staff are doing the
right training. Currently, those responsible for workforce development are
unable to specify what management and supervision training front-line team
managers and deputy managers have had. Given the concerns about
supervision and management understanding and control, this is a significant
omission (Recommendation).


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
The LSCB has maintained a clear focus on serious incidents and on ensuring effective
challenge between board partners. This is in spite of a very busy year, which has
included four serious case reviews and a 50% turnover of board members. However,
the board has not quality assured multi-agency practice sufficiently through joint
audits. For example, to date it has not reviewed early help services, and it has yet to
fully deliver against the new board structure that was implemented in April 2015.
In the short time that they have been in office, the newly appointed independent
chair and business manager have already had a significant impact on the LSCBs
work. The board has successfully developed a performance scorecard with which to
routinely monitor front-line practice. However, further work is required to ensure that
the scorecard includes appropriate measures relating to children who go missing and
are at risk of sexual exploitation.
The board effectively undertakes serious case reviews and reviews of child deaths in
order to ensure that lessons are identified to improve safeguarding practice for
children and their families. Some significant changes to policies and procedures have
been made as a result of learning from case reviews and audit, but follow through on
action plans and evidence of impact have been variable, with some actions
outstanding.
Although the main board partners are appropriately undertaking section 11
assessments of their safeguarding practices, further work is needed to engage with
faith and voluntary sector organisations in reviewing their safeguarding practices.
The board does not assess front-line practice for children at risk of sexual
exploitation effectively enough. However, it has worked well with the local authority
at a strategic level to raise awareness and safeguard children.
The board has delivered a range of training to professionals across the partnership
and has a comprehensive suite of policies and procedures to guide practice. It has
appropriately identified the need to strengthen the training offer and regularly review
policies and procedures. The board has also identified the need to ensure that
policies and procedures remain relevant and up to date.
The LSCB does not yet have sufficient influence across strategic partnerships to
inform and influence priority setting and planning for children and their families.


Recommendations

Significantly extend the programme of joint- and single-agency audits to
ensure that the LSCB is able to identify and prioritise areas for further
development and improve the way in which children, young people and their
families are safeguarded and protected.


Carry out a multi-agency audit of early help.


Ensure that the board regularly reviews the effectiveness of partner agencies
responses to children and young people who are at risk of sexual exploitation
and, where applicable, identify areas for further improvement.


Agree and adopt an appropriate range of performance measures in respect of
child sexual exploitation and children who go missing, so that the board is
able to effectively monitor and evaluate the services available to these
vulnerable young people.


Ensure that all action plans produced by the board, including those developed
in response to serious case reviews and multi-agency audits, are effective and
that their implementation is subject to rigorous scrutiny, resulting in
improvements in safeguarding practice.


Increase the level of engagement with faith groups and voluntary sector
organisations in order to ensure that they, and the LSCB, are confident that
they are responding effectively to safeguarding issues.


Take steps to ensure that the board is able to exercise significant influence
across all of the key strategic partnerships in the design, development and
delivery of services for children, young people and their families.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The last year has undoubtedly been a particularly busy one for the LSCB, with
four serious case reviews, two individual management reviews, the
restructuring of the board and a 50% turnover in board membership. The
board has continued through this time of change to provide some effective
challenge to key partners and to act on learning from serious incidents.
However, some aspects of its work have been less impressive. In particular, it
has failed to audit, monitor and evaluate work carried out by partners to
safeguard children, including through early help. There has also been a
significant delay in fully delivering against the boards new structure, which
was due to be implemented in April 2015 (Recommendation).


Of particular note were the appointments of a new independent chair in
September 2015 and a new business manager in December 2015. With a brief
to increase the impact and effectiveness of the board, they have made a very
positive start. As well as meeting with key partners to explore their roles and


respective contributions, the new independent chair and the new business
manager quickly recognised the need for a renewed focus on the collective
response to neglect. They have begun to bring greater clarity to the various
board sub-groups to ensure that sub-groups activity accurately reflects the
boards priorities.

Governance arrangements between the LSCB, the director of childrens
services (DCS), the lead member and the chief executive are clear and well
established. All three of them met with the new chair of the LSCB in January
taken. The DCS is also in regular communication with the LSCB chair.


The boards new structure provides a strong foundation on which to develop
the role, function and impact of the various sub-groups and task and finish
groups. Some of these are Luton-specific; others have a pan-Bedfordshire
remit. Although the scrutiny and assurance group is up and running and
delivering effectively on a number of work streams, there has been a delay in
establishing some of the other sub-groups, despite these being integral to the
boards restructure nine months ago. For example, neither the learning and
improvement sub-group nor the bullying, sexting and online issues sub-group
is yet fully operational.


Board members describe the primary focus over the past 12 months as having
been to make sure we are doing the right things. For example, a great deal
of work has gone into developing the boards performance scorecard. This
ensures that the board has access to relevant performance management
information with which to assess the quality and effectiveness of partner
agencies front-line practice and identify areas for improvement. Used to good
effect at the December 2015 meeting of the LSCB executive, the scorecard is
still being fine-tuned. Currently, it does not include robust and reliable data on
missing children and/or those who are at risk of sexual exploitation
(Recommendation).


There is evidence of, and board members confirm that there has been,
increasingly effective challenge between agencies on their respective
contributions to safeguarding children and young people. Partners are now
better able to hold each other to account. For example, in response to a
particular challenge about police attendance at initial child protection
conferences (ICPCs), police officers schedules are now organised in such a
way as to ensure that they are available to attend ICPCs on set days each
week. Similarly, the housing department has recently been invited to provide
assurance to the board that the current housing crisis, which is leading to the
increased use of bed and breakfast accommodation, is not exposing
vulnerable children and their families to greater risk, by virtue of their being
temporarily housed alongside potentially risky adults.


The main partner agencies involved with the LSCB complete annual section 11
self-assessments of the effectiveness of their arrangements for safeguarding


children. In 201415, analysis of the returns confirmed that partner agencies
understood the importance of safeguarding and had suitable arrangements in
place. However, the returns provided little evidence of impact or improved
outcomes for children and young people. This years self-assessments are
currently being analysed by a pan-Bedfordshire group; it is too early to
evaluate how well this gap has been addressed.

One significant area of weakness, which the incoming chair and business
manager have already identified, is the Boards lack of engagement with faith
communities and the voluntary sector. To date, the Board has done little to
support these groups to be able to assure itself about the quality of the
groups safeguarding arrangements. The new Board manager has now started
a detailed piece of work to explore possible issues and sensitivities, in order to
know how best to engage effectively with what is a complex, multi-faith
landscape and with a voluntary sector that does not have a representative
body (Recommendation).


With four serious case reviews (SCRs) underway and a fifth currently in the
process of being commissioned, the SCR sub-group has been extremely busy.
Additionally, the LSCB has completed two individual management reviews
(IMRs) in response to serious incidents during the year. Learning from child
deaths, SCRs and IMRs has been used effectively to inform changes in
procedures and developments in practice across Luton. The board is proactive
in acting on the learning from such events without waiting for reports to be
agreed or published. This is good practice. For example, a bruising protocol
has been developed and implemented, with training provided, to ensure that
there is a robust professional response when bruising to babies or children is
seen. Similarly, the threshold document has been reviewed and relaunched
within the last 12 months in response to learning from case reviews.


However, there is room for improvement in the sign off, and subsequent
follow-up, of SCR action plans. Practice is variable and ranges from rigorous
monitoring to ensure that actions agreed have been completed in the case of
one SCR to less frequent review of the SCR action plan by the executive board
in another. Recognising that the LSCB also needs to improve its ability to
evidence the impact of SCR action plans, the LSCB multi-agency audit group is
planning in future to audit all SCR action plans to determine their quality and
effectiveness in terms of progress, review and impact (Recommendation).


The need to improve the professional response to neglect is a key learning
outcome from a number of SCRs. Having identified the lack of progress in this
area, the new chair of the LSCB has taken swift action to address the deficit
by appointing a part-time development officer to focus on this issue. The new
chair has also secured the services of a leading national expert on neglect to
facilitate the boards development and business planning day in March 2016.


The child death overview panel (CDOP) routinely reviews all unexpected
deaths of children in Luton, although in a small number of cases, there has


been a delay in sharing information with the SCR group. On one occasion, this
led to a lengthy delay between the critical incident and the start of an SCR.
Subsequently, the CDOP, which is a pan-Bedfordshire group, has changed its
processes to ensure that the same thing could not happen again. The CDOP
produces Luton-specific data, as well as information on county patterns and
trends, so that the LSCB has the data and information it needs to provide
effective scrutiny. Learning from reviews of child deaths is used well to try to
reduce risks and mitigate modifiable factors, such as those associated with cosleeping and consanguinity.

Although the board has delivered a good range of learning events to share
findings from national and local SCRs with professionals and partner agencies,
attendance by social workers at these events has been problematic. During
this inspection, the vast majority of staff who spoke to inspectors were unable
to say very much about the priorities or work of the board and almost all said
that they had not received any briefings or information about SCRs, local or
national. The learning and improvement sub-group is currently exploring how
to improve communication across the partnership to increase awareness and
understanding of the boards work, particularly the outcome of SCRs and the
lessons learned from them.


The board delivers a range of relevant training to partners and professionals
across Luton, although to date this has not included safeguarding training on
for example parental mental ill-health and substance misuse, despite these
issues figuring highly in the local profile. Having received feedback that the
quality of training provided was not of a consistently high standard, the board
undertook a speedy review and took decisive action to secure a new training
provider. From 1 April 2016, the boards training will be delivered through a
pan-Bedfordshire training group.


Multi-agency audits have not been used effectively to identify improvements
in professional practice. During the last year, the Board has carried out only
two multi-agency audits and in neither case is it evident that the outcomes of
those audits have been fully implemented. For example, while an audit in
early 2015 to consider the experience of individuals and agencies that had
made referrals to childrens social care prompted the development of the new
threshold document, referrers told inspectors that feedback from childrens
social care is still poor. A second multi-agency audit, in November 2015,
reviewed the cases of eight young people who, following referral to the child
sexual exploitation panel, were judged not to meet the panels criteria.
Although the audit did lead to an appropriate review of the panels function,
action has not been taken to determine whether or not vulnerable young
people consistently receive an effective and proactive service response to
reduce the risk of sexual exploitation. Additionally, the board has not yet
carried out an audit of early help services and/or the experience and progress
of children and families who receive early help and support. This is a
significant omission and means that the board cannot be assured that these
services are robust (Recommendation).



The LSCB has developed an effective range of policies and procedures to
promote the welfare of children and young people in Luton and is constantly
on the alert to the possibility that new ones may be needed. For example, the
Board is about to launch a new policy on female genital mutilation and has
developed a clear pathway to protect children from female genital mutilation.
However, at present the board does not have a robust approach to ensuring
that policies and procedures are regularly reviewed and refreshed in order for
them to remain relevant and up to date. The pan-Bedfordshire policy and
procedures group has recognised, and is in the process of rectifying, this
situation.


The LSCB chair recognises that the boards performance scorecard does not
yet include robust data on child sexual exploitation and children who go
missing and that, to date, its review of practice has been limited to a single
audit of referrals to the child sexual exploitation panel. The LSCB chair has
plans in place to address both issues (Recommendation).


At a strategic level, the board has made a strong contribution to the
continuing development of the pan-Bedfordshire child sexual exploitation and
missing children strategic group, which has increasingly effective oversight
and understanding of the area-wide picture of vulnerable children. The board
has also worked well with the local authority, which has been extremely active
in raising awareness and understanding of the nature and extent of child
sexual exploitation and children who go missing from home, school and care.


One of the LSCBs major successes in the last 12 months has been the
development of the Luton pledge on safeguarding children from child sexual
exploitation. Launched at the local football club in order to gain maximum
publicity, the pledge was a product of some very sensitive work with various
community groups, including representatives from the faith sector. The board
also led on a significant piece of work involving the airport, local airlines, the
police and the Border Agency to develop a memorandum of understanding on
trafficking and sexual exploitation. The plan now is to provide training for
cabin crews to help them to identify children who may be being trafficked.
With a protocol already agreed, the training is expected to take place very
soon.


Increased awareness and stronger strategic partnerships are leading to better
sharing of intelligence and higher levels of activity to safeguard children and
young people who may be at risk of, or are being, sexually exploited. For
example, there are currently four police operations in progress and police and
local authority partners are working with 90 young people across the county
where child sexual exploitation is a concern. The police are also making
greater use of their powers to disrupt potential perpetrators. In 2015, the
police child sexual exploitation team and missing persons unit issued seven
child abduction warning notices (CAWNs) between them. The child sexual
exploitation team alone has already issued six CAWNs since the start of 2016.



Well supported by a participation worker, young people involved in the LSCBs
challenge group are beginning to have an impact. Conversations between the
challenge group and the LSCB executive, for example, about how adults can
keep up to date with the latest issues affecting young people, involved some
very strenuous debate. This experience convinced Board members that they
needed to reach out to young people and hear regularly and directly from
them. With monies from NHS England, young people from the challenge
group are now engaged, with others, in developing video material that will
focus on issues and concerns of interest to young people.


At the most recent meeting of the LSCB executive, members of the challenge
group were invited to share their findings on young peoples thoughts and
feelings about neglect, based on a consultation exercise that they had carried
out. Members of the LSCB executive were so impressed that they plan to
publish the results so that some of the key messages can be shared with
professionals across the partnership. The LSCBs forward plan is now being
developed in such a way as to facilitate and encourage increased input from
young people, through a series of quarterly themed meetings.


Perhaps not surprisingly, given the issues associated with management and
leadership capacity for most of last year, the Boards influence on other
strategic groups and partnerships has been limited. The one exception is the
Childrens Trust Board, which the outgoing chair of the LSCB attended
regularly and where the LSCB was able to help shape the development of the
Flying Start strategy and programme, not least by emphasising the critical
importance of effective partnership working. Otherwise, the LSCB has not had
much impact in terms of the design, development and delivery of services for
children and young people (Recommendation).


The Annual Report for 201415 requires improvement. Although it provides an
overview of key activities and learning and includes information and data on
the work of the local designated officer, the CDOP and the multi-agency risk
assessment conference, it lacks robust analysis of the effectiveness of local
safeguarding practice, processes and procedures. The report does not include
any data on, for example private fostering or the take-up of safeguarding
training.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector:

Nigel Parkes

Deputy lead inspector:

Jansy Kelly

Team inspectors:

Margaret Burke, Michael Ferguson, Tony Gallagher,
Karen Wareing and Anne Waterman

Shadow inspectors:

Not applicable

Senior data analyst:

Stewart Hartshorne

Quality assurance manager:

John Mitchell


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications, please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


