Medway
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 14 September to 8 October 2015
Report published: 27 November 2015

Childrens services in Medway require improvement to be good

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement

Executive summary
This executive summary should be read alongside the recommendations in the next
section of this report. Each recommendation is clearly linked to the relevant
paragraph(s) that set out the detailed findings of this inspection.
Childrens services in Medway require improvement to be good. Services have
improved from 2013, when they were found to be inadequate. Over the past two
years, the Medway Improvement Board (MIB) and senior local authority and political
leaders have worked together effectively. This has led to positive changes in the
experiences of children and young people in most of the areas identified for


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


improvement in previous inspections. Some practice remains weak or inconsistent. In
a few areas, for example the quality of support provided to care leavers, practice is
now good.
Senior and political leaders understand well the strengths and weaknesses within
services for children who need help, protection and care. External scrutiny, such as
peer review, has been welcomed and acted on. The impact of internal overview and
scrutiny is clearly evident. Learning from complaints is well embedded and senior
managers take careful account of young peoples views. The corporate parenting
board is a strong and effective forum for challenging and improving the experiences
of children looked after. Within a comprehensive quality assurance framework,
regular case auditing has been established and performance management
information is robust.
Leaders, managers and partners are committed to further improvement. Strategic
plans are appropriately aligned and strong political support is evidenced through
substantial financial investment in core social work teams. In the past two years, 75
new permanent social workers have been appointed and caseloads are reducing as a
result. This is a vital step in Medways improvement journey. A stable senior
management team is in place. These managers have maintained a firm commitment
to recruiting good-quality staff. The proportion of agency staff at social work and first
line manager level remains high, directly linked to the increase in overall staffing
levels. Reliance on agency staff has led to disrupted social work relationships for
some children. In these cases, progress against plans has been slow. Senior
managers are doing the right things to address workforce challenges. In particular,
high quality professional support is provided through the social work academy.
Regular case supervision is evident and often detailed, although formal staff
supervision is weaker. Managers do not always make sure that plans for children are
progressed assertively, or utilise performance information effectively in their
oversight of key areas of core social work practice. For example, multi-agency plans
for children who are subject to child in need and child protection plans are not as
effective as they should be. Child protection core groups do not consistently review
or progress plans. Similarly, managers have not provided effective oversight and
management of pre-proceedings work within the Public Law Outline. This is leading
to delays in improving outcomes for some children.
Partnership working has improved considerably since the last inspection, particularly
in ensuring a robust multi-agency response to referrals to childrens social care. The
contact, advice and duty service (CADS) responds efficiently to new referrals in most
cases and thresholds to decide what help families need are effectively applied. Some
contacts take too long to progress and, for these families, help can be delayed. Risk
within families is responded to well, but some interim and contingency plans lack
enough detail to ensure that arrangements to safeguard children are clear while
awaiting next steps. Strategic and operational arrangements for responding to
families experiencing domestic violence, and to children who go missing or who are
at risk of child sexual exploitation, are strong overall. However, children who go
missing are not consistently seen soon enough after they return.
Children looked after live in stable placements that meet their needs well. However,


not all children looked after have a formal permanency plan at the right time.
Connected persons and special guardianship arrangements are frequently considered
as a permanence option for children, but assessments to consider the
appropriateness of these arrangements are not always progressed in a timely way.
When children return home from care, professionals do not always review what help
these families need to reduce the likelihood that problems will return. Independent
Reviewing Officers (IROs) take an active interest in the progress and experiences of
children looked after. However, managers and IROs do not consistently accelerate
plans for permanence. Younger children are being adopted and timescales are
improving, but older children also need to be able to live in adoptive homes and in
good time. Child permanence reports and later-life letters are not consistently good
enough. Decisions made by the Agency Decision Maker (ADM) about children to be
adopted, although timely, lack detail and rationale.
Commissioning relationships are strong and partners are addressing gaps, but there
is further work to be done. For example, the health needs of newly looked after
children are not assessed quickly enough by health professionals. Child and
adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) support is not sufficient to meet the
needs of children looked after and care leavers. Too many children looked after do
not see a dentist often enough.
When concerns are raised about professionals who work with children, these are
responded to appropriately. However, increased workloads have reduced the ability
of managers to oversee and track this work effectively.
A comprehensive needs analysis has resulted in the implementation of a clear early
help strategy. Recent progress has been made but this has taken too long. The
quality of early help assessments is improving. Further work is now needed to ensure
that services for families at this level are consistently well coordinated and delivered,
particularly after a period of social care involvement.
The quality and timeliness of assessments and the participation of children in looked
after reviews and child protection conferences have markedly improved since the last
inspection. Childrens diverse needs are assessed and understood, but most care
plans do not reflect the current needs of children looked after well enough. The
quality of support for care leavers is now consistently good and young peoples
outcomes improve as a result. Further work is needed to reduce the attainment gap
between children looked after and other children in Medway and to ensure that more
care leavers are engaged in meaningful employment, training or education.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two childrens homes. One was judged to be good in
their most recent Ofsted inspection and the other, which provides overnight
respite for disabled children, was judged adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in January 2013. The local authority was judged to be inadequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in July 2013. The local authority was judged to be inadequate.
Local leadership


The Director of Childrens Services (DCS) has been in post since September



The DCS is also responsible for adult services and holds the statutory Director of
Adult Services role.



The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
December 2014.

Children living in this area
 Approximately 62,536 children and young people under 18 years old live in
Medway. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 21% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 16% (the national average is 16%)
 in secondary schools is 13% (the national average is 14%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 14% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian/Asian British.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 13% (the national average is 19%).
 in secondary schools is 9% (the national average is 15%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 August 2015, 2,393 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 August 2015, 469 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 358 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 August 2015, nine children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from 10 at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection, six serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and three serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at
the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
of 69 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 425 (68 per 10,000 children)
at 31 March 2015. Of this number:
authority area
 one lives in a residential special school3, which is outside of the authority
area
 five live with parents, of whom one lives out of the authority area
 three are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 29 adoptions
 a total of 184 children ceased to be looked after, of whom 3%
subsequently returned to be looked after


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


orders
independent living
living in houses of multiple occupation.

Recommendations

Ensure that all managers use performance management information effectively
to scrutinise and improve key areas of core social work practice, particularly in
relation to:
 the timely progression and regular review of contacts and referrals
(paragraph 19)
 the quality and timeliness of core groups and child in need reviews
(paragraph 30)
 the timely completion of connected persons and special guardianship
assessments (paragraphs 43, 106)
 the timeliness of return interviews for children who go missing,
ensuring that children are spoken to about their experiences
(paragraph 33).


Ensure that strategy discussions and section 47 child protection enquiries
clearly describe interim protection arrangements and contingency plans
(paragraphs 20, 21).


When cases are stepped down from statutory childrens social care services,
ensure that proper consideration is given to whether the family would benefit
from ongoing support and that a plan is put in place where needed (paragraph


Take steps to ensure that the progress of all investigations concerning
allegations about professionals is robustly monitored until investigations are
concluded and outcomes are confirmed (paragraph 38).


Ensure that:
 the senior management review of all children looked after under a
Section 20 arrangement is accelerated and that the permanency plans
and legal status for these children are appropriate and clear (paragraph


 the senior management review of all children who are subject to the preproceedings phase of the Public Law Outline is accelerated and that preproceedings work is timely for all children (paragraph 41).

Take action to ensure that all children who become looked after have an initial
health assessment within 28 days and see a dentist at least annually
(paragraph 57).


Ensure that, for all children who return home from care, an assessment of the
childs and familys circumstances is undertaken to determine their ongoing
needs (paragraph 53).


Include more precise and measurable attainment targets in the personal
education plans of children looked after. Narrow the attainment gap between
children looked after and other children in Medway across all key stages
(paragraph 59).


Continue to improve the impact of the local education, employment and
training (EET) strategy in order to achieve better outcomes for care leavers.
Ensure that all 1618-year-old young people who are looked after receive high
quality EET support (paragraph 94).

looked after of all ages and that there are sufficient adoptive placements for
children over the age of five (paragraphs 68, 81).
they contain all the information needed for children to understand their life
stories in the future (paragraph 79).
with the local authoritys policy. Provide all managers with training on good
practice in supervision. Ensure that case supervision is appropriately focused on
progressing childrens plans (paragraphs 32, 111, 112).
workforce changes. Where change is unavoidable, ensure consistency and
continuity of case planning (paragraphs 32, 117).

Summary for children and young people
 Ofsted inspected childrens services in Medway in 2013. Inspectors were so
worried about what they found that they judged services to be inadequate for
children who needed help, protection and care.
 The Medway Improvement Board, set up to make sure the right changes were
made to improve the experiences of children, has done its job well. In this


inspection, inspectors found that, since 2013, managers and local politicians have
done many of the things that were needed to improve services for children.
 Now, when children need urgent help or are at risk of being harmed, social
workers step in quickly. Police, schools and health professionals work well with
social workers to decide what to do next. Most children are helped by the right
people at the right time. Managers still need to do more to make sure there is
enough support for families when they first begin to find life difficult. Leaders are
already thinking about how they can do this better.
 When children are at risk of being harmed, child protection plans are always
written and shared with families. The plans say why professionals are worried
and what needs to be done to make children safer. Managers, social workers and
other professionals do not always think often enough or carefully enough about
what is working and what needs to be done differently. It is very important that
they put this right to improve childrens lives more quickly.
 Managers make the right decisions about children coming into care. Most children
who live in foster or adoptive families or in childrens homes are settled, happier
and doing much better than before they came into care. Decisions about where
children will live for the rest of their childhood are not always written down to
make sure that everyone knows the plan. Not enough looked after young people
gain important qualifications such as in English and mathematics.
 Some children have had lots of changes of social workers and have found this
difficult. Managers have spent more money on extra staff and are doing all they
can to find more good social workers. This is beginning to make a difference.
 Social workers are well trained and care about the children they are helping.
Managers and local politicians value what young people say. The Children in Care
Council is a dynamic and determined group whose work is leading to changes for
all children looked after. Care leavers are helping to improve services by, for
example, giving their views on the quality of new housing options.
 When very young children cannot stay with their own families, social workers find
them caring adoptive parents. This is beginning to happen more quickly. Social
workers and managers need to find more adoptive families for older children.
 When young people leave care, personal advisors make sure they have
somewhere safe to live and help them to achieve their goals. Pathway plans
include the right things and are written in a language that makes sense to young
people. Care leavers who have emotional difficulties need better support from the
right health professionals.

The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Early help services are increasingly effective in identifying need and supporting


children and families. Thresholds between early help and childrens social care are
clearly understood, but services are not always well coordinated. This means that
some children and families, where there is no immediate risk, are not getting the
help they need at an early enough stage.
The co-located, multi-agency Childrens Advice and Duty Service (CADS) provides a
robust response to childrens needs. Thresholds are consistently applied by qualified
social workers and managers. Information is shared effectively and parental consent
sought. Some contacts take too long to progress while social workers decide how
best to help families, who then wait too long to find out what support they will
receive.
The quality of social work support for children in need, including those in need of
protection, is variable. For some children, practice is decisive; plans are clear and are
progressed in a timely way. However, some child in need and child protection plans
are not sufficiently specific and social workers and their managers do not give
enough attention to ensuring that all plans are progressed. Some multi-agency core
group reviews are not held regularly enough and, on occasion, are missed
altogether. As a result, some childrens situations do not improve at the pace that is
needed. When children no longer need help from childrens social care, the plan for
ongoing support is not always clear.
Children at risk of significant harm are identified effectively. Child protection strategy
discussions and section 47 child protection enquiries include key professionals.
Information is shared appropriately and decisive action is taken to understand and
reduce harm to children. However, interim and contingency plans are not always
sufficiently clear.
Risks relating to child sexual exploitation are identified and responded to well.
Children and young people are helped and risks are reduced. A multi-disciplinary
child sexual exploitation team is currently in development to further strengthen the
quality of service. The response to children who go missing is robustly managed and
missing incidents are proactively responded to. Return interviews take place when
children go missing, but they do not always happen in a timely way and
professionals do not consistently use the information in planning and working with
children and young people.
The number of concerns about professionals working with children in Medway has
risen. Most investigations are managed well by the Designated Officer, but the
tracking and progression of this work are not consistently robust.


Inspection findings
led to a more structured delivery of local early help. It is too early to evaluate
the impact of these revised arrangements, but they are based on both a
comprehensive analysis of local need and learning from what works effectively
elsewhere.
common assessment framework (CAF) is increasingly effective in assisting the
identification of need and promoting the coordination of work between
professionals. However, services are not yet fully integrated and the
accessibility and effectiveness of early help are inconsistent. This means that
some children are not getting the help they need to improve their
circumstances. The local authoritys family support service meets the needs of
families with more complex needs well and the recent expansion of the service
is enabling more children to benefit from this support. However, where local
authority family support workers are not directly involved in the service being
provided, plans of support are less well structured. The local authority has
recognised these weaknesses and has implemented clearer arrangements to
improve the integration, monitoring and targeting of this work.
clearly defined, understood and appropriately applied. In a few cases, when
planning and making decisions, social care professionals are not fully
considering the actual service likely to be delivered through early help.
Similarly, when cases are closed by social care, consideration is not always
given as to how support will continue to be provided and coordinated, leaving
some families without all the support they need to maintain the progress they
have made.
needs. Any professional who contacts CADS with a concern about a child is
offered a conversation with a qualified social worker. This is a particular
strength because it facilitates effective information sharing and is helping to
support the development of a shared understanding of thresholds across the
partnership. Thresholds are appropriately applied, informed by historical
information, take account of parental consent and are authorised by social work
qualified managers.


reviews all incoming police domestic abuse notifications and notifies key
professionals involved with the child so that they are able to offer support
where needed. It is too early to evaluate the impact of this process fully, but
there is evidence that it is beginning to make a positive difference for some
children. Inspectors saw several instances where, for a period during summer
until some weeks after the incident occurred. This issue came to light during
the course of the inspection and the local authority took decisive action to
address this.
support for families. However, many contacts take too long to progress. On
occasion, this is due to workload and capacity, but sometimes social workers
may spend a week or longer seeking information to inform and validate
decisions. Children are safeguarded, but some children and families wait too
long for a decision to be made about the help that they will receive. Senior
managers have identified this issue and have introduced appropriate measures
to review all contacts that remain in the service for over 24 hours. However, at
the time of the inspection, these reviews were not taking place due to reduced
senior social worker capacity.
This was an area of weakness in the previous child protection inspection.
Strategy discussions are convened in good time; they identify and respond well
to risk. This leads to protective action where required. Key agencies contribute
well and meetings are an effective forum for information sharing. Strategy
discussions do not, however, routinely set out interim protection arrangements
or contingency plans.
are overseen by managers. They do not always include a detailed rationale to
support decision making and social workers do not record checks with other
agencies in one consistent place. This makes it difficult for managers to assure
themselves that recommendations are based on all available information. Like
strategy discussions, they do not consistently include interim protective
arrangements or contingency plans. Decisions about next steps are appropriate.
Where there is an unresolved risk, managers take decisive action, including
convening timely initial child protection conferences. As a result of a concerted
effort by the local authority, considerable progress has been made in this area
over recent months, with 91% of initial child protection conferences convened
within statutory timescales in the year to July 2015. This is a significant
improvement compared with 60% in 201415.


they are seen on their own. The voice and experiences of children are
increasingly evident in case recording, most of which is up to date and
appropriately detailed. Examples of direct work are evident in a few childrens
records but, more often, social workers are better able to articulate the work
they have undertaken than is reflected in their case recording.
practice and timeliness in this area. Several assessments seen were of good
quality, identifying risks and needs and including comprehensive historical and
agency information. Assessments consistently reflect the voice and experiences
of children, consider the individual and diverse needs of each child in the family
and some are informed by research. In cases seen by inspectors, appropriate
thought had been given to how long an assessment should take, based on the
childs particular situation. Managers review the progress of assessments at key
points. The completion of assessments, in the right timescales for individual
children, is leading to their needs being identified and met at an earlier stage.
and are well attended by partner agencies. The strengthening families model
is used well in conferences. Parents and professionals find this approach helpful
in identifying what is working well and what needs to change. Most plans
include key actions and timescales for delivery, but some do not focus clearly
enough on what needs to happen in order to make children safer. Plans include
contingencies, although most are catch all statements regarding seeking legal
advice rather than what action will be taken if concerns increase or childrens
experiences do not change. This means that children, families and professionals
are often not clear enough about what will happen if the risks are not reduced.
in Medway was higher than in similar local authorities. This is due to an
increase in the number of plans from 358 in March 2014 to 474 in March 2015.
Numbers have remained stable since this time. The Director of Childrens
Services and the Medway Improvement Board have been proactive in seeking
to establish whether the right children are subject to the right plans,
commissioning a number of internal audits and external reviews. All of these
have concluded that thresholds are set at the correct level and this is line with
what inspectors found in individual cases. The increase is considered by
managers to be a result of a legacy of previous poor assessments, gaps in
availability of early help services and increasingly robust management oversight
of child in need plans and thresholds.


at 31 March 2015. In assessments seen by inspectors, social workers had
carefully and sensitively explored the day-to-day experiences of children living
in neglectful households. The local authority, with the Medway Safeguarding
Children Board (MSCB), has made tools available to assist professionals in
further understanding the impact of neglect on children. However, there is little
evidence within case files of the use of these tools.
protection plans. Domestic abuse is known to be a cause for concern for 49%
of the children subject to these plans and is a contributory factor to the number
of children subject to child protection plans due to neglect (41%) and
emotional abuse (40%). Families experiencing domestic abuse have access to a
range of support services. These include a well-utilised one stop shop that
provides various support options. The day programme effectively supports
young people who have witnessed domestic abuse and the domestic abuse
recovery together (DART) programme provides therapeutic intervention for
parents and children. Arrangements for sharing information and coordinating
support for victims of domestic abuse at multi-agency risk assessment
conferences (MARAC) are effective, although consideration of the impact of the
domestic abuse on the children in the family is not always fully considered.
difficulties due to substance misuse and mental ill health. The co-location of an
adult services mental health social worker in CADS effectively integrates
support for parents and children. The local authority has reviewed its
commissioning arrangements. Some services have been decommissioned where
they did not meet current needs or performance requirements. Others, such as
CAMHS, short breaks and substance misuse services have been reviewed and
are more closely monitored, resulting in improved delivery of service.
not always clear. While in the majority of cases seen by inspectors, regular and
usually purposeful visiting was evident, this work is not routinely being driven
by the plan or subject to robust review. Some cases are closed without
considering continuing support to the family.


for senior managers. This was highlighted as an area for improvement in the
previous child protection inspection. Inspectors saw examples of effective
practice where decisive planning and intervention were leading to improved
outcomes for children, but too many plans are not robustly progressed.
Managers acknowledge that although multi-agency core groups are well
attended, they are not regular or effective for all children. In a few cases,
practice is weak; for these children, plans do not progress in good time, risks
are not sufficiently reduced, and childrens situations do not change quickly
enough. For example, in a small number of cases seen by inspectors, these
meetings had not taken place at all. Although partner agencies consistently
attend key multi-agency meetings, they do not routinely support purposeful
action or escalate their concerns where plans drift or actions are not
progressed.
childrens lives, managers seek legal advice. The number of childrens cases
subject to the pre-proceedings phase of the Public Law Outline in Medway is
high and this approach is used to step up intervention where child protection
plans are not effective. In some of these cases seen by inspectors, earlier
planning, intervention and review should have been more purposeful and
robust.
these discussions on case files, but management oversight is not sufficiently
challenging. Decisions do not always identify how actions link to the childs plan
or whether the plan is reducing risks for the child. Inspectors also saw several
cases where plans had drifted due to changes in social workers or gaps in
allocation. Appropriate safeguards are in place to identify and reduce practice
such as this, including oversight by IROs, operational performance meetings
and child protection surgeries. However, these measures have not been used
consistently or effectively to identify or address shortfalls.
help provided is effective in reducing the risks children face and ensuring that
their support needs are met. A dedicated missing childrens coordinator reviews
all missing episodes and takes appropriate action to ensure that childrens
needs are responded to at an early stage. The coordinator also provides flexible
support to professionals working with children who go missing. During the
three-month period prior to the inspection, the missing service dealt with 149
incidents involving 55 children in need and 19 incidents involving 10 children
subject to child protection plans. Independent return interviews are completed,
but some of these interviews are outside of the required 72-hour timescale and
findings are not considered consistently to inform future plans for children.


team actively track and follow up children missing education. Robust steps are
taken to identify the whereabouts of these children. Children in alternative
provision are carefully monitored. The coordinator for children missing
education and the head of the inclusion team work effectively with attendance
officers to ensure that children attend school regularly. Close working with
home-school support staff ensures that the additional needs of these children
are met by specialist services such as CAMHS.
proactive approach is taken to respond to need and risk at an early stage, with
direct work and support undertaken where this is needed. Agencies share
information effectively in order to understand risk, improve childrens
circumstances and prevent risks escalating. Professionals assess the risk of child
sexual exploitation using a risk assessment toolkit and, where concerns are
evident, clear safety plans are put in place. The local authority is planning to
further strengthen services for children at risk of sexual exploitation through
the creation of a co-located, multi-agency sexual exploitation service.
with the recently revised Medway joint housing and social care protocol.
Between April and July 2015, all 20 young people aged 16 and 17 who
presented as homeless received a joint housing assessment. Assessments seen
by inspectors were of a good quality and accurately identified young peoples
support needs. Young people are offered mediation to help them to remain in
their families where possible, although it is not always clear whether their
entitlement to leaving care services has been fully explained to them. When
required, appropriate housing and support are provided, with bed and breakfast
accommodation used very rarely and only in the event that all other options
have been exhausted. Plans are in place to strengthen this service by locating a
joint-funded housing post in CADS.
Children Board have successfully raised awareness of private fostering.
Consequently, the number of notifications has increased in recent years. Once
notified, children are seen and spoken to promptly and thorough assessments
of their care arrangements are completed in line with statutory requirements.
Children who are privately fostered are visited regularly and receive high
quality, sensitive support centred around their individual needs.


specialist team of social work qualified designated officers undertakes strategy
discussions and investigations. The team has seen a significant increase in
referrals over the last year, prompting additional investment. Despite this,
management capacity has been affected. The initial response to allegations is
appropriate to ensure that children are safeguarded. However, during the
inspection two cases sampled by inspectors had not been effectively tracked or
progressed. The oversight of referral and investigation outcomes has not been
robust in all cases.

The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Outcomes for children looked after are improving in Medway. The majority of
children looked after live in stable placements. These enduring placements enable
children to develop consistent attachments to their carers and to settle in local
schools.
Social workers see children looked after regularly and know them well, including
those placed at some distance from the local authority. However, care plans do not
describe desired outcomes. The health needs of children looked after are regularly
reviewed, but initial health assessments are not timely and too many children do not
see a dentist regularly.
Permanency planning has improved since the Ofsted inspection in 2013, but some
decisions about childrens long-term status are not sufficiently clear. Senior
managers are actively and systematically tackling this issue.
Managers track cases in the pre-proceedings phase of the PLO However, the process
takes too long to progress or conclude for some children. Although these children are
safeguarded, decisions about next steps are not consistently made quickly enough.
When care proceedings are instigated, the timeliness of progression of childrens
cases to a final hearing shows significant improvement over the last year. Managers
have taken steps to improve the quality and timeliness of connected persons
assessments, but these require further attention to be good.
The response to children looked after who go missing and who are at risk of sexual
exploitation is well coordinated and prompt. Return interviews are held, risk
assessments are undertaken and clear safety plans are developed to reduce risks.
Assessments and reviews for children looked after who return home from care do
not always happen in good time and they do not consistently consider whether the
original concerns and problems have been addressed.
The progress made by children looked after between the key stages in reading,
writing and mathematics is below other children both in Medway and nationally. The


gap in educational achievement between looked after children and their peers is not
closing quickly enough. Personal education plans are reviewed regularly and engage
the right people but some targets are not precise enough to ensure that everyone is
clear about what they should be working towards to support and improve children
and young peoples progress and achievements.
Younger children are adopted quickly and the speed of this is improving. However,
not enough is being done to ensure that older children are able to live in adoptive
homes quickly. Child permanence reports and later-life letters are not consistently
well completed.
Services for care leavers have significantly improved and are now good. Personal
advisers provide excellent practical and emotional support and use pathway planning
effectively. A continued sharp focus is needed to ensure that all 1618-year-old
looked after young people receive high quality post-16 support.
Inspection findings
managers and, in cases seen by inspectors, these decisions were timely and
appropriate. Medway has experienced a notable recent increase in the number
of children looked after, with numbers rising from 380 at 31 March 2014 to 435
at the point of the inspection. The proportion of children looked after under a
voluntary arrangement is high and has increased further over the last year from
children had been recently accommodated, the use of voluntary arrangements
was appropriate.
problems, including some where there is a risk that children will need to be
looked after. However, targeted edge of care services have been slow to
develop in Medway. A multi-disciplinary team was being set up at the time of
the inspection, with some appointments made. This team has begun to focus
on targeted prevention work with adolescents on the cusp of coming into care,
alongside work with young people already in care, to achieve safe and enduring
returns to their families. The evidence base for a separate service for younger
children is currently being evaluated. It is too early for either of these new
services to demonstrate impact.


subject to pre-proceedings planning for 16 weeks or longer and a number of
children for six or nine months. Legal advice is appropriately sought, letters are
sent to families outlining concerns and managers meet with parents to explain
why they are concerned. Cases are overseen by senior managers using a preproceedings tracker. However, important pieces of work such as parenting
assessments are not always undertaken in good time. Although children are
safeguarded through child protection plans or through being looked after,
decisions about next steps are not consistently made quickly enough. This
leaves children and their carers uncertain for too long as to the local authoritys
plan for their future care.
have been looked after for a considerable period of time and are in stable
placements that meet their needs well. However, some children and young
people who have been in care for more than two years have not had their
permanent care arrangements secured through a senior management decision.
In six out of 12 cases tracked by inspectors, formal permanency planning for
children looked after was delayed. Sequential, rather than parallel, planning
was evident for some babies and infants in care proceedings, resulting in
avoidable delays in permanency planning at an early stage. Managers have
identified the need for improved practice in this area and are systematically
reviewing plans for all children looked after to determine if care proceedings
should be instigated or whether their arrangements should be formally
approved as long-term fostering placements.
months prior to the inspection. In the same period, nine children left care
through child arrangement orders. This performance is comparable with other
local authorities and demonstrates that social workers and managers are
considering a range of permanence options for children. However, in two out of
five cases sampled by inspectors where foster or family carers were applying
for an SGO, progress was delayed due to carers uncertainty about continuing
financial support. Timely progress of SGO assessments was more evident where
children were subject to care proceedings. Assessments for children living with
connected people such as friends or family members are not always completed
quickly enough and in two cases seen by inspectors, managers had not
authorised emergency arrangements at an early enough stage.


of the process and the quality of social workers evidence has improved
considerably. This progress has been endorsed by Cafcass and the Family
Justice Board (FJB). The length of care proceedings has reduced from 44 weeks
in 2014 to an average of 32 weeks. While this remains above the target of 26
weeks, the trend is positive. Cafcass and the FJB report regular and
constructive senior management engagement, joint training and improved
compliance with court timescales and directions. This is contributing to an
improving standard of evidence in court statements and care plans, and to the
timeliness of court proceedings.
and proceedings service. This allows social workers to form relationships with
children from the early stages of being looked after and reduces service-led
changes of staff. Service remodelling, although initially disruptive to social work
relationships, has led to the majority of children who have been looked after for
more than 12 months experiencing a consistent social work relationship for at
least six months.
a result, workloads are more manageable  at an average of 18 to 20 children.
Social workers appreciate the readily available support and supervision provided
by team managers. Regular management oversight is evident in the vast
majority of cases, although reflective discussion is less evident.
workers at least every six weeks, including those living in distant placements.
This is the minimum standard managers have set for any child looked after to
be visited, although social workers visit children more frequently according to
their needs. Social workers know children well and carefully record their views
and concerns. The majority of children looked after live in stable placements
with considerably fewer moving three times or more each year than in other
local authorities. These enduring placements enable children to develop
consistent attachments to their carers and to settle in local schools. This
increases their resilience and emotional health and well-being.
of children looked after are understood. Assessments are holistic, with risks,
needs and protective factors clearly documented. However, care plans are not
meaningful documents for children or their carers, with only a few featuring
discernible outcomes or ambitions to stretch attainment and achievements.
Social workers contact with children is regular, but is not routinely and clearly
guided by purposeful direct work to address the objectives laid out in care
plans.


looked after. In cases seen by inspectors, the needs of disabled children who
are looked after were understood well and placements are meeting their needs.
In four of five cases, planning for these children was well focused on their
complex needs with clear plans in place for their permanent care. Packages of
care were well coordinated and extensive, reviewed through detailed looked
after reviews. For children and parents whose first language is not English,
careful use of translators and interpreters informs direct work. Foster carers
and adopters promote positive cultural identities. Diversity is well addressed in
looked after reviews and court care plans. One social worker took careful
account of a black young persons feelings and wishes in identifying a new
placement where she would feel more culturally connected to her carers. The
young person has moved and is happier as a result.
with performance improving from 84% to 99% in the past six months. The
large majority (92%), of children looked after participate in their reviews.
Minutes of reviews are detailed with concise and specific recommendations and
these are proactively followed up by IROs. Some review minutes provide a
vibrant picture of childrens personalities and achievements. However,
recommendations are not consistently linked to overarching outcomes,
particularly relating to plans for permanence. This makes it difficult to align
actions with clear objectives to improve childrens well-being and attainment.
small minority of cases seen by inspectors. The IRO annual report does not
provide an evaluation of the number, content and outcome of escalations and
their impact on improving practice. The IRO service is predominantly comprised
of locums and, although most have worked for Medway for some time, this
workforce profile does not ensure long-term continuity for children looked after.
have been referred since April 2015. Young people say they receive helpful
support. Effective communication between the local authority and the
commissioned service ensures that the service continues to meet their needs.
subsequently return to be looked after, which is positive. However, where
children do return home from care, careful, informed assessments and plans
are not consistently evident. In three out of five cases seen by inspectors,
children returned home without either a looked after review or a child in need
planning meeting. In these cases, the concerns that led to children becoming
looked after had not been thoroughly assessed or addressed. Although, in cases
seen by inspectors, children continue to receive support through a child in need
plan and package of support, families do not consistently receive sufficient help
to prevent problems from re-emerging.


support. From June to August 2015, 34 (8%) looked after children went
missing a total of 128 times; 19 children looked after had been missing on
three or more occasions. The missing persons coordinator collates intelligence
and analyses patterns to identify concerns about individual children and the
potential risks to others. Cases seen by inspectors were well managed and
return interviews were consistently completed by the missing persons
coordinator. Interviews appropriately inform subsequent risk assessments and
safety plans. Inspectors saw three cases where good care and support to
children have led to a significant reduction in their missing behaviour.
Child sexual exploitation assessments and safety plans are consistently
completed. Risk-reduction interventions with young people living in distant
placements are equally robust. Inspectors saw examples of risks being well
managed and reduced for young people who had long histories of severe and
persistent sexual exploitation. In two cases, secure accommodation had been
used appropriately to safeguard and assess young people while further plans
were made for their care.
children looked after have access to the emotional health and well-being
services and support they need. Approximately a quarter of children looked
after receive this support and managers acknowledge that this is not good
enough. This is particularly important in light of the higher strength and
difficulties questionnaire (SDQ) scores (a measure of psychological well-being)
for children in Medway compared to children in other local authorities.
Additional investment from the Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) has been
secured and a commissioning strategy has been prepared. This is intended to
reshape and increase access to CAMHS and emotional health and well-being
services for children looked after, from 2016.
regularly and comprehensively reviewed. The large majority of looked after
young people approaching transition to the leaving care service are provided
with an informative summary of their health histories. However, timeliness of
initial health assessments for children who become looked after has been poor
for a considerable period of time. Performance, linked to insufficient capacity
within the looked after childrens health service, remains well below the local
authoritys own target. This leads to delays in ensuring that childrens initial
health needs are promptly assessed and addressed. A quarter of children
looked after do not have an annual dental appointment.


average. The youth offending service and police undertake effective work to
divert young people from receiving criminal sanctions. This is underpinned by
an innovative joint protocol between the local authority and the police. The
protocol was generated by the councils corporate parenting board to reduce
avoidable criminalisation of looked after young people.
children looked after nationally. For example, in 2014/15, seven of 20 young
people gained a minimum of five A*C GCSEs, including English and
mathematics and this number was lower than children looked after nationally
and for all Medway children in this Year 11 cohort. The progress children looked
after make between the key stages in reading, writing and mathematics is also
worse on average than all children looked after nationally and slightly lower
than other children in Medway. Children looked after who have special
educational needs do not achieve as well as similar children in Medway.
Although the local authority reports that 90% of children looked after are
making progress in line with their attainments targets, the gap in educational
achievement between children looked after and their peers is not closing
quickly enough.
the educational attainment of children looked after. Very specific help is
provided to support the development of self-confidence and emotional and
mental resilience through, for example, counselling, play therapy and additional
music lessons. The head of the virtual school effectively oversees the targeting
of this resource.
plan (PEP). PEPs include an appropriate level of detail and information about
each young persons background. However, the academic targets are not
sufficiently precise in all cases.
after up to the end of Key Stage 4 was 97%. This is higher than both national
and local performance. This demonstrates the strong partnership between
schools, the virtual school and the attendance advisory service. In 2014/15,
there were no permanent exclusions of children looked after, reflecting the
close working between the inclusion team and schools. The proportion of pupils
with a fixed-term exclusion was 5%, which is below the national figure. Two
children looked after attend a pupil referral unit. All children looked after whose
health needs do not prevent them from engaging receive a minimum of 25
hours education per week. Children with significant health needs are effectively
overseen by the inclusion team.


destinations of Year 11 pupils effectively. Transition arrangements for children
looked after with the local college and other post-16 providers are good, with
timely and appropriate sharing of information. In 2015, 75% of children looked
after made a positive transition into education or training with a post-16
provider or school sixth form.
children looked after and young people. A junior branch of the council has 69
members. Members of the children in care council collaborate well with the
corporate parenting board and influence its priorities, particularly in reducing
changes of social workers and setting clear, basic requirements for social
workers in their day-to-day work.
from its borders as frequently as those living closer to home. These children
constitute 16% of all children looked after by Medway; this figure is marginally
higher than similar authorities as at 31 March 2014. Access to advocacy
services is equitable. Frequent changes of residential placements were also
evident for a small cohort of young people with multiple and difficult needs.
of children placed in independent provider placements has increased. This
means that it is not always possible for brothers and sisters to be placed
together. Senior managers have identified this issue and an improvement plan
has recently been put in place. However, the target to recruit a net gain of 10
carers over the year is insufficient to meet need. Foster carers spoken to were
unclear about the relationship between payments, the skills of foster carers and
the needs of children.
and assessments are thorough. The fostering panel scrutinises applications and
challenges these appropriately.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
managers appropriately consider other permanence options for them. This
includes adoption. However, these discussions do not consistently take place at
or before childrens second looked after review.


improve their oversight of plans for childrens long-term and permanent care.
This panel considers a number of children of various ages at each meeting and
some meetings are themed  for example, to concentrate on children who are
voluntarily accommodated under section 20 of the Children Act 1989. However,
the panel is not consistently attended by the full range of professionals set out
in its terms of reference and decisions do not include clear timescales. For
example, representatives from the adoption team do not always attend. This
reduces the robustness of the panels scrutiny and its effectiveness in driving
permanence plans for all children.
care through adoption, a quarter of those who left care overall. This is strong
performance. Numbers being adopted remain positive, although have fallen
more recently, with 28 children adopted between September 2014 and August
took 728 days to place children with adopters after they came into care. This is
six months longer than the national threshold. However, for the 28 children
adopted since September 2014, this figure improved to 554 days, against a
target of 487 days.
September 2015 (seven of whom have subsequently been adopted),
performance against the adoption scorecard is much improved. The
government target for the time from becoming looked after to being placed
with prospective adopters is met for these children.
and deciding on a match with adopters was 243 days, three months outside the
target. Performance in this area has also improved over the past 12 months
and the government target has been met. Those placed include black, minority
ethnic and disabled children. However, a very low number of children aged five
or over has been placed for adoption during this time.
is in line with the overall children looked after population. In most cases,
brothers and sisters are placed together for adoption (nine out of 10 during
but, on average, it took three and a half years for an adoptive placement to be
found for them. This is too long for these children to have waited. All of the 12
children for whom the local authority is currently family-finding are aged five or
under.


used to identify the right adopters for children. This includes the use of
adoption activity days and the adoption register.
suitably quickly. In a small number of cases seen by inspectors, children had
been in adoptive placements for a considerable time without being formally
adopted. Appropriate action had not been taken to progress this or to consider
an alternative permanence plan.
alternative permanent options for them is not always sufficiently focused or
timely. In particular, there are significant delays in discharging placement
orders. This means that even where these children have lived for a long time
with their foster carers, they cannot be sure that the arrangements for them
are permanent.
is improving, but is not yet consistently good. CPRs do not always provide a
sufficiently clear picture of their birth parents and siblings that children can
refer back to in the future.
helpful to children and adopters. Later-life letters contain a range of useful
information, but are not always written in language that will be easy for young
people to understand in adolescence, particularly in their use of jargon. Not all
children being adopted benefit from life story information and later-life letters.
consider proposals for children to be placed for adoption. He scrutinises the
proposals and the recommendations of the adoption panel in good time.
However, the depth of the recording of the reasons supporting decisions is not
sufficiently thorough. Senior managers are aware these records need to be
strengthened because the chair of the adoption panel has formally raised this
with them.
five are successful, this is not the case for older children. Currently there are no
carers approved for children over five. The local authority does not have any
prospective adopters approved for fostering-to-adopt placements.
completing stage one of the process, but the assessment stage is consistently
completed within the statutory timescales. Reasons for delay are scrutinised by
the adoption panel and minutes note how long approvals have taken.


minutes show that there is challenge and debate within panel meetings,
including consideration of the appropriateness of adoption support plans. The
chair produces six-monthly reports that provide a suitably detailed and robust
review of the work undertaken and present appropriate challenge to the local
authority.
are generally thorough and identify the key needs of children in terms of their
health and education needs, childrens future contact with their birth families
and the future financial support of the placement. However, delays in agreeing
adoption supports plans have resulted in some children who have been placed
with adopters for some time not being adopted quickly enough.
support on offer and 19 families were receiving support at the time of the
inspection. This includes support groups, financial provision, and therapeutic
support (funded through the Adoption Support Fund). The adoption team
oversees over 200 letterbox contact arrangements between adopted children
and their birth families.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good
recommendations from the 2013 inspection of services for children looked after
and care leavers have been addressed. The quality of support for care leavers
has improved significantly from the poor level found by that inspection. Care
leavers benefit from high-quality individual support from their personal
advisers. From often low starting points, they make considerable progress
towards being able to live as independent adults.
broad range of skills and experience to their work with young people. The team
manager provides strong and supportive leadership and the team receives
regular, good-quality supervision.


is regularly reviewed and updated. This includes disabled care leavers
transferring into adult social care who receive good quality support and strong
advocacy from their personal advisers. Most young people have a needs
assessment and pathway plan at an appropriately early stage. Plans are used
well by workers to inform young peoples preparation for adulthood and leaving
care. For a small number of looked after young people, pathway planning does
not begin soon enough. The local authority has a plan to improve services by
ensuring that all relevant 16-year-olds are allocated a personal adviser to work
alongside their social worker to ensure a smooth and planned transition into
leaving care services.
histories when they leave care although previously, care leavers have not
benefited from these. A specialist nurse for care leavers provides support to
individual care leavers and helps them to access other health services, including
sexual health and relationship counselling and advice for young parents. This is
reaching a significant number of care leavers who value the services the nurse
provides to them. A range of other services is available to offer counselling
support to care leavers, and in cases seen by inspectors, young people were
receiving creative packages of support to meet their emotional needs. Provision
for care leavers with complex mental health needs is less well developed.
from personal advisers and housing support services, helps care leavers to
develop independence skills and independent thinking. As a result, many are
ready and able to live independently and successfully take on their own
tenancies. The local authority has a plan to improve support by offering a dropin centre, which will also be able to provide group work to help develop live
skills.
and supported to stay put with their foster carers beyond their 18th birthdays.
In both these areas, local performance significantly exceeds the national
average. The leaving care service is currently in contact with all its care leavers
and works tenaciously to maintain links and relationships though often
turbulent periods in young peoples lives. Care leavers spoken to during the
inspection said they felt safe and supported. When care leavers go missing,
they are carefully monitored and responded to with appropriate seriousness.
Personal advisers and other support services provide sensitive individual work
to help care leavers keep themselves safe.
is a reasonable range of supported accommodation, which includes some highquality provision. The local authority has identified a need for more tailored
accommodation for care leavers with complex support needs; new provision
has recently been commissioned.


inspection and its use is extremely rare. Some young people live in houses of
multiple occupancy but only when this meets their needs. In all such cases seen
by inspectors, good-quality support was being provided. When ready, care
leavers are enabled to access their own tenancies and receive good tenancy
support. Fifteen care leavers were in custody at the time of the inspection. This
is linked to higher numbers of care leavers becoming looked after when older
(post 16), when offending behaviour had already become well established.
Examples were seen of very effective individual work to reduce the risk of
incarceration. These young people are receiving steadfast support from their
personal advisers. Careful thought is given to ensuring that young people are
well supported and make good choices after their release.
education, employment or training including mentoring, strong links with local
colleges and universities and support developing employability and interview
skills. An increasing number are also now accessing higher education (12 at the
time of the inspection) and good-quality apprenticeships, including some
provided by the local authority. Despite this wide range of activity however,
overall outcomes remain low, with too many care leavers and 1618-year-old
looked after young people not in education, employment or training (NEET). As
of August 2015, 43% of care leavers were in education, employment or
training. This is partly due to previously poor looked after and leaving care
services. Overall, NEET levels for care leavers are higher than for other young
people in this age group in Medway, although in line with national figures for
care leavers. The local authority and its partners have already identified this as
a priority and continued, focused attention is needed in order to improve the
impact of work in this area. In particular sustained work is required to ensure
support to enable them to remain in education or move into suitable training or
employment.
and commitments to care leavers are included in the councils pledge to
children in care. Councillors and the Lead Member for childrens services are
proactive in championing the cause and care leavers views. A recent
comprehensive scrutiny report has been instrumental in helping to drive further
improvements to the service. However, while members of the Children in Care
Council were extremely positive about the quality of personal advisers, care
leavers spoken to were not fully convinced that senior managers were
promoting their interests.
of care leavers have been well supported by participation workers to give their
views on current services and influence service development and their views
are making a difference. They have, for example, been active in visiting and
evaluating potential new supportive accommodation.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Under the firm leadership of the DCS, Medway childrens services have, overall,
made significant progress in almost all of the areas of concern identified in the
Ofsted inspections of 2013. This has taken some time due to the need to make
structural changes and difficulties in recruiting permanent managers and frontline
social work staff. Some developments are at an early stage. Most areas of social
work practice, including formal permanence planning for children looked after of all
ages, require further improvement. A few, such as ensuring core groups are held on
time and are effective for all children, need sustained attention from senior
managers in order to improve practice. The very large majority of care leavers now
receive good help and support, although sustained attention is required to improve
education, training and employment outcomes.
Elected members have actively monitored and supported the improvements, in
particular through stronger corporate parenting and injections of additional funding,
leading to a significant increase in the establishment of social work posts. A variety
of strategic groups, including the Medway Improvement Board, has worked
effectively to develop and improve services to children. Partnerships with other
agencies have been strengthened through greater collaboration, joint working and
joint commissioning of services.
Robust quality assurance, audit and performance management systems have been
implemented to inform the development of services and monitor the work
undertaken. These measures have ensured that senior managers have an accurate
understanding of the strengths and weaknesses within services. Where further
improvement is needed, such as in the number of foster carers and adopters
available, plans are in place to address this. However, first line managers do not
consistently use the information available to them to ensure that core social work
tasks, such as connected persons assessments, are completed well and in good
time. Although management oversight is clearly evident on case files, it is not always
effective in driving or challenging plans for children. Managers do not consistently
provide staff with supervision at the right standard.
A range of creative recruitment and retention initiatives has been introduced. These
initiatives have been effective in recruiting a permanent senior management team,
which has systematically tackled most areas that required improvement. Recruitment
of sufficient first line managers and social workers remains a challenge, with
continued over-reliance on agency staff to fill newly created posts. This has
negatively impacted on the consistency and continuity of practice for children, some
of whom have continued to experience too many changes of social worker. Although
all cases were allocated at the time of this inspection, some children have
experienced periods without a consistent named social worker to progress their


plans.
Newly qualified social workers are well supported and the local authority has
pioneered the development of the Social Work Academy in order to support social
workers and managers at all points in their development.

Inspection findings
were raised in Ofsted inspections of child protection and children looked after
services undertaken in 2013. In almost all areas, there has been marked
improvement as a result of decisive and directive strategic management and
leadership, combined with robust monitoring by elected members and external
and internal improvement boards. Some areas have been successfully
addressed, such as the implementation of thresholds and the development of
robust contact, referral and assessment services. Most others remain work in
progress, in particular those targeted at improving the consistency of social
work practice and the effectiveness of management oversight in progressing
childrens plans.
organisational and staffing issues requiring improvement, combined with the
challenge of recruiting capable additional or replacement social work and
managerial staff.
audits and needs analyses are used effectively to develop a realistic
understanding of issues affecting children and their families in the area, and of
the impact of local services to support them. For example, ongoing high levels
of child protection activity have prompted internal and MIB case audits.
Through this work, senior managers and partners have been able to satisfy
themselves that thresholds are set at the appropriate level. Intelligence is
consistently used to inform and update specific and measurable strategic
improvement plans.
reflected in its commitment of resources and oversight following the last Ofsted
inspection. Elected members and senior officers are committed to ensuring that
childrens issues are prominent and this is now one of the councils four
priorities. Significant additional funding has been allocated to the service at a
time of severe constraints on council expenditure. The Lead Member for
childrens services demonstrates a strong commitment to vulnerable children
and is instrumental in ensuring that young people, including those who are
looked after, have a strong voice within the council.


team has a clear sense of direction. The team is provided with firm leadership
by the DCS, who maintains a direct link to the front line through meeting
regularly with social workers, auditing and observing practice. At the time of
this inspection, the test of assurance for the wider role of the Director was
being updated.
Chief Executive, the DCS and strategic groups overseeing the development of
childrens services. A range of groups undertakes this function, including the
Medway Improvement Board, the Medway Safeguarding Children Board
(MSCB), an internal improvement board, the Health and Wellbeing Board and
the Childrens Action Network. Their respective work programmes are closely
aligned with crossover in some of the membership. There is little duplication
and lines of accountability and networking are transparent.
for children looked after. Its four sub-groups on youth justice, housing, health
and education reflect the right strategic priorities, regularly reporting to the
board on their progress. The boards priorities and business plan align with
strategic priorities for children looked after and the improvement plan. The
board closely interrogates the children looked after performance dashboard. A
recent focus has been on improving services for care leavers, in particular
supported housing provision. Engagement between the board and the Children
in Care Council is well developed and is valued by both. Governance
arrangements are well established, particularly in relation to the role of the
Childrens Overview and Scrutiny Committee. The board has secured three
apprenticeships for care leavers in the council and is working to increase
numbers further. The board has led on the production of a creative joint
protocol with Kent Police to avoid unnecessary criminalisation of children looked
after. The board is particularly active in foster carer recruitment campaigns and
monitors social work caseloads. Further work is needed to challenge and
improve performance relating to the number of children looked after who have
a timely initial health assessment.
closely aligned with the quality assurance processes of the MSCB. A range of
case audit and themed audits is undertaken, which is closely moderated to
ensure consistency and accurate benchmarking. The chair of the improvement
board is directly involved in case auditing. Managers routinely re-visit audits to
ensure that learning and actions are progressed. The quality and consistency of
these audits has been improved in recent months and those undertaken for this
inspection were rigorous overall.


reported to key strategic groups, such as the senior management group, the
improvement boards and the MSCB. They are used well to identify areas of
strength and areas that need to be addressed. Managers apply this learning to
promote staff development. Quality assurance processes are closely aligned
with an extensive range of performance management information, which is
routinely and regularly collated.
appropriate steps to address poor practice. For example, poor timeliness and
quality in the completion of connected persons assessments has resulted in
procedures being updated and targeted practitioner workshops, although work
is not yet of a sufficient quality. The training offer is comprehensive and social
workers report that they are encouraged and enabled to attend. Average social
work caseloads are reducing, at around 22 but some remain too high, at
around 30. Social workers spoken to by inspectors said they were well
supported and managed. Most could articulate where practice still needs to
improve and were confident in the actions of senior managers to continue to
improve services.
targeted coaching and the introduction of a range of new systems and tracking
tools, some areas of core social work practice have been stubbornly slow to
improve. Senior managers are keenly aware that there are not enough
permanent, experienced first line managers to drive improvement in all areas.
For example, sustained operational involvement of skilled managers is required
to improve the timeliness and effectiveness of pre-proceedings work. Achieving
stability and consistency at this level is being afforded the right attention by
senior and political leaders.
since the last inspections and have been developed in conjunction with other
authorities across the South East. This has been strengthened in response to
the requirements of the local authoritys childrens senior management group,
the improvement boards, the MSCB and elected members who regularly receive
and interrogate performance reports and who have decided the areas that
require monitoring. Performance information is systematically analysed and
reported to operational managers across childrens services, to enable them to
monitor and manage their services and staff. Weekly service performance
meetings are held within the teams with analysts, to assist team mangers to
manage their teams. However, team managers do not consistently maximise
the use of performance information available to them and this limits their
effectiveness in quality assuring and progressing the work of their teams.


significantly since the last Ofsted inspection. Additional capacity has enabled
commissioning staff to systematically review and implement more robust
performance monitoring of services. Extensive needs analyses have been
undertaken across a range of service areas, in particular for children looked
after and for the development of early help services. These analyses have
informed the development of new commissioning plans and frameworks for the
reconfiguration of services. Most of these are scheduled to be implemented in
the latter part of 2015, so it is too early to assess their impact. In the interim,
existing commissioned services have been reviewed and a few have been
decommissioned where they did not meet current needs or performance
requirements. Others, such as CAMHS, short breaks and substance misuse
services have been reviewed and more closely monitored, resulting in
improving service delivery. Joint commissioning has significantly improved
through the establishment of the joint partnership commissioning team
between the local authority and the Clinical Commissioning Group.
strengthened significantly in recent years, with improved collaboration,
communication and engagement, facilitated by the DCS and the senior
management team. For example, Cafcass and the judiciary report positive
relationships and networking with managers and staff within the childrens
services, and a real drive from senior managers to engage with Cafcass and the
courts through active participation in the FJB. This has resulted in closer
monitoring of cases going through the courts and significant improvement in
the timeliness of this work. However, Cafcass and the judiciary report ongoing
concerns about the impact of changes of social worker on the consistency and
quality of practice. Cafcass and health services report working closely with the
local authority childrens services, providing induction for newly qualified social
workers and workshops to increase social workers understanding of the role of
key issues affecting families, such as neglect.
line managers on individual cases and this has significantly improved since the
last Ofsted inspection. Most cases seen by inspectors did contain operational
management decisions and actions required and some also included reflective
discussion. However, too many cases did not demonstrate consistent or
continuous management oversight to drive forward case planning. In particular,
managers do not ensure that all child protection plans are progressed through
regular and effective core groups, or that permanence plans are formalised and
driven for children of all ages.


managers across childrens services. Of these, 26 were not of an adequate
standard and did not meet the standards set by the councils own supervision
policy or follow supervision agreements made with staff. Regular supervision
was not evidenced and in almost all, there were significant gaps or no records
or explanation provided. Despite 65% of team managers attending supervision
training in February, May and June 2015, almost all recording was of a poor
quality, with little evidence that issues arising from previous supervision
sessions were carried forward for discussion at subsequent meetings. None
evidenced reflective supervision.
remain a key challenge. A wide range of initiatives has been developed and
implemented to reflect market forces and attract appropriate staff. New staff
are subject to a rigorous interview process, which includes a number of
exercises to test their practice skills. Probationary processes are robust.
work relationships with children and families and the local authoritys ability to
achieve consistency of practice. As at 31 May 2015, 27 of the social workers
within core social work teams were from an agency. However, this is in the
context of a 62% increase in the social worker establishment in the past two
years (54 posts). Many of the new posts are initially filled with agency social
workers while managers seek to recruit further permanent staff. During the
past two years, 75 permanent social work appointments have been made, a
testament to the increasingly robust recruitment and retention arrangements.
These new social workers have either been appointed to the additional posts or
have replaced other permanent or temporary staff who have left the local
authority. Turnover and sickness rates are in line with similar authorities.
management team. However, one of the key barriers to achieving greater
consistency in practice is the high number of agency first line managers. This
rose from 14 out of 24 in April 2014 (58%) to 17 out of 26 in June 2015 (65%).
Recruitment of first line managers continues to be a significant challenge. Many
have been home grown, promoted from among social work staff. Managers
seen were all enthusiastic about managing and developing their service, while
realistic about the key issues faced. In particular, the variability in the quality of
work undertaken, exacerbated by staff turnover or changes. The local authority
understands how crucial first line managers are to achieving greater
consistency in social work practice and as a result, has developed an assessed
year in management programme to develop the management skills of
experienced and talented social workers. This is due to be launched early in
initiative has taken too long to put into place.


staff turnover and high use of agency staff has led to a significant number of
staff changes over time. Some social workers and managers have also changed
roles as a result of promotion or structural changes in teams and services.
While this has some positive benefits in developing and improving the quality
and stability of services overall, many children and young people have
experienced too many changes of worker, limiting their ability to form trusting
relationships and reducing continuity of support and case planning.
difficulties they experienced earlier this year in responding to an unexpected
shortage of agency staff. This resulted in a period where a number of cases
were overseen by managers and held on duty while waiting for newly
appointed staff to take up their posts. Sampling of these cases indicated that
the majority were closely overseen by managers during this period and that
there was limited negative impact on childrens experiences. However, in a
small minority of cases this led to significant delay in plans being progressed.
All cases were allocated at the time of this inspection.
to understanding and improving social work practice in Medway. Separate post
holders for adults and children work closely together to integrate and improve
practice. The PSW co-chairs the Social Work Academy Board, and has a key
role in evaluating its impact. Links with local universities are mutually beneficial
and provide free training courses for Medway staff; this demonstrates
partnership working and a commitment to best value. Along with the Advanced
Practitioner, the PSW undertakes learning audits, and ensures that learning is
effectively disseminated through a variety of approaches including one-to-one
coaching and mentoring, workshops and briefings. Themes include court report
writing and undertaking child sexual exploitation risk assessments. The PSW
has undertaken home office accredited anti-radicalisation Prevent training. She
has been proactive in ensuring that childrens service are fully engaged with the
local multi-agency Prevent and Channel processes, which aim to safeguard
vulnerable people from being drawn into violent extremist or terrorist
behaviour. She is helping social workers to understand how to identify children
at risk of radicalisation and extremism.
innovative project. It provides a wide range of professional development
support and opportunities for social workers at all stages in their professional
development, including those wishing to return to the profession. The academy
is nationally recognised, having supported large numbers of social workers and
students in the past 10 months. Newly qualified social workers (NQSWs) in their
assessed year in employment (ASYE) are supported well by the academy. At
the time of the inspection, 17 NQSWs were employed within childrens services,
with a further cohort of seven due to start in January 2016. The programme is
well structured and organised.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement to
be good

Executive summary
This executive summary should be read alongside the recommendations in the next
section of this report. Each recommendation is clearly linked to the relevant
paragraph(s) that set out the detailed findings of this inspection.
The Medway Safeguarding Children Board (MSCB) has made significant progress
during the last six months and now benefits from strong independent leadership.
It has responded promptly and positively to a diagnostic undertaken by the Local
Government Association in February 2015, which enabled partners to gain a clear
understanding of its strengths and areas for development.
Until recently, the MSCB has not systematically demonstrated active challenge. In
March 2015, the Board introduced a challenge log that has encouraged partners to
better evidence constructive challenge.
The Board has established clear governance arrangements with its partners and with
other key strategic groups that oversee work with children and their families. The
MSCB has reviewed its sub committees and working groups. These are now better
aligned to the Boards priorities and link well together, although the work
programmes for some groups are too broad. Attendance at some groups has not
been sufficiently consistent over the past 12 months and the chair has engaged with
partners to improve attendance.
The Board receives a wide range of performance information from its partners.
However, this is too broad and not sufficiently focused on its key priorities. For
example, it has not enabled the Board to identify whether core groups effectively
progress child protection plans.
The Board has begun to involve young people in developing its work. Although this is
at an early stage, these young people are keen to develop their role further.
The changes in business support staff experienced by the Board in recent years have
negatively impacted on its work. During 2015, the team has stabilised. Permanent
appointments and a redistribution of roles are beginning to better support its work.
The Board has effectively overseen the coordination of support to vulnerable groups,
in particular missing children and those at risk of sexual exploitation or domestic
abuse.
The Board has ensured that partners report how they ensure that children are


safeguarded through their safeguarding audits and school reports, although it has
not sufficiently ensured that information from these has been systematically collated.
A wide range of multi-agency safeguarding training is provided and is well attended
by workers from most agencies, although attempts to evaluate the longer-term
impact of training have had a poor response.

Recommendations
ensure that their work is proportional and manageable (paragraph 128).
relation to the frequency and effectiveness of child protection core groups and
the progression of child protection plans (paragraph 129).
its multi-agency training and ensure that partners engage in this evaluation to
enable effective multi-agency practice (paragraph 138).
partner agencies, through safeguarding and school audits, and rigorously
collate and address findings from these (paragraph 128).

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
(MSCB), the Health and Wellbeing Board, the Community Safety Partnership,
Safeguarding Adults Board and the Childrens Action Network are well
established and ensure that safeguarding is a cross-cutting theme in their
respective strategic plans. The Board is closely involved in the work of the
Medway Improvement Board (MIB) to ensure that their respective roles are well
synchronised and to avoid unnecessary duplication. Senior partners have begun
to consider how the Board can prepare for the transition should the MIB no
longer be required.
positive action to galvanise partners to secure their commitment, enthusiasm
and engagement in the work of the Board. The chair is well respected by
partners and is well supported by the councils Chief Executive, DCS and Lead
Member. The chair has developed strong communication with Board members,
with the DCS and with the chair of the MIB to promote a common and realistic
understanding of how effectively local children are safeguarded. The Board has
responded positively to learning from inspections, national and local reviews
and commissioned audits to improve the function and profile of the Board.


effectiveness and impact of the MSCB in February 2015. Reporting in June
effectiveness of the Board, with clear recommendations for improvement. This
has been invaluable to the Board in understanding and rectifying key deficits.
The MSCB has responded positively and promptly, developing an action plan to
address the issues raised. Therefore, these do not form recommendations from
this inspection. Many of the areas for improvement are ongoing. A few have
been completed. For example, the diagnostic identified that the Board had not
adequately monitored private fostering arrangements; this was rectified mid2015. Action plans from serious case reviews completed several years ago,
which had not been signed off, have also subsequently been completed.
evidence the range of issues raised by its partners and the independent chair.
This has enabled partners to provide transparent and constructive challenge to
each other and for the Board to track outcomes. For example, the DCS recently
challenged police colleagues about a period around August 2015 where
domestic abuse notifications had not been promptly referred.
and this was underway at the time of the inspection. One of the key sub-groups
overseeing performance management and quality assurance has been
hampered in fulfilling its functions through having an extensive work
programme, changes in membership and inconsistent chairing arrangements.
Two core areas of its work have not been undertaken with sufficient rigour. A
multi-agency dataset has been developed, combining performance information
gathered by key partner agencies. This is regularly reported to the Board, with
some analysis of issues and trends. However, the dataset is too broad and does
not readily align to the Boards priorities. The sub-group also ensures that
partner agencies regularly report on how they safeguard children through
Section 11 reports and through reports from schools. These have been updated
on a bi-annual cycle and will be renewed from November 2015. While the
response from key agencies has been high, the sub-group has not had the
capacity to effectively monitor or influence agency plans, or to collate returns
from schools.
through a multi-agency audit programme, it has not sufficiently monitored the
effectiveness of multi-agency child protection core groups. During the
inspection, cases were identified where core groups had been irregular and
ineffective. The MSCB has identified this deficit and plans to address it through
the work plans of its subgroups.


with attendance by representatives at the right level from all partner agencies.
Attendance by some partners at some sub-committees in early to mid-2015 was
inconsistent and this impacted negatively on their work. The independent chair
appropriately challenged partners to secure improved attendance in recent
months. Two lay members have been recently appointed to the Board.
has, until recently, been limited. While reports on early help services have been
received, the Board has not systematically evaluated the effectiveness of the
early help offer. As the local authority has developed its early help strategy, the
MSCB has, more recently, taken a more active role in overseeing its
development. This includes considering the potential impact of the strategy on
reducing the high numbers of children requiring child protection plans.
Centre and the Young Offender Institute (YOI) (Cookham Wood) and ensured
that representatives from these establishments are engaged with the Board and
its sub-groups. The Board receives regular safeguarding reports from these
representatives and the chair takes a direct and active interest in how
vulnerable young people are safeguarded. The Board has recently signed off
the long-standing action plan for a serious case review for the YOI. At the time
of inspection, the Board had been notified of a further case review involving the
YOI for an out-of-area young person. The Board has recently decided to
introduce a task and finish group to focus specifically on safeguarding for this
group of young people placed in YOIs.
implemented and monitored through the MSCB. A joint Medway and Kent policy
and procedures sub-group oversees these, producing joint policies and
protocols, benchmarked regionally and nationally to ensure consistency. Some
policies are modified to reflect issues specific to Medway. For example, revised
thresholds processes have been developed and disseminated which are well
understood by partners. The MSCB has appropriately monitored the
development of the Contact, Advice and Duty Service, the application of
thresholds and the joint work of partners to assess and protect children.


with the most vulnerable children, that these groups are included within its
priorities for 201517, and that training and awareness-raising sessions are
provided. Appropriate training is in place for professionals working with children
who go missing, those at risk of child sexual exploitation, those at risk of
radicalisation and those who are exposed to domestic abuse. The Board has
monitored the effectiveness of the multi-agency sexual exploitation panel and
the development of a multi-agency sexual exploitation team, in collaboration
with partners in Kent. Intelligence and information on children at risk of child
sexual exploitation is appropriately shared between partners. This was well
evidenced in two major child sexual exploitation operations across Kent and
Medway in the past year, led by the police with close collaboration of partners.
Although partners collate the right information relating to children at risk of
child sexual exploitation, a comprehensive child sexual exploitation dataset has
not been established to inform service development. This is planned as part of
the work in the multi-agency team.
appropriate steps taken to address local modifiable factors in child deaths, such
as smoking in pregnancy. The panel is well constituted and attended and is
appropriately challenging. The work of the panel has led to changes in
procedures and practice, for example child sexual exploitation, in the
development of a policy to respond to parents who do not attend health
appointments for children with long-term health conditions. The impact of this
policy is in the process of being evaluated.
During the past year, permanent staff have been appointed and roles redefined
to enable it to provide better support to the Board and its groups.
engage young people of diverse backgrounds and ages in its work. At the time
of the inspection, 11 young people were involved. They contributed to the
recent recruitment process for lay members, and to the Boards review of its
work in raising awareness of domestic abuse in the community. Young people
from this group seen by inspectors were enthusiastic and committed to
developing their role and their voice on the Board.


is developed and delivered to its partners. This is provided in ways that are
readily accessible to staff, such as e-learning and short sessions. Training is
appropriately graduated according to the experience and needs of learners.
Core child protection training is provided, alongside workshops to address key
safeguarding issues such as female genital mutilation, Prevent and child sexual
exploitation. These are well aligned to local need. Members of the learning and
development sub-group effectively oversee the quality of training, supported by
learning and development officers. The MSCB has recognised the need to
strengthen its evaluation of the impact of training, which is primarily based on
post-course self-evaluation. Response rates to questionnaires three months
after course dates have been low and as a result the Board is unable to fully
evaluate the impact of training on practice.
ensure that they incorporate current safeguarding issues. These are now better
aligned to the business plan and to the work of the sub-committees. The MSCB
annual report for 201415, approved by the Board at the time of this
inspection, provides a realistic synopsis of the work of the Board, the range of
work undertaken to safeguard children and some commentary of what impact
the Board and its sub-groups have had. This is significantly better than previous
annual reports, although it could provide greater focus on the impact of the
Board on safeguarding practice.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Stephanie Murray
Deputy lead inspector: Pietro Battista
Team inspectors: Donna Marriott, Nick Stacey, Nicholas McMullen, Michael Ferguson,
Peter Green
Senior data analyst: Patrick Thomson
Quality assurance manager: Christopher Sands


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Complaints about Ofsted, which is available at:
www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to send you a
copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2015


