Newcastle Upon Tyne
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 24 April 2017  11 May 2017
Report published: 7 July 2017

Childrens services in Newcastle Upon Tyne require
improvement to be good

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Good


Good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Senior managers know the strengths and weaknesses of their service very well.
Inspectors identified very few areas for improvement where action plans were not
already being implemented and that had not already been identified by senior
managers. While progress can be seen in the quality of social work practice, with
many examples of good work, this is not yet leading to consistently good outcomes
for all children.
In 2015, senior managers established that too many children in the city experienced
harm due to neglect. The wish of the senior team to better understand neglect and
the needs and characteristics of families in which neglect occurs led directly to
innovation and investment in evidence-based practice. In 2016, the council led an
ambitious service transformation to redesign long-term social work in the city,
intended to effect change within families. Through Family Insights (funded through
the DfE Innovation Programme), a new unit-based model of social work has been
implemented. Staff have responded positively to the transformation programme. This
transformation is in its early stages, and, while inspectors have seen some evidence
of improving practice in relation to early help, quality of assessments and plans,
educational outcomes and a strengthening approach to securing earlier permanence,
not all children are benefiting from a consistently good social work response.
Highly effective and dynamic partnerships focus clearly on shared priorities, which
are clearly defined and translated well through strategic plans. Impactful
partnerships with the courts and children and family court advisory and support
services (Cafcass) are securing timely progression through legal proceedings. Early
years and preventative services have been combined to better target support for the
most vulnerable families and, when the need for help is first identified, there are
improved outcomes for many children.
Comprehensive workforce planning, a strong focus on learning and development for
staff at all levels, and reduced caseloads have resulted in high retention rates and a
reduction in the use of agency staff. Vacancies and sickness rates are among the
lowest in the region. Children have meaningful and consistent relationships with
social workers, who know them well. Senior managers have ensured throughout the
transformation programme that, where possible, children do not experience changes
of worker. Social workers are regularly supervised by their managers. Group
supervision also enables workers to have further reflection time. However, this does
not always result in consistently good management challenge around the quality of
childrens assessments and plans.
The initial response service (IRS) has not yet been restructured, although, following
a very recent external review, senior managers are now implementing plans for
improvement. Inspectors found, and the local authority has identified, that the
screening of contacts to childrens social care is not consistently and sufficiently
robust. Thresholds are not always understood or applied appropriately and, as a
result, not all children receive the right level of intervention at the right time. While


there is a swift and effective response to child protection concerns through the multiagency safeguarding hub (MASH), a small number of children wait too long before
interventions effectively identify risk and need.
Child and family assessments are improving, with a better focus on strengths and
risks, but not all assessments are sufficiently analytical, or history is not considered
well enough within the assessments. In addition, some are not updated, which
means that childrens needs are not always fully understood and considered. Not all
pre-birth assessments are carried out as early as they could be. Resultant plans in
these cases are therefore not as sharply focused as they should be, which leads to
drift, and delays for some children in permanence being achieved. Children benefit
from regular reviews, although independent reviewing officers (IROs) are not
consistently effective at challenging or escalating concerns about delays or about the
quality of planning for children. Management arrangements have been strengthened
to address this. Delegated responsibility is not secured in a timely way for all
children.
There is effective risk management in response to domestic violence, homeless 16and 17-year-olds, children at risk of radicalisation and female genital mutilation.
There is a highly effective response to risks of child sexual exploitation, and
inspectors saw evidence of some outstanding practice to protect children. When
children go missing from home, the vast majority receive a return home interview,
but these are not consistently analysed to inform individual planning and wider
prevention strategies.
The majority of children become looked after when it is in their best interest. The
recent development of a number of performance panels is providing senior managers
with better oversight of decisions about when children should become looked after.
These panels are leading to earlier identification of entrenched neglect and a better
focus on achieving timely permanence planning for children, particularly through
adoption. The legal proceedings panel is not yet being used effectively to
consistently track all children in pre-proceedings or to ensure contingency planning
when change is not being achieved or sustained in some cases. As a result, a small
number of children are placed in an emergency in placements that do not meet their
needs, and there are insufficient placements locally for children who have more
complex needs. When a plan of adoption is agreed, the majority of children are
matched quickly and placed with their permanent families at the earliest opportunity.
The majority of children enjoy safe, supportive and stable placements with foster
families close to home.
The educational achievement of children looked after is a strength supported by a
well-led virtual school. The Children in Care Council (CiCC), Voices for Choices, is a
strong and visible group that is actively promoting the voices and experiences of
children looked after. However, advocacy and independent visitors are not used
widely. Care leavers benefit from an effective service. However, services to support
childrens mental health are not meeting local need and some children and young
people are waiting too long to receive a more specialist service.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates four childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the
protection of children was published in March 2012. The local authority was
judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked
after was published in March 2012. The local authority was judged to be
good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since April 2013.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services.
 The chief executive (CEO) has been in post since January 2013.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post
since January 2015.
 The local authority is rolling out a systemic model of social work.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 56,619 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Newcastle. This is 19% of the total population in the area. (Office for
National Statistics mid-year population estimates 2015)
 Approximately 29% of the local authoritys children are living in low-income
families. (Child benefit data  as at 31 August 2014)
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 24% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 21% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 21% of all
children and young people living in Newcastle, compared with 21% in the
country as a whole.

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are Pakistani (4%), Bangladeshi (4%) and African 3%.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an
additional language:
 in primary schools is 25% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 18% (the national average is 16%).
Child protection in this area
 At 24 April, 2,433 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 24 April, 406 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 72 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 424
(75 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 24 April 2016, three children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is similar to 31 March 2015.
 In the two years before inspection, three serious incident notifications were
submitted to Ofsted and one serious case review (SCR) has been completed.
 There were two SCRs ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 24 April 2017, 532 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 94 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 498 (88 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016.
 Of this number, 285 children (or 54%) live outside the local authority area.
 Sixty-eight children live in childrens homes, (47 in independent and 21 in inhouse childrens homes), of whom 50.0% (34) live out of the authority area.
 Five children live in residential special schools, all of whom live out of the
authority area.
 Four hundred and ten children live with foster families, of whom 61% live out
of the authority area.
 Thirteen children live with parents, of whom 15% live out of the authority
area.
 Four children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 29 adoptions
 forty-three children became subject of special guardianship orders


 two hundred and eighty-one children ceased to be looked after, of
whom 4% (12) subsequently returned to be looked after
 nine young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to
independent living
 no young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in
houses of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that initial screening is informed by consistent and robust decisionmaking in the initial response team.


Ensure that all assessments are informed by an understanding of historical
information and childrens experiences and that they are routinely updated to
inform childrens plans.


Ensure that the decisions for childrens long-term permanence are made in a
timely way, particularly for children living in long-term foster care, and
increase the effectiveness of legal and permanence panels to reduce drift and
delay in securing legal permanence for children.


Increase the effectiveness of the scrutiny and challenge by the IROs and the
adoption panel chair to improve the quality of childrens assessments and
plans.


When children go missing, ensure that information from independent return
home interviews is used and analysed effectively to inform individual planning
and wider risk reduction strategies.


Ensure that children looked after and care leavers have timely access to
specialist emotional and mental health support services.


Ensure that children and young people have timely access to advocacy and
independent visitors.


Accelerate plans to ensure that sufficient placements are available, in order to
meet the needs of children locally, particularly in an emergency, and
especially those children who have more complex needs.


Ensure that all parents receive a timely pre-birth assessment to better inform
early and appropriate services and support.


Ensure that delegated authority is agreed in a timely way when children
become subject to section 20 arrangements.


Improve the quality of individual supervision and case records to better
demonstrate how staff are supported and are able to reflect on their practice.


Summary for Children and young people
 Professionals in Newcastle work well together to support children and their
families when they first need help, support and protection. However, social
workers and managers do not always identify soon enough when children and
young people need extra help.
 Specialised teams of professionals work very hard to protect children and young
people from sexual exploitation. They provide lots of information and advice all
over the city to raise awareness to keep children and young people safe and to
help if they have suffered harm.
 Social workers are very committed and know the children and young people they
work with very well. However, they do need to get better at making children and
young peoples plans and assessments clearer so that children know what is
going to happen to them, when and why.
 Managers and IROs need to make sure that children and young peoples plans
make a difference and, when they do not, they need to take action to make
things happen sooner.
 Managers and social workers need to make sure that children and young people
have access to an advocate when needed to make sure that their views are
heard.
 If children and young people need to be looked after away from their own home,
very good foster carers and staff in childrens homes keep children and young
people safe and look after them well. Sometimes, when children first become
looked after, it takes too long to find the very best placement. Managers at the
council are working hard to put this right.
 When children have a plan of adoption, they go to live with their new family
quickly.
 The council works very well with schools and colleges to make sure that children
and young people get good support with their education and have the help they
need to be the best they can be.
 When young people are ready to leave care, they get good support from their
workers to live independently and live in good accommodation where they feel
safe.
 The Voices for Choices group works very hard to let senior managers know what
it is like to be looked after in Newcastle. Through this work, the group helps to
make improvements in the services received by children and young people.
 When children and young people need support with their emotional needs or
mental health, they wait too long. The council and its partners need to do more
to make sure that help is available much sooner.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Services to children and families in need of help and protection are improving
following a whole-service review. Appropriately focused strategic plans are being
implemented and are having a positive impact on social work practice and
improving the service response to children and families. However, it is too soon to
see the full impact of these changes, and some children are not receiving a
consistently good or timely service to meet their needs.
Newcastles early help offer is a strength. Families benefit from well-coordinated
and responsive early help services that are accessible and deliver positive results.
Social workers are tenacious with families who are difficult to engage. Families
affected by domestic abuse or substance misuse are supported effectively with
good multi-agency oversight and services. Vulnerable children and asylum-seeking
families receive good-quality help.
Work with children at risk of sexual exploitation and trafficking is highly effective,
and there is evidence of some outstanding practice. There are also effective multiagency responses to children at risk of female genital mutilation and at risk of
radicalisation. Arrangements for reducing risks for children who go missing,
although recently strengthened, are still not good enough. The quality of return
home interviews is inconsistent and they do not all inform safety planning.
When immediate risks to children are identified, a highly effective response is
provided. However, the threshold is not consistently applied by partners, and
decision-making is not always robust in the initial response service. A small
number of children receive a response at a lower level, when a social work
assessment is needed. As a result, not all children receive appropriately focused
help at the right time.
The quality of assessments is improving. However, not all assessments are
sufficiently analytical to ensure that needs are fully understood and they are not
leading to consistently focused plans. Contingency planning is not embedded and it
is too soon to see the impact of the recently implemented legal proceedings panel
on reducing drift for all children. An arrangement for child protection chairs to
support social workers in their formulation of child protection plans during last
year, when caseloads were previously high, is not leading to sufficiently consistent
or robust challenge.


Inspection findings

Families are benefiting from effective, aligned and wide-ranging early help
services, and have increased access through three community family hubs.
Good multi-agency engagement ensures that services respond to community
need. New early help assessments have been developed, and, as a result of
this development, there has been a significant increase in partner agencies
completing the assessments. These partner agencies are increasingly leading
on plans, meaning that children and families are supported by workers they
already know and have a relationship with. Early help plans support a range of
needs, including domestic abuse, parental substance misuse and poor parental
mental health. Practitioners engage children and families well with early help
plans and are able to effectively meet childrens diverse needs. When cases
open to early help services require a social work intervention, these cases are
escalated appropriately to childrens social care.


The IRS provides a central point for the assessment of concerns about
childrens welfare. Although prompt, the screening of contacts is not
sufficiently robust. Decisions are not always well informed by historical
information or multiagency checks and this results in some children receiving
a service that does not meet their needs. (Recommendation)


A wide range of services and community organisations appropriately respond
to families affected by domestic abuse, substance misuse and poor parental
mental health. When children experience domestic abuse, effective multiagency arrangements coordinate responses well. Appropriate risk
management through multi-agency public protection arrangements (MAPPA)
ensures effective coordination of services to reduce risks to children.


Well-established relationships support effective information sharing with police
and health representatives co-located in the MASH. Consent is appropriately
considered to support open and transparent work with families. Strategy
discussions are timely and effective in addressing risks for children. They are
well attended by partner agencies and result in timely joint investigations.
Childrens views are gathered and wider safety planning ensures that all
relevant children are included. Investigation outcomes are appropriate for the
levels of presenting concern and lead to timely child protection conferences.


The threshold is not consistently applied by partners in all cases. Inspectors
saw a small number of cases that should have been referred for a social work
response sooner. Not all agencies are represented in the MASH, an example
being education services, and this is a missed opportunity to further embed
multi-agency working and to support schools to better understand the
thresholds for referral to childrens social care.


Effective out-of-hours arrangements ensure that children are protected. The
emergency duty team works closely with day services, the police and other
agencies to ensure the immediate protection of children.



The quality of assessments is improving, with a good focus on strengths and
risks; many also result in appropriately focused services for families. However,
for a minority of children, assessments are not sufficiently analytical or
detailed to ensure that their needs are fully understood and to inform focused
planning.


The pre-birth protocol is not being consistently followed in all cases and, while
assessments for children are taking place prior to birth, in some cases this is
not providing sufficient time for direct work to promote necessary change.
(Recommendation)


Children in need of targeted support, including children who have disabilities
and children on the edge of care, receive proportionate and sensitive support
to meet their needs. Interventions are appropriate and include intensive
support, for example the community fostering service. Foster carers work with
families in their own homes to achieve positive and sustainable change. There
is good access to a wide range of suitable services, including short breaks and
bespoke services. Feedback through parent and carer forums shows that
families are positive about the help they receive and this appropriately informs
the planning of services.


Child in need reviews, overseen by an IRO, are improving in their
effectiveness by ensuring that appropriate support services are in place when
a statutory social work intervention is no longer needed. This supports
sustainability and family resilience. Neglect is now well understood in
Newcastle, with the Newcastle Safeguarding Children Board (NSCB) leading
multi-agency audits to review practice and to address concerns about the
increasing number of repeat child protection plans under this category. As a
result, many long-standing cases that reflect significant drift and delay in
addressing neglect are now progressing through care proceedings.


Children are seen alone and within appropriate timescales, and there is some
effective and appropriately focused direct work with families to support and
improve outcomes for children. Social workers engage and listen to children
well, although not all social workers are consistently reflecting on childrens
lived experiences.


Childrens and families assessments are not always updated when
circumstances change. In a small number of cases, the absence of
chronologies capturing significant events leads to a reduced understanding of
childrens lived experiences, particularly where involvement has been
prolonged. In some cases, social workers and other agencies are relying too
much on parents self-reporting and are not fully considering parental ability to
sustain change.


When caseloads were previously high, the council made an arrangement for
child protection chairs to support social workers in their formulation of child
protection plans by developing plans in conferences. Now that caseloads have


reduced and are at an acceptable level, this continued arrangement is not best
supporting consistent or robust challenge of childrens plans when
circumstances do not change. The requirement for the child protection chairs
to develop the childs plan within the meeting reduces their independence
and, in some cases, is impacting on their ability to effectively challenge drift
and delay and escalate concerns.

Not all plans help families understand what needs to change or what support
will be provided. This is particularly visible in long-term cumulative neglect
cases that have not been addressed quickly enough, leaving some children in
poor home environments for too long. Managers have recently strengthened
this through the implementation of an additional (designated) conference for
children who have been on a child protection plan for approaching two years.
This is improving the escalation of concerns and ensuring more timely and
appropriate decision-making. There is effective multi-agency work to support
families to make changes. (Recommendation)


The Public Law Outline is not used effectively for all children in preproceedings and social workers do not consistently follow process. Letters
before proceedings do not always address concerns well enough or explain to
parents what will happen if childrens circumstances do not improve. Care
within the family or with connected persons is not always considered as the
first option and this is leading to delays in securing legal permanence for some
children. The council has established a legal panel to improve pre-proceedings
processes, and this has been effective in improving the timeliness of care
proceedings. Effective relationships with the courts and Cafcass support the
timeliness of children moving through the court process.


Children are not consistently well supported to participate in their conferences
and reviews. Few children take up the offer of the advocacy service. This
limits childrens ability to inform their plans and give feedback to help to
improve services. Senior managers are aware of this gap and have made
plans to improve opportunities for children to feed back using social media.
(Recommendation)


Prevention work for children at risk of exploitation is highly effective and there
are some examples of outstanding practice. There is increasing use of local
organisations, including the fire brigade, community safety partnership and
voluntary organisations, to raise the profile and improve community
awareness. The multi-agency response to sexual exploitation is very well
resourced, and the complex abuse process is used successfully to identify
children at risk of female genital mutilation or human trafficking.


Partners and social workers identify children at risk of sexual exploitation and
trafficking effectively, and appropriate and responsive services support
children and reduce risk. Effective assessment tools are used appropriately
and inform safety planning. Successful use of court orders disrupts offending


behaviour and safeguards children. As a result, the council and partners are
reducing risks for these children.

Operational arrangements for reducing risks for vulnerable children have
recently been strengthened. There is effective coordination by a specialist
social worker, who tracks all missing episodes, and a commissioned provider,
who undertakes return home interviews for children not known to childrens
social care. However, the quality of return home interviews is not consistently
good or timely. Some meaningful discussions result in suitable
recommendations, but not all inform safety planning and there are missed
opportunities to further improve the coordination of this work operationally
and strategically. Senior managers have recently improved arrangements for
tracking children who are missing education. (Recommendation)


Private fostering arrangements are suitably monitored and supported. Despite
much proactive awareness raising, numbers remain low.


Young people aged 16 and 17 who present as homeless are very well
supported and safeguarded by good partnership working between statutory
and voluntary sector organisations. Prompt assessments and successful
commissioning of Your Homes Newcastle provide appropriate advocacy and
housing-related support to young people up to 25 years old.


Arrangements for reporting and responding to allegations are effective.
Allegations have increased as a result of greater promotion of the role of the
designated officer and effective work with the voluntary and independent
sectors.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
The majority of children become looked after when it is in their best interests.
However, a small number of children become looked after in an emergency, and
for these children some drift has occurred, as the planning of cases in preproceedings has not been effective. Recent practice is improving, but it is too soon
to see an impact. The majority of children looked after live close to home and
benefit from good-quality, stable and safe placements that meet their needs and
contribute to improved outcomes. However, there are not enough local placements
for children placed in an emergency or for those children who have complex
needs.
Permanence decisions are not made soon enough for all children and some
children experience delays in long-term matching. Not all assessments of childrens
needs are sufficiently robust to inform placement choice, and this is not supporting
sufficiently clear planning in these cases. Children do benefit from regular reviews,
but IROs are not wholly effective in challenging drift or escalating concerns.
When adoption is pursued, children do not have to wait long periods to be
matched with their permanent families. There is a comprehensive range of
adoption support services, which give families every opportunity to succeed.
When children go missing or are at risk of sexual exploitation, timely action is
taken to monitor, review and reduce risks. While return home interviews are
undertaken when children go missing, these are not yet consistently informing risk
assessment and planning for children. Children do well at school and attend
regularly, and their educational achievements and progress are supported
effectively by the virtual school. Up-to-date health assessments are in place for the
majority of children. However, specialist provision of emotional and mental health
support is insufficient to meet the needs of the looked-after population.
Children have meaningful and consistent relationships with social workers, who
know them well. Life story and direct work undertaken with children is helping
them to understand their histories. The CiCC, Voices for Choices, is a strong and
visible group, that is actively promoting the voice and experiences of children
looked after, and children actively participate in their reviews. However, advocacy
and independent visitors are not actively promoted.
The majority of care leavers achieve positive outcomes and make good progress.
An experienced and dedicated team of staff provides a wide range of services to
care leavers, with access to good-quality housing and opportunities for education,
training and employment, and keeps them safe from the effects of any harmful
behaviours.


Inspection findings

The majority of children looked after in Newcastle, including unaccompanied
asylum seekers, become looked after when it is in their best interests.
However, for a small number of children, earlier identification of risk and
decisive action would have prevented the need for emergency admission into
care and ensured earlier planning for permanence. Children who become
looked after in an emergency do not always benefit from robust multi-agency
assessments to inform best placement matching and planning for
permanence. When it is appropriate for children to remain at home while they
are looked after, the council provides a good range of interventions and
support. Unaccompanied asylum seekers and homeless children aged 16 to 17
who need to be looked after are well supported by a dedicated and
experienced team, and have a range of accommodation and support services
provided through effective commissioning and planning.


When children and young people return home in a planned way, the majority
have appropriate plans in place to support them, informed by clear risk-based
assessments. Effective intervention services provided to families mean that
reunification is successful in the majority of cases where this is appropriate,
and very few children become looked after for a further period. However,
inspectors saw a small number of cases where older children returned home
without a purposeful plan, and this was not always informed by multi-agency
support to address and reduce identified risks.


There are well-established and positive relationships with the judiciary and
Cafcass. Thresholds for care proceedings are appropriate and progress in a
timely manner, with the majority completed within 27 weeks on average.
Assessments of parents and family members are of a suitable quality,
undertaken by well-supported and experienced social workers. The use of
independent and expert assessments has been kept to a minimum, and the
council is developing the skills and capacity of social workers to undertake
specialist parental assessments.


The council has reviewed all of its long-standing cases of children looked after
under section 20 of the Children Act 1989. This has led to an improved
permanence for these children and includes returning home as well as care
outside the immediate birth family. However, permanence decisions are not
always in place at the earliest opportunity and by the second review. At the
time of inspection, a number of children who were settled and thriving in their
long-term placements had not been matched with their current carers long
term. The council has recognised this and recently developed a permanency
monitoring panel to improve senior management oversight of timeliness of
permanence decisions and recognition of permanent placements for children.
However, it is too early to see the impact of this for all children.
(Recommendation)



The majority of children are placed with foster carers within 20 miles of their
home. Long-term placement stability is good. Robust regional commissioning
arrangements mean that children experience supportive, stable and safe
placements. However, there are not enough suitable homes locally for children
who have more complex needs and larger family groups of brothers and
sisters. As a result, some children are living separately from their brothers and
sisters when the plan is to live together, and children who have more complex
needs are often placed at some distance from their homes. While senior
managers identified this shortfall at the beginning of 2016, the action plan to
improve capacity is not fully implemented. (Recommendation)


Children have meaningful and consistent relationships with social workers,
who know them well. Visiting is mostly regular and purposeful, and children
spoken to understand the reasons why they are looked after and their future
plans. Senior managers have ensured, wherever possible, that children have
not experienced changes of social workers as part of the transformation of
services. Inspectors saw good examples of direct and life story work, which is
helping children to understand their histories and experiences.


Recruitment processes for foster carers are robust. They receive appropriate
training and support, equipping them with the skills they need to provide good
care to children. Regular visits to foster carers by supervising social workers
facilitate effective oversight and ensure that support can be provided when
needed. Recent changes to management within the fostering team have
ensured a renewed focus on the timely placement of children with foster
carers who can meet their needs.


Effective strategic and operational arrangements ensure that, when children
go missing or are at risk of sexual exploitation, appropriate, timely action is
taken to monitor, review and reduce risks. Children looked after who are at
risk of sexual exploitation are reviewed within the Risk Management Group, to
ensure that changes in circumstances and risks are carefully and effectively
addressed. Children are looked after in placements that meet their needs and
they are effectively safeguarded and supported to achieve good outcomes.
When children go missing, the vast majority receive an offer of a return home
interview provided by a commissioned service. However, the outcomes of
interviews are not being used effectively to inform individual plans or broader
service need. (Recommendation)


Assessment of childrens needs is not always sufficiently robust to inform best
placement choice, and children sometimes become looked after in an
emergency without the benefit of an up-to-date assessment of their needs.
This results in early placement moves to accommodation that is more suitable.
A small number of children looked after who have complex needs, for example
those children who are at risk of sexual exploitation, have experienced a
number of moves as initial placements have not met their needs.



Not all children have an up-to-date assessment of need or clearly developed
plans that reflect their current circumstances. As a result, service provision to
address emotional, educational or contact needs are often delayed, and
contact arrangements are not considered well enough. For children looked
after under section 20 arrangements, inspectors found that delegated
authority was not in place in the majority of cases, hampering carers abilities
to make decisions for care arrangements and leisure activities on behalf of
parents. (Recommendation)


Plans for children are not always clear or sharply focused. Social workers no
longer write reports for reviews. The task of assessing, evaluating and
analysing the ongoing needs and risks for children is undertaken by IROs. This
temporary solution was introduced to better support social workers when
caseloads were high, but it is still in place and reduces the IROs quality
assurance function and independence of their role. Although children benefit
from regular reviews, IROs are not effectively challenging or escalating
concerns about delays in achieving permanence or about the quality of
planning for children. (Recommendation)


The CiCC, Voices for Choices, is a well-established, strong and visible group,
which is actively promoting the voice and experiences of children looked after.
It has undertaken a range of work to support practice and service
development and has produced a range of materials, including a DVD that
illustrates the experiences of children looked after that has been shown in a
range of forums. The influence of the group has led to the continuation of
employment of viewpoint staff, who gain the views of children to inform
reviews. The CiCC members are also involved in staff recruitment and the
development of staff profiles, as well as a number of leaflets for adults and
children. The group has contributed to the development of the pledge for
children looked after and has direct access to senior managers, both via email
and as members of the corporate parenting advisory committee.


Children and young people actively participate in their reviews, and as well as
attending reviews, their wishes and experiences are consistently gained
though the electronic viewpoint system, undertaken in the majority of cases
by a viewpoint worker. Inspectors saw a number of good examples of
childrens views gained though this system on file and that these were
considered and influencing decision-making in reviews. Arrangements for the
promotion of commissioned advocacy and independent visitor services with
children looked after are not sufficient. Fewer than 10 children currently have
an independent visitor, which means that children looked after do not have
the benefit of the support that such a service could offer to advise, befriend
and assist them, particularly those children who are placed at a distance.
(Recommendation)


A significant number of changes to the management and staffing of the virtual
school in the last year has resulted in increasingly positive outcomes for the
education of children looked after. The proportion of current children looked


after making expected or better than expected progress has improved over
the past two years, and the majority of children at different key stages
perform better than their peers in other parts of the country. However, the
figure remains below that of other pupils in the city.

The virtual school is well led and has driven forward improvements in
attendance, reducing the proportion of children looked after who are
persistently absent, as well as the number of fixed-term exclusions. There has
also been a rapid increase in the completion rate of personal education plans
(PEPs) completed by out-of-area schools. Social workers and teachers use
PEPs to plan the educational progress of children looked after effectively. The
majority of plans are characterised by good recording of attendance, current
attainment and progress against targets. An increasing number of plans report
on and measure the impact of the pupil premium.


The recently restructured admissions and attendance service has successfully
reduced the number of children identified as still missing from education after
increased the number of visits to home-educated children to check the quality
of the education being delivered and to ensure that children are safe. The
number and quality of alternative education providers are insufficient to meet
the different needs of children and young people who have disengaged from
mainstream schooling. Just over half of the children looked after who are in
alternative education do not currently receive 25 hours a week of education.


Performance in relation to the completion of health assessments is better than
comparators, with 90% of children having an up-to-date health assessment,
which is increasingly informed by strengths and difficulties questionnaires.
Health staff work across the northeast region and liaise effectively with health
services further afield to provide continuity and quality-assured health
provision. They have developed a number of weekend and evening clinics to
maximise accessibility of their service. Current arrangements in Newcastle for
meeting childrens emotional and mental health needs are not sufficient. Long
waiting times and high thresholds for specialist services mean that some
children experience poor mental health without more specialised support for
unacceptable periods. (Recommendation)

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

The adoption team is experienced and well trained, providing high-quality
support to children and adopters to ensure that children are able to benefit
from living in a permanent home.


Referrals are made in a timely way to the adoption team, following the childs
review recommending adoption as the permanence plan. This allows


dedicated family finders to begin the identification of adopters at an early
stage. Family finders are fully appraised of a childs needs, enabling them to
complete searches for the most suitable carers. When children who have
complex needs are identified, national searches begin without delay to make
sure that children are placed with carers who are able to meet their longerterm needs.

The majority of children are matched quickly and placed with their permanent
families when it is agreed that adoption is the permanence plan. The in-year
figures show that the council is close to the government threshold for this
measure. This ensures that children are able to live in adoptive families at the
earliest opportunity and reduces the uncertainty about their long-term futures.


Newcastles adoption service has a limited number of adopters able to be
matched with children who have complex needs or with large groups. The
service has recognised this issue and has previously targeted recruitment at
carers who could meet the needs of these children. The recruitment campaign
for adopters is now managed in house, thus allowing a more adaptable and
responsive approach to local need.


Child permanence reports (CPRs) are not yet of a consistently high quality,
and this is an area for improvement identified by senior managers. The
reports viewed contained sufficient detail for the agency decision maker
(ADM) to make a best interest decision and to enable effective matching with
adopters. However, some reports are lacking detail regarding birth parents
history, which is therefore not available to a child seeking this information at a
later stage.


Life story work and later life letters are of a good quality. However, these are
not readily accessible on all childrens files and could result in some children
not having access to birth family information once they are placed with their
adoptive families.


Adopters are very complimentary about the professionalism and quality of
service that they have received from the adoption team. The prospective
adopters reports are thorough and highlight strengths and vulnerabilities. The
reports are completed with sensitivity and contain clear analysis and
recommendations to the adoption panel. This facilitates informed approvals
and careful matching with young people, minimising the risk of future
placement breakdown and further disruption to a childs life. Prospective
adopter reports are at times delayed, but this is not having a significant
impact on the availability of carers for Newcastle children. In 201617, of 41
children placed for adoption, 36 were placed with carers assessed by
Newcastle adoption team.


Support to adoptive families is comprehensive and the adoption team has
dedicated adoption support workers and an adoption support specialist.
Adoption support workers have a wide range of training to ensure that


support is effective and available to families from within the councils
resources. The service has access to other therapeutic interventions when
needed, and adoption support is considered early to maximise the potential
for children to settle into their new homes. The adoption support fund is
utilised when required.

The council has been creative in its approach to adoption support, developing
a buddy scheme that matches experienced adopters with new adopters. This
less formal approach not only helps to build resilience within the childs new
family, but it helps to extend the network of those with shared experiences.


Adoption support assessments are detailed and have a clear analysis of needs,
resulting in plans that focus on those areas where support is required most.
These plans are regularly reviewed to ensure that interventions remain
appropriate. There have been no disruptions in over 18 months, and there
was a clear commitment by the council to provide the right support at the
right time in the adoption journey in order to give children every opportunity
to succeed within their new families.


The chair of the adoption panel is experienced and has held this role for a
number of years. The panel has a wide range of members, including adopters,
independent members and a medical adviser. Panel members are
knowledgeable about adoption and effective in their roles. The record of panel
recommendations is clear and detailed and these are then signed and
approved by the ADM. The ADM and panel chair meet on a quarterly basis,
although this meeting is not maximising service improvements. The adoption
panel annual report to the agency is descriptive and lacks a depth and focus
on quality assurance to assist the agency to drive improvements.
(Recommendation)

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good

The councils 16 plus team is well resourced, with sufficient social work
expertise and access to specialist services to provide effective support to its
care leavers. Embedded in the team is a full-time welfare rights officer. The
team currently supports 337 young people, a significant number of whom live
outside the councils boundaries.


The team has regular contact with the vast majority of its care leavers. Its
rate of contact with care leavers of all ages compares favourably to that of its
statistical neighbours and of other local authorities in the rest of the country.
This good level of contact reflects the tenacity and commitment of social
workers and leaving care support workers to building and maintaining
relationships of trust with their care leavers.



There is a good range of services available to care leavers exposed to risktaking behaviours. Staff work particularly effectively with the citys community
and voluntary sector to provide additional support to address issues of sexual
health and exploitation, domestic violence, debt management, and substance
misuse.


The range of accommodation available to care leavers is very good, because
there is the support available to prepare them to take on their own tenancies.
The proportion of care leavers in suitable accommodation is comfortably
above that of the councils statistical neighbours and of councils in the rest of
England.


The young peoples service (YPS), part of Your Homes Newcastle, provides a
highly effective support service to care leavers who are moving into supported
accommodation and then into independent tenancies. Its well-qualified staff
design a specific support programme for each care leaver based on
information contained in their pathway plans. This encompasses independent
living skills, budgeting and preparation for employment. Crucially, staff are
only withdrawn from supporting care leavers once they are convinced that
they can maintain their tenancies.


In the past year, the proportion of care leavers achieving positive placements
in education, training and employment has risen from just below half to the
current level of nearly two thirds. This improvement is the result of a strategic
commitment by the councils leadership to its most vulnerable young people
and more effective partnership working between agencies responsible for
post-16 education and training in the city. The Connexions service plays a
pivotal role in providing bespoke information, advice and guidance to care
leavers about their training and employment options both before and after
leaving formal education. The council is further developing its duty as
corporate parent by ring fencing some of its apprenticeship positions to care
leavers. For those not yet ready for an apprenticeship, it has designed a preapprenticeship programme.


The majority of pathway plans provide a thorough record of the social care
chronologies of care leavers and the range of interventions put in place to
support them. Social workers use the plans effectively to assess each care
leavers capacity to become more independent, particularly in housing and
financial matters. In a minority of plans, social workers set targets that are too
general and open ended to drive measurable progress.


All care leavers register with doctors and dentists, whose contact details are
included in pathway plans and in the health information packs that they
receive when they formally become care leavers. The majority of care leavers
receive an annual health check, and actions to improve their health are
followed up by the small team of children looked after nurses. However, a lack
of capacity within the team has resulted in the slow implementation of plans


to analyse the unmet health needs of care leavers to inform the
commissioning of services, and in the withdrawal of drop-in sessions.

Care leavers have insufficient access to emotional and mental health services.
Social workers and teachers working with care leavers report that the
thresholds to access mental health services are too high, and the length of
time it takes to receive a service after referral is too long. The council
instigated a review of the current strategy for childrens and young peoples
emotional and mental health last year and is still awaiting a response from the
clinical commissioning group. (Recommendation)


Care leavers have a good understanding of their legal entitlements. They
make use of the grants available to furnish their tenancies and they are aware
of the continuing financial bursaries that can support them in further and
higher education. As a result, there are currently 21 care leavers studying for
degrees.


Senior managers ensure that their care leavers are aware of how proud they
are about their achievements and progress by hosting annual awards
ceremonies in prestigious venues. They listen attentively to the views of care
leavers, for example by responding to their requests for financial support to
obtain subsidised passes into local leisure and sports facilities.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
The senior leadership team and elected members are committed to
transformational, long-term change and service improvement for childrens social
care in Newcastle. There is strong political support to steer a realistic course
through this process. The senior management team across childrens social care
and education have been strengthened in the last 18 months. Early years and
preventative services have been combined to better target efforts on the most
vulnerable families, and childrens outcomes are improving, for example by
increased school attendance, safer home environments and healthy families. There
is a highly effective response to sexual exploitation, and evidence of some
outstanding practice.
The senior team has invested in evidence-based practice so that social workers can
work more effectively to tackle the scale and impact of neglect in the city. Early
help services and long-term social work have been restructured. There has been a
significant improvement in educational outcomes for children who are looked after.
Care leavers are particularly well supported to achieve independence and live in
good-quality accommodation.
Highly effective workforce planning and a strong focus on learning and
development for staff at all levels, as well as reduced caseloads, have resulted in
high retention rates and a reduction in the use of agency staff. Vacancies and
sickness rates are among the lowest in the region. A strengthened performance
management culture and a more rigorous focus on quality assurance mean that
senior managers now know the strengths and weakness of their service very well.
Inspectors identified very few areas for improvement where action plans were not
already being implemented and that had not already been identified by senior
managers. While some progress can be seen, securing consistently good social
work practice will take longer to achieve.
The recent development of a number of performance panels is providing senior
managers with better oversight of decisions for children who become looked after.
These panels are leading to more timely permanence planning for some children,
particularly through adoption. However, it will take some time to see more positive
results in instances securing early permanence for children where there has been
previous drift and delay, and in instances of those children who become looked
after in an emergency and where previous interventions have not been
preventative or robust enough. Staff at all levels receive regular supervision,
although not all records are able to show how managers are supporting and
challenging social work practice. Similarly, where IROs are scrutinising childrens
plans, evidence of their challenge and impact is not well recorded and could be
stronger.


Inspection findings

In 2015, senior managers identified that too many children in the city had
experienced harm due to neglect. The wish of the senior team to better
understand neglect and the needs and characteristics of families in which
neglect occurs led directly to innovation and investment in evidence-based
practice. In 2016, the council led an ambitious service transformation to
redesign long-term social work in the city, which was intended to effect
change in families. Through family insights (funded through the DfE
Innovation Programme), a new unit-based model of social work has been
implemented. Staff have responded positively to the transformation
programme. The chosen model of social work practice is intended to support
staff to think and respond more holistically to childrens and familys needs. It
is too early in the implementation for inspectors to identify that this has led to
wholescale, improved outcomes for all children.


The CEO is very impactful and has demonstrated strong leadership, with
effective oversight and accountability for Newcastles services to children.
Since coming into post in 2015, the CEO has brought together childrens and
adults social care into one councils people directorate. There is a
determination to support children through their life courses. The senior
leadership team, led effectively by the director of people, together with
elected members, is appropriately focused on transformational, long-term
change and improving childrens outcomes. There is strong political support to
steer a realistic course through this process, and effective challenge and
oversight through scrutiny arrangements. The lead member for children is
highly committed and ensures that senior leaders are held to account and can
evidence improvements in childrens outcomes.


In 2015, the director of people restructured the senior management team.
Weak management oversight and a lack of challenge regarding the quality of
social work practice and performance shortfalls were resulting in children
receiving inconsistent services. Some children were experiencing delay in their
needs being assessed, and managers had not responded quickly enough to
address them.


Leaders and managers now understand the strengths and weakness of their
services well and have a commitment to improving childrens outcomes. A
much stronger focus on performance management has demonstrated
sustained improvement in meeting the councils target for securing compliance
across the service. Very few areas of improvement were identified that were
not already known by senior managers and where action plans were not
already in place. However, inspectors found that not all action plans are
leading consistently to improved practice. For example, a recent independent
review of contact, referral and assessment arrangements, in January 2017,
identified a number of practice weaknesses: in particular, poor-quality
screening of information to inform the response to contacts to social care. The
review found a lack of robust management oversight, with particular regard to


recording the rationale for the decision made. Despite a comprehensive action
plan to address these issues, and training taking place at the time of the
inspection, some of these weaknesses in practice were still evident at the time
of the inspection, as it was too soon to see the full impact of this action.

The quality assurance framework has been strengthened, and compliance with
statutory requirements is firmly established across the service. Clear plans
linked to training are being implemented to improve the quality of social work
practice. Senior managers and frontline staff have access to good-quality,
robust and timely performance management information. A strong focus on
performance management has enabled sustained and continuous
improvement in meeting targets for securing compliance across the service.


Regular supervision takes place at all levels. Group supervision delivered by
consultant social workers is provided in addition to formal supervision in the
social work units. Despite this good performance, records of supervision do
not show well enough how social workers are being supported to reflect on
their practice. Supervision records at all levels do not show what happens
during supervision, what difference it makes for practitioners and how
effective it is in relation to achieving better outcomes for children and their
families. Similarly, while IRO scrutiny of childrens plans is in evidence, the
impact of IRO challenge is not consistently seen in plans for all children.


The recent development of a number of performance panels is providing
senior managers with better oversight of decisions and of the allocation and
need for resources. While this is evidence of progress, it is not yet leading to
improvement in the quality and timeliness of decisions for all children, as
these processes are not yet fully embedded, particularly around planning for
early permanence and pre-proceedings work.


Long-term coherent, strategic planning and financial commitment are ensuring
sustainability in service provision and maintaining a focus on improving a
shared ambition for children across the city. Effective and accountable
arrangements for the oversight of the NSCB mean that partners work together
very effectively to safeguard children and young people. The political
commitment to ensure that this is a priority across key partner agencies is
demonstrated through the leader of the council chairing the Well-being for Life
Board. This is ensuring that the Newcastle future needs assessment (NFNA) is
focused on the needs of local children and their families and is aligned with
the overall council plan.


Workforce planning is highly effective. The principal social worker adds value
by driving forward a workforce strategy that is inextricably seen as the key
element in improving outcomes for children and their families. Consequently,
there has been a high level of investment and a strong focus on learning and
development for staff at all levels. This has resulted in high retention rates
and a reduction in the use of agency social workers, which has been sustained
in recent years. Vacancies and sickness rates are among the lowest in the


region. There is a commitment to providing high-quality placements for social
work students through traditional routes, Step Up and Frontline. Highly
effective partnerships with regional local authorities and universities have
resulted in 27 social workers securing permanent positions following their
student placement and assessed year in employment (ASYE) in the past two
years. Staff at all levels are highly committed to their work, and those spoken
to during the inspection told inspectors that they are proud to work in
Newcastle.

There is a well-coordinated and easily accessible early help offer. Early years
and preventative services have been aligned to better target efforts on the
most vulnerable families in the city. A continued effort to strengthen this offer
through aligning public health services has recently been achieved. The launch
of a new model of early help assessment and planning has seen a 16%
increase in the number of children being supported through early help plans in
the last six months, with 64% of children achieving improved outcomes. In
early years, Newcastle is now above the national average for good level of
development. Children who are looked after do well at school and attend
regularly, and their educational achievements and progress are effectively
supported by the virtual school.


A well-informed commissioning strategy uses a broad range of information to
identify the needs of children, young people and families across the city.
Senior managers recognise that there are insufficient placements available
locally for children who have more complex needs, and work is under way to
develop more provision locally, but this is not yet in place. Good
commissioning arrangements are underpinned by strong partnership
arrangements and good consultation with stakeholders, providers and
voluntary organisations. All contracts meet stringent safeguarding standards
and they are subject to ongoing scrutiny to ensure that high-quality services
are provided. However, care leavers and children looked after have insufficient
access to specialist emotional and mental health services, and so far the
council has been too slow to respond. (Recommendation)


There is some very early evidence that children are experiencing more timely
and targeted interventions. However, it is clear that there are high number of
long-standing cases where some children have remained on child in need and
child protection plans due to parents inability to achieve and sustain change.
This has meant that earlier interventions have not improved the circumstances
of some children, and a small number of children continue to become looked
after in an emergency due to crisis. Not only has this impacted negatively on
childrens experiences, but it has placed increasing pressure on the councils
ability to provide a range of suitable local placements in an emergency.


Outstanding work by the council and its partners, in particular Northumbria
police, to identify and respond to sexual exploitation and human trafficking
has resulted in a high number of convictions of perpetrators. Highly effective
intelligence-led disruption and prevention strategies are making children,


young people and vulnerable adults in the city safer. Considerable emphasis
has been placed on the collection and sharing of information with partner
agencies, resulting in a sophisticated understanding of the extent of sexual
exploitation in Newcastle and the surrounding areas.

Well-planned training and awareness-raising programmes across a range of
partners constantly take place. Knowledge about how to identify risk and
respond to protect children is comprehensively disseminated across all
agencies, including the voluntary sector. Awareness raising with the business
community is impressive and has been a vital element in tackling sexual
exploitation, and many children have been safeguarded through this
approach. Extensive assertive outreach is taking place to identify vulnerable
children and undertake preventative work. Targeted awareness raising and
positive engagement with minority ethnic communities on the issues of sexual
exploitation is ensuring a focus on under-reporting in these communities and
raising awareness. Wrap-around services provided by a high number of
agencies to assist children to recover and move forward with their lives are
outstanding. At the core of this practice is targeted work to promote childrens
self-esteem and self-confidence in order to reduce future risk and support
recovery.


Newcastle children have experienced sustained long-term placement stability
for a number of years. The council has well-established effective relationships
with the local family justice board and Cafcass, and this is ensuring that
children benefit from efficient and effective progression through legal
proceedings, with court timescales currently standing at 27 weeks. This is
among the best performance locally. Once a plan for adoption is agreed and a
placement order granted, the majority of children do not wait to be matched
with adopters. Services for care leavers are good. Strong multi-agency
partnerships have significantly improved outcomes in education, employment
and training. The range of accommodation available to care leavers is very
good.


The corporate parenting advisory committee is chaired by an experienced and
committed lead member who takes a keen interest in the experiences of
children looked after and care leavers. While the panel is able to evidence
where it has championed the needs and rights of children looked after and
care leavers, it has not been sufficiently curious or challenging in relation to
the time that children and young people wait to access support for their
emotional and mental health needs or young peoples transitions into adult
services.


Service planning and delivery take account of the views of children, their
parents and carers. Children who are looked after are regularly involved in the
recruitment of staff and the training of foster carers and elected members.
Corporately, SCRs and complaints are managed well and senior leaders are
keen to use learning to improve services to children. However, operationally
the voices of children are not heard as well as they could be. While an


advocacy offer is available, children are not supported well enough by their
social workers or by their IROs to access this service.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good

Executive summary
Newcastle Safeguarding Children Board (NSCB) functions effectively and meets its
statutory requirements. It is supported by constructive working relationships
between senior partnership managers, a clear alignment of strategic priorities and
effective political overview.
Strong governance arrangements and efficient board processes support productive
multi-agency challenge, oversight and effective delivery of the Boards priorities
and business plan.
The analysis and evaluation of performance through a thorough and focused multiagency data set and multi- and single-agency social care auditing is a particular
strength. This offers a broad oversight of the quality of practice across all areas of
safeguarding responsibility, and effectively identifies and supports areas for
improvement. The Board has been highly influential in the development and
oversight of effective multi-agency practice. The responses to sexual exploitation
and human trafficking are particularly impressive, and the identification of neglect
as a Board priority has ensured consistent focus and practice development in this
work. The Board has played a key role in developing partnership working in
relation to female genital mutilation and violent extremism. These developments
have been supported effectively by the voluntary sector.
The Board has ensured multi-agency engagement in the ongoing oversight and
development of consistent application of thresholds, and there are firm plans in
place to continue to embed this across partner agencies.
The Board is a learning organisation, effectively identifying and disseminating
learning from case reviews. The multi-agency training programme is delivered in
line with board priorities and is responsive to emerging needs. Wider learning is
constructively disseminated to frontline practitioners through a range of methods.
The Board uses existing forums and processes to ensure that the views of children
inform discrete areas of work, although these do not inform all areas of Board
activity. The recent working agreement between the NSCB and the youth council
further develops this, but is not yet sufficiently embedded to evidence impact.


Recommendations
 Ensure that the views of children consistently and effectively inform Board
activity and developments.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

Strong governance arrangements ensure that NSCB is effectively meeting its
statutory responsibilities. The Boards business plan has clear priorities
identified through effective performance monitoring and self-evaluation. The
delivery of the business plan is well supported by clear, prioritised and
monitored action planning.


Constructive working relationships between senior partnership managers, and
the clear alignment of strategic boards and priorities, with the addition of a
committed political overview, ensure that there is effective strategic
prioritisation and multi-agency ownership of safeguarding work in Newcastle.


Effective board functioning is supported by efficient Board processes, and
multi-agency commitment to Board activity is evident. The independent chair
has been instrumental in developing focus and challenge by the Board. Timely
monitoring of areas of challenge is well supported by a challenge log. The
chairs of the Board committees are from a range of partner agencies, further
enhancing the multi-agency contribution to safeguarding work. Lay members
have played a key part in the Boards work, particularly informing about and
linking with local communities.


Engagement with schools has been constructively developed and utilised.
Strong relationships with the voluntary sector have ensured both challenge
and the use of specialist knowledge to support safeguarding practice
developments. The Board does use existing forums and engagement
processes with children to inform some discrete areas of development, and
has recently engaged in a working agreement with the Newcastle youth
council. However, these are not sufficiently comprehensive or developed to
ensure that the views of children are central to all key areas of Board activity.
(Recommendation)


The effective use and analysis of a thorough and evolving multi-agency data
set, to ensure oversight and prioritisation of safeguarding activity, is
impressive. This is a particular strength for the Board. Areas for more detailed
and qualitative investigation are identified, and this effectively supports
subsequent practice improvement.


Thorough multi-agency auditing with a well-developed methodology and clear
dissemination of learning focus on key points in the childs journey, and
responds to Board priorities and emerging needs. Allied to learning from single


agency social care audits, this ensures that the Board has a qualitative
oversight of frontline practice, with a focus on, and driving areas for, practice
improvement.

Neglect has been identified as a Board priority and has been key in driving
partnership focus and development in this area. The neglect strategy and
progress of the action plan are subject to regular Board review, including the
impact of specific projects to address neglect. Bespoke training and best
practice events have disseminated learning to frontline practitioners, and
thematic auditing ensures an ongoing focus on the quality of frontline
practice.


The Board has ensured that there is active multi-agency involvement in
improving the consistent application and understanding of thresholds. Plans
are in place to embed this further. There was multi-agency engagement in the
revision and dissemination of the thresholds guidance and continuum of help
and support framework, and the weekly social care audits of thresholds are
supported by monthly multi-agency auditing. Specific targeted work arising
from this auditing has included improving the quality of written referrals.


Section 11 and section 175 audits provide an appropriate overview of multiagency safeguarding. The current audit process is expanding the breadth and
depth of practice. The previous audits in 2015 assured the safeguarding
practice of the required agencies and schools. Learning from that audit
process has resulted in the current use of an online tool with a much wider
range of agencies and greater depth of scrutiny with specific amendments for
schools. The current audit is being viewed as an ongoing process by the
NSCB, and sampling of current audit returns to date has evidenced immediate
Board responses to support improvement of safeguarding practice in a
responding agency.


Clear and detailed reports are presented to the Board to supplement
performance data analysis and auditing where appropriate or where those
areas are not covered by performance activity. This ensures that the Board is
fully sighted on, and can assure itself of, all areas for which it has
safeguarding responsibility. These include the management of allegations
against professionals, private fostering and children in custody.


Cases from which there may be learning and which may meet the criteria for
SCR are identified effectively, and timely decisions are made in line with
statutory requirements. Reviewing methods, using creative approaches, are
clearly considered to maximise learning specific to the case, including
immediate learning where possible. Subsequent learning is effectively
disseminated through a variety of methods. Clear actions arising from reviews
are regularly monitored to ensure timely progress. A recently introduced
impact assessment thoroughly evaluates effectiveness at the point that
completion of the case review action plan is signed off by the Board.



The multi-agency training programme is delivered in line with Board priorities
and is responsive to emerging needs. A range of methods are used to deliver
and evaluate training. Learning from practice events is also utilised to gain
frontline practitioner views of and suggestions for the Board in that practice
area. There are effective links with other Board committees, ensuring that
training is delivered and amended in line with case review and audit findings.
There are specific examples where the impact of training on frontline practice
has been evaluated through audit.


The child death overview panel (CDOP) benefits from an independent chair
and demonstrates a learning approach to improving its function and
effectiveness. Information and data is used effectively to identify and act on
areas for learning and development. Priorities identified from the annual
report are being progressed, and examples of positive impact include
reduction in maternal smoking rates, following targeted intervention, and
increased awareness of safe sleeping.


Coordinated approaches between the NSCB and the adult safeguarding board
(NSAB) have effectively supported and overseen the development of
outstanding multi-agency practice in responding to sexual exploitation and
human trafficking.


Responding to female genital mutilation has been identified as a Board priority
and the female genital mutilation strategy and action plan has underpinned
effective awareness raising, the development and implementation of clear
pathways, timely responses to potential risk and ongoing refinement of those
service responses. The development of the work has been enhanced by the
effective engagement with local voluntary groups.


The multi-agency Prevent duty group has overseen the effective development
of understanding risk from and responses to violent extremism. External
funding has been agreed to further enhance links with and understanding of
the needs of local communities, and the work has also benefited from
coordination with voluntary groups.


Policies and procedures are regularly updated to reflect local and national
developments, and are in line with current statutory requirements. The
accessible online procedures also contain practice guidance, all of which are
known to and used by frontline staff.


NSCB is a learning organisation that reflects on its effectiveness and evolves
its approaches to discharging its functions. The annual report, in conjunction
with the annual learning from practice report, effectively evidences the range
of Board activity with a focus on priority areas and analyses the effectiveness
of key areas of safeguarding practice and learning.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the differences that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Rachel Holden
Deputy lead inspector: Tracey Metcalfe
Team inspectors: Nicola Bennett, Caroline Walsh, Fiona Millns, Graham Reiter,
Charles Searle, Matthew Reed
Senior data analyst: Judith Swindell
Quality assurance manager: Sarah Urding


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


