London Borough of Newham
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board
Inspection date: 3 June 2014  25 June 2014
Report published: 8 August 2014
The overall judgement is that childrens service requires
improvement.
The authority is not yet delivering good protection, help or care for children, young
people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Good


Good


Requires
improvement

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is
good.
The LSCB coordinates the activity of statutory partners and has mechanisms to
monitor the effectiveness of local arrangements.


Contents
Section 1: The local authority - Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB



Section 1: The local authority - Summary of findings
Childrens services in Newham requires improvement because:

The local authority and its partners have made some, but not all, of the
improvements recommended in the November 2011 inspection when Ofsted
found that safeguarding services and services for looked after children in
Newham were adequate.


Chronologies recorded on the local authoritys electronic system do not include
important events in childrens lives before the children were referred to
childrens social care. Full histories are not completed routinely unless the case
is in court.


Staff in the Triage service (the part of the local authority that people first
contact when they are worried about children or think they may need help from
a social worker) are very busy. Sometimes there are delays in less urgent
requests being passed to a manager to make a decision, or in letting agencies
know what actions have been taken. Staff in the Assessment service have too
much work to do. This means social workers do not always do everything they
need to do at the right time or at a pace that suits children. Managers knew
about the problems before this inspection started and had already made
arrangements for additional temporary staff that should reduce workloads to a
more manageable level.


At the moment, agencies refer too many children to the Local Authority whose
problems are at an early stage and who could be better helped elsewhere. This
means that children and their families are asked to participate in social work
assessments that are not necessary. This delays them being referred to the
right place to get help and adds to the workloads of social workers.


Child in need meetings for children who do not need a child protection plan but
still have serious problems are not recorded well. They do not focus enough on
whether what is being done is helping children.


Many children experience too many changes of social worker. This makes it
difficult for children to get to know their social worker well. Sometimes changes
of worker lead to delays in plans being carried out.


While operational managers check that work has been done within timescales
and to a sufficient standard, they do not always focus enough on the quality of
the work and the difference it has made for children.


When children are unable to live with their families and start to be looked after
by the local authority, there are not enough placements available in and around
Newham. As a result, some children do not see as much of their family and
friends as they would like and a minority have to change school.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
The inspection did not find any areas for priority and immediate action
Areas for improvement

Evaluate with partners the extent to which early help for children reduces the
need for statutory services, and use the evaluation to inform service
development.

being referred to childrens social care.
decision-making effectively.
undertaken.
experiences and, to inform the next steps, consider whether actions taken are
having a positive impact.
analysis of triggers and patterns to reduce the risk of re-occurrence. The
analysis should include looked after children who go missing for short periods
from their placements.
children when they start to be looked after.
experience a wider range of training, apprenticeships and employment.
workforce is sufficiently stable and skilled to provide children and their families
with services of consistently good quality.
experience and ability.


The local authority has the following strengths:
detailed and realistic understanding of the strengths and areas of
development for the service and for wider partnership arrangements.
ensure that the plans for vulnerable groups are robust. These include those
children at risk of child sexual exploitation, missing, involved in gangs, at risk
of offending and who live in households where there is domestic violence.
proceedings. As a result, some parents are able to make the positive
changes required, and delay in making permanent plans for those children
who need them is avoided.
quality and is a significant strength. As a result, many children achieve as
well as or better than expected at school and are able to access further and
higher education.
with professionals who support them, including social workers, outreach
workers, foster carers and Independent Reviewing Officers (IRO).
their birth families and who need a permanent alternative home. When
adoption is not appropriate or likely, other types of permanence are
rigorously pursued.
with effective support.
Childrens Trust, Newham Safeguarding Childrens Board (NSCB) and the
Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG), which ensures that services for children
are planned and developed in close partnership. It is acknowledged by the
NSCB Chair that the local authority has been a driving force in strengthening
the effectiveness of these partnerships.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after, and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of social work and the difference adults make to
the lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff worked with families and each other, and discussed the
effectiveness of the help and care given to children and young people. Wherever
possible, they talked to children, young people and their families. In addition, the
inspectors tried to understand what the local authority knows about how well it is
doing and what difference it makes for the people it is trying to help, protect and
look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Shirley Bailey
Team inspectors: Pauline Turner, Pietro Battista, Brendan Parkinson, Christine
Williams, Sara Goodinge and Carmen Rodney.


Information about this local authority area1
Children living in this area
 Approximately 77,828 children and young people under the age of 18 live in
Newham. This is 25% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 33% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 29% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 41% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 82% of
all children living in the area, compared with 22% in England as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are Asian/Asian British (45%) and Black/Black British (25%)
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an
additional language:
 in primary schools is 75% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 68% (the national average is 14%).
 The number of live births has more than doubled in the last 10 years and
Child protection in this area
 At 3 June 2014, assessment had identified 3,389 children as being formally
in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from 3,691 at 31
March 2013.
 At 3 June 2014, 239 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 247 at 31 March 2013.
 At 3 June 2014, 25 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from 23 at 31 March 2013.
Children looked after in this area
 At 3 June 2014, 416 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 52 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 406 (51 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2013. Of this number:2


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where these were available.
The categories below may overlap.


authority area
authority area
area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 28 adoptions
returned to be looked after
to independent living
living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home. This is a short breaks unit
for disabled children. It was judged as adequate at its last full inspection in
April 2013 and was making inadequate progress in an interim inspection in
October 2013.
 The previous inspection of Newhams safeguarding services and services for
looked after children was in November 2011. The local authority was judged
to be adequate for both its safeguarding services and its services for looked
after children.
 The most recent inspection of Newhams adoption service was in October
 The previous inspection of Newhams fostering service was in December
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since December 2013.
 The Chair of the LSCB has been in post since October 2012.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
Key Judgement
The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Inspection Grade
Requires improvement

this inspection.
Newhams network of childrens centres and the Families First service. Some of
this help is of good quality and parents regard it positively. However,
comprehensive and well-coordinated early help is not yet available. This means
that the local authority cannot be confident that children receive the early help
they need to prevent difficulties continuing or getting worse.
This service undertakes prompt and intensive work with families to meet
identified needs. Although the work is sensitive to the childs culture, the
planning of the work does not always identify clear, measureable outcomes. As
a result, it is not always clear if the work leads to an improvement in the childs
situation.
others but the authority has not yet fully evaluated their effectiveness. High
numbers of children continue to be referred to childrens social care services.
These children do not have safeguarding needs but, rather, needs related to a
wider range of social issues. Childrens social care responds well to these
referrals. Staff in Triage undertake comprehensive checks before passing the
work to social workers who complete assessments so that targeted early help
can be put in place. It means, however, that many children are being subject to
unnecessary statutory assessment processes. This delays the provision of help
at a more suitable level; it also reduces the capacity of childrens social care to
focus on its core safeguarding functions.
with childrens social care. The children continue to receive support from
Families First, affording them continuity and enhanced support. Weekly
meetings between the Families First service and childrens social care result in a
shared understanding of thresholds and strong arrangements for the transfer of
children and their families between the two services.
and referred promptly to childrens social care by a range of partner agencies.
Childrens social care acts swiftly to ensure that they are protected. While
discussions about the child protection strategy are held routinely with the
police, the records are not always comprehensive or do not always show the


rationale for decisions. They do not always include the views of, or provide for
consultation with, other relevant professionals. The local authority has recently
begun work with partners to improve this aspect of joint working.
necessary arrangements to protect children. However, inconsistencies in how
information is held on a childs file mean that EDT staff sometimes spend too
much time looking for key information. For example, poor record-keeping about
children who go missing means that EDT cannot quickly establish the risks to
young people to inform decision-making.
and childrens social care is variable. Operational managers do not challenge
inconsistent practice sufficiently. Good-quality assessments identify risks and
protective factors succinctly. They are effective in considering historical
information, childrens identity and their cultural needs, and are informed by
information from professionals, children and families. Other assessments are
weaker: they are overly descriptive, with limited analysis that does not clearly
articulate risks to, or concerns about, children as a result of parental behaviour.
Further, weaker assessments do not seek or use childrens views consistently.
Many cases do not have chronologies that are sufficiently comprehensive to
inform assessments and planning effectively.
parents have no recourse to public funds are well considered through
assessment. These assessments demonstrate a good understanding and
consideration of families cultural needs. Where no safeguarding issues are
identified, cases are appropriately transferred to a specialist worker who
continues to support these families to resolve their legal and financial status.
timely and of good quality, demonstrating effective multi-agency working with
health professionals. Assessments give appropriate attention to safeguarding
disabled children.
have been identified. Initial plans usually focus effectively on outcomes and
show good planning to improve the childs situation. For many children who are
subject to child protection planning, these plans mean that risks are reduced
and that escalation is timely if the childrens circumstances do not improve.
review previous plans well, analyse progress and consider if the actions being
taken are reducing risks sufficiently.
and are well attended by partner professionals. In very many cases, a parent
will also attend. However, in the main, these meetings evaluate the progress of
tasks and rarely consider explicitly whether risk is reducing as a result of the


multi-agency support offered to the family or what further actions might be
required to promote the childs safety.
them is often less robust. Visits are less frequent and direct work with them to
understand their experiences is limited. Meetings to coordinate and review their
support do not take place as regularly as they do for children with child
protection plans, and the cases are overseen less robustly. This means that, in
some cases, support in a crisis is reactive rather than planned; in others, it can
lead to drift. However, inspectors also saw examples of families who were
receiving effective multi-agency support that prevented problems from
escalating and empowered parents to make safer choices for themselves and
their children.
substance misuse. While professionals that support parents do not often attend
multi-agency meetings, they routinely share relevant information with social
workers about parents progress and the impact of their substance misuse on
their parenting ability. The information is used to inform childrens plans.
are immediately considered and appropriate action is taken. In a small number
of the cases seen, insufficient attention was given to achieving sustainable,
long-term support for the children, after the immediate crisis had been
resolved.
indicates that 80% of police notifications to the local authority are related to
domestic abuse, 20% of child protection cases show it as a primary concern
and it features in 36% of cases. Families affected by domestic abuse are
referred to a range of services and victims receive good provision. Consultant
clinicians, based within teams, take good account of the experiences of the
children in these families. This leads to more effective, direct and purposeful
work with them and a focus on helping them to communicate their experiences
and increase their resilience.
social workers. Social Workers visit children routinely in their own home and
spend meaningful time with them alone. However, multiple changes in social
workers for some children mean that their experiences are less well
understood. For example, performance information shows that for the period
October to December 2013, of children receiving services as a child in need,
at 16%, this is a large number of children. In the same period, of children who
were subject to a child protection plan, 16% had experienced three or more
changes of worker  a reduction from the previous quarter of 32%.
authority provides almost all of them with appropriate accommodation and they


become looked after children. The Intensive Youth Intervention Team supports
a very small number of young people who do not wish to become looked after.
Young people have their legal rights clearly explained to them.
not always up to date. Sometimes when cases are closed, significant gaps
remain in the information. This means that, if problems re-emerge later, there
is the potential for further work with families to be compromised.
Protection arrangements (MAPPA) focus well on the safeguarding and welfare
needs of children. Attendance at these meetings is good and relevant
professionals from across the partnership prepare well for them. This enables
information to be shared effectively across agencies. Sufficiently regular
meetings ensure that information-sharing is timely and purposeful. Action plans
are clear, with good attention given to holding professionals to account for any
activity that has been allocated to them.
coordinating plans for young people who are vulnerable to, or have
experienced, sexual exploitation. It also provides an opportunity for senior
managers scrutiny of the plans. The meeting is well chaired, with clear
direction and effective planning.
about gang activity and missing children. Strategic issues include, for example,
the need for targeted support for schools where there is higher incidence of
gang activity. As a result of partnership working, additional support is identified
for individual children and plans are strengthened. The Multi-Agency Risk and
Vulnerability Panel complements the MASE meeting to ensure that young
people at risk of offending are well supported.
missing from home. However, social work practice and management oversight
in responding to such episodes are not always robust. While children are seen
on their return, these visits do not always sufficiently analyse the triggers for
why young people went missing or provide sufficient documentary evidence to
analyse patterns and develop action plans to reduce the risk of future missing
episodes. The risks for looked after children who are missing from their
placements for short periods are not always well considered.
Agency, ensures that all parties are well informed when a child is missing from
education. The local authority maintains a comprehensive record of children
and young people who are known to be educated at home. Safeguarding is
given a high priority and, when parents choose to educate their children at
home, the local authority makes its procedures clear from the beginning.
Regular monitoring and networking with other local authorities and
organisations that support parents and families underpin the work.


from a very low base. This is the result of a dedicated service and awareness
raising by social workers and managers. Despite this, opportunities for young
people to attend meetings about plans for them or to be represented by an
advocate if they choose not to attend are not yet consistent.
appropriate. Currently, private fostering arrangements support 25 children.
They are visited within the statutory timescales, are routinely spoken to and
their views about the arrangements are recorded. Until very recently, these
children were visited by whoever was on duty; however, they are now
supported by a specialist social worker. This offers improved consistency for
them and their carers.
with their private foster carers through supporting court applications for
residence and special guardianship orders. A twice-yearly private fostering
panel, chaired by a senior manager, provides a good level of management
scrutiny. The panel reviews and approves all existing private fostering
arrangements.
and notified to the local authority recently. Notifications have increased from a
low point of seven in 201213, with 14 notifications of potential arrangements
across 201314, of which only one was a private fostering arrangement. To
date, one new assessment has started in 201415. Newhams performance,
while low compared to national figures, is in line with the rest of London. The
NSCB is aware of this and has undertaken extensive steps to raise the profile of
privately fostered children, but this work has not yet increased the number of
notifications.
responding to allegations of abuse or the mistreatment of children and young
people by professionals and carers are effective. In almost all cases, allegations
are responded to swiftly, with timely initial meetings. Records of the meetings
are clear and well recorded, and the support needs of children and the alleged
perpetrator are considered effectively while investigations are underway. Cases
are reviewed routinely and challenge from the LADO minimises delays in
reaching a conclusion. The LADO ensures that all actions are completed,
including referral, in substantiated cases, to the relevant professional governing
bodies and the Disclosure and Barring Scheme (DBS). The LADO produces an
annual report, shared with the NSCB. A sub-group of the NSCB works to raise
awareness of the LADOs role and the responsibilities of those working with
children, particularly within faith organisations, to act appropriately when
concerns arise. Targeted awareness-raising is undertaken with organisations
that come to the attention of the LADO.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Key judgement
The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Judgement grade
Requires improvement

home who might otherwise be looked after. Inspectors did not see any cases
where children had become looked after unnecessarily when they had
entered care through a social work assessment. However, a significant
number of children become looked after in urgent, unforeseen
circumstances. In some of these cases, limited consideration is given to
other options, such as the childs extended family.
after require further care; only 17 (4%) children of those currently looked
after had had a previous episode of care. This indicates that children who
return home are likely to be receiving sufficient support to prevent their reentry to care.
all the circumstances and experiences of the child, they are risk-based and
sufficient for decisions to be based on them. They show clearly the nature
and type of placements required. However, these assessments are rarely
updated as childrens and families circumstances change, when care plans
are monitored and reviewed. The broader single assessment is therefore not
being well maintained as a continuing, holistic view of strengths, needs and
risks. It does not support reflection on what is the best plan for the child.
who are in need of local authority care. The threshold of care panel
undertakes an important role in considering whether children need to
become looked after.
to be made for childrens care. Evidence of managers driving decisionmaking and exercising oversight is limited and it has not always been fully
recorded. However, this is improving and examples exist of thorough,
focused work. Recording generally is up to date, although it often does not
fully detail the extent of work undertaken to support looked after children.
through statutory interventions benefit strongly from legal and social care
services working constructively within the Public Law Outline (PLO). This is
well supported by a dedicated manager for court cases. The work
undertaken at all stages is focused and effective. As a result, there have


been sustained improvements in reducing timescales in court proceedings.
The time taken for proceedings has reduced from 67 weeks in mid-2013 to
continued improvement, with a current average of 39 weeks. Cases still in
proceedings are expected to conclude at 30 weeks on average. While this is
still longer than the target of 26 weeks, it shows good progress from the
position a year ago. This has been achieved through working actively in
partnership with the courts, and with the Children and Family Court Advisory
and Support Service (Cafcass), both on individual cases and strategically.
workers and seen alone. In the majority of cases seen by inspectors,
including individuals within large families, children are helped to express how
they are feeling; this is used to inform plans. The proportion of children who
waited longer than eight weeks for a social workers visit is low (23 children,
or 5.5%). Children placed some distance away from the local authority area
who spoke to inspectors confirmed that they see their social worker, as well
as their IRO, and see the relationship as helpful, informative and
constructive.
worker if they have a number of changes of social worker: 26% of looked
after children have experienced three or more changes.
with children to prepare them for their future, for example, adoption. The
majority of looked after children who would benefit from life story work
receive it, and inspectors saw examples of good-quality work in this area. For
a minority, however, such work is not completed in a timely manner.
do not always capture their views sufficiently or profile them. IROs provide
support for and challenge to agencies, during and outside reviews, with a
number of concerns raised under the escalation arrangements. Almost half
of the cases raised under the escalation arrangements in 2013 related to
drift in implementing plans and undertaking actions that had been identified
as being needed. Managers responded readily to these concerns.
work. As a result, levels of stability for a large proportion of children are
high. Once a childs needs are identified, there is a clear, determined
commitment to finding a suitable match for the child, although the majority
of placements are away from the borough, family, friends and schools.
Children do not remain looked after where a safe return to their family is
likely. The local authority focuses efforts on pursuing a viable placement with
the childs extended family for those who become looked after. However, this
is not always reviewed if the child remains looked after for a lengthy period.


after children had not been updated within the past year. The initial plan
tended to be continued, whether it was successful or not. A small number of
children who enter care under the age of 10 continue to experience
uncertainty. Mostly, they have complex needs and they continue to be
looked after for several years without being provided with permanence.
They focus on the achievements and deficits within the plan and, in most
cases, manage to hold contributing agencies to account. Childrens health
and educational needs are well profiled, with 97% of looked after children
having had a health assessment within the previous year, 95% having up to
date immunisations, and 94% having had dental checks, although health
assessments are not always undertaken in a timely way.
children who are unable to return home or to their birth families and who
need a permanent alternative home. Figures for 201314 show 27 of 28
children with a Placement Order were placed within 12 months. For older
children coming into care, adoption is not automatically ruled out, but the
approach taken is to try to achieve stability and continuity for this group by
looking at long-term fostering, if it is not probable that an adoption
placement would be found. The number of SGO (special guardianship order)
arrangements being achieved in the past year has shown a significant,
positive increase from 12 in 201213 to 24 in 201314; seven of these were
made to foster carers, showing the authoritys increasingly persistent focus
on this as an option for children wherever possible.
in the number of foster carers, connected carers and adopters. Improved use
of success data enables the local authority to concentrate its energies on
activities which, in the past, have led to success in recruiting new families.
terms of both capacity and the range of skills needed, it cannot yet provide
for Newhams looked after children in terms of their ages, languages,
cultures, ethnicities, and the complexity of their needs. Although plans are
emerging to deal with this, the authority recognises that implementation is
still some way off. Just 28% of children in care are placed within the
borough at present. A further 42% are placed across 21 other London
boroughs, with 29% being placed outside London. The local authority makes
timely and suitable arrangements to meet the health and education needs of
children placed out of Newham, spot-purchasing services when necessary.
Children placed out of the area told inspectors they were happy in their
placements and they have regular contact with their social worker and their
families.
although there is not a sufficiently diverse range of carers available when


children are placed initially. Subsequent placements are more often planned
well, particularly in relation to the childs identity and culture. If a placement
is not a strong match, in most cases sufficient attention is paid to respecting
the childrens needs, wishes and values and those of their families. Within
this, the authority routinely prioritises and promotes the importance of the
childs relationships with siblings. Where children cannot live with their
brothers and sisters, contact is considered sufficiently, although the reviews
do not always give this a strong profile.
attachments are identified, the children remain with their carers.
Practitioners support attachment well when the plan is for an enduring
placement.
through direct purchase, according to need. No children were placed in
provision that was judged as inadequate and just three children had been
placed in provision identified as adequate. However, all these were stable
placements for these children.
and continues to do so. The local authority is aware of and takes account of
these changes in its planning, commissioning and procurement. In many
cases identifying the placement and preparing and introducing the child to it
is done carefully and sensitively. This contributes to the authoritys strong
and improving performance in achieving stability for children. A relatively low
proportion of the current looked after cohort have experienced three or more
placement changes (9.4%), and this figure is now below the national
average (11% in 2013). However, a much higher proportion of children
experience one or more changes of placement (26.9%).
There is a stronger focus on the raised expectations of carers, as well as on
increased support for tackling complex and often challenging behaviours. A
more direct consultation and advice service is planned for carers to help
them deal with these. Carers welcome the support the local authority
provides. It is not always clear, however, what delegated authority is
available or in place for carers. In practice, they exercise a major role in
supporting the placed childs education and social experiences.
to selecting the best schools for them. The attainment gap is closing with all
pupils nationally. Across Key Stages 2 and 4, the 2013 cohorts of looked
after children achieved well. This was despite their extremely challenging
pasts and the fact that an above-average proportion of them required
additional learning support. At Key Stage 2, over half of all looked after
children achieved the standard expected nationally in English, while two
thirds achieved similar levels in mathematics. Standards achieved in GCSE
examinations improved significantly, with 40% of all looked after children


obtaining five or more A* C grades, including English and mathematics;
achieved GCSE grade B as the average grade. Although most looked after
children placed out of the borough achieved well, those educated within the
borough obtained better results.
completed on time and the majority of them provide detailed accounts of the
progress of looked after children. However, these plans seldom include
specific targets that are linked to academic achievement or to planning to
accelerate progress. They do not have measureable success criteria and clear
timelines and milestones.
than 5% of the children have experienced two or more schools over the past
two years. Attendance is given a high priority and, overall, it was 90% in
permanent exclusions in the past year. There is a good focus on the needs of
children who are not on a full-time timetable. Of all looked after children,
The virtual school ensures that there is sufficient support and ambition for
this group of children.
placements for short periods as well as when they go missing from care.
Almost all (19 out of the 21) children with one or more missing episode are
placed outside of the area. Information and intelligence at the point the
problem arises are coordinated effectively, with evidence of initial
consideration of causes and risks, including whether exploitation may be a
feature. With those who go missing more frequently, the review of triggers,
patterns and protective behaviours to support the young person is limited.
vulnerable to bullying, or whose friends encourage them to make poor
choices, is effective.
emotional ill-health, difficulties with alcohol or misuse of other substances,
support is readily sourced within the area of the placement or, if close to
Newham, within the borough. Ten young people are identified as having a
substance misuse problem, down from 28 in 2012. Of those looked after and
receiving SDQ (strength and difficulty questionnaire) assessments, 42 of
them (22%) had high scores. Support is often sought from a Children and
Family Consultation Service (CFCS) practitioner to enable referrals to be
made and links to be achieved in a timely way. Within the borough, 98
looked after children or their carers are being supported by the CFCS, with
almost half of the cases being open for more than a year. Very few (8%) do
not take up the service.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is
good
their birth families and who need a permanent alternative home. Although
the number of adoption orders decreased slightly in 201314, permanence
through adoption and SGOs increased overall during the year. This included
groups of children who are harder to place, such as disabled children, those
who have complex needs and sibling groups with a wide age-range.
timeliness of the various stages of a childs journey to adoption. Although not
all areas had improved during that year, the three-year performance data
show that Newham is meeting the governments thresholds and is
performing better than the average for England.
remain good. Active parallel planning and good, regular information-sharing
between the adoption and fieldwork teams lead to the early notification of
children who may need an adoption placement. Together with an effective
system to track all individuals for whom adoption is being considered, this
has had a positive impact on children moving into an adoptive placement in a
timely way. As at 31 March 2014, 37 children were subject to placement
orders, of whom 22 were placed with prospective adopters.
through each stage of the process. Timeliness is also helped because good
working relationships with post-adoption workers are established before the
adoption order is granted, and support is provided from the point of the
placement.
of its demography and the local housing stock. The local authority uses a
range of strategies for finding families, in collaboration with key partners
such as the North East London Adoption Group and the British Association
for Adoption and Fostering (BAAF). Recruitment campaigns are targeted in
order to match the profile of the children for whom permanency is sought,
such as attending events in Black History month and targeting churches and
faith groups within the Black community, since the number of children from
an African heritage who are in need of adoption is growing. This work is
resulting in an increasing number of approved adopters from a wide range of
lifestyles and cultures. However, the pool of adopters does not yet fully
reflect the diverse needs and numbers of children waiting to be adopted.
register to ensure that as wide a search as possible is made to secure a
permanent family for them. Membership of the North East London


consortium offers a wider choice of placements and complements in-house,
family-finding activities.
of adopters and range of placements further, including concurrent
placements, an increase in fostering to adopt placements and further
targeted recruitment to secure permanence for the children at most risk of
not being matched with an adoptive family.
all adoptive families were approved in less than nine months from the
registration of interest to the date of the approval. The well-structured
process is receptive to working at a pace which suits individual adopters. All
initial enquiries receive a prompt, personal response. Potential adopters
regarded this early responsiveness highly. A sound, two-stage system for
recruiting, preparing and assessing potential adopters is well established. It
is thorough and challenging. Prospective adopters who look as though they
could meet the needs of a child for whom family-finding is in progress are
fast tracked. Using experienced, external assessors and a skilled,
knowledgeable, external facilitator for preparation courses increases
Newhams ability to be flexible and responsive to potential adopters.
parents, and a DVD made by Newham's birth mothers and grandmothers
group. Adopters told inspectors that they considered the assessment process
to be thought-provoking (particularly the input from birth parents), timely
and fair. They thought that, combined with the post-approval training to
which they have access, it prepares them well to meet the needs of the
children placed with them.
analysis. All of them are at least satisfactory and the majority of them are
good. Childrens placement reports are detailed and comprehensive. The
views of birth parents regarding the plans for adoption are sensitively
reported on, and particular attention is paid to attachments to brothers and
sisters and to childrens cultural needs.
adopters and the matching of children to families. Panels are well managed
and chaired. Panel members are suitably knowledgeable and well trained.
Timely input from legal and medical professionals is available for all panels.
This, together with the good-quality information from the reports, ensures
that the panel makes robust recommendations to the agency decision-maker
about matching.
assessment of adopters through a range of methods, such as obtaining
feedback from prospective adopters about their experience of the service.
Quarterly meetings between the independent chair of the panel and the


agency decision-maker identify any themes and put action plans in place.
Routine quality assurance of all PARs is robust; the panels and managers
regular scrutiny of the tracking sheet minimises any drift.
range of commissioned post-adoption support services. These services are
well received and are effective in supporting placements. An increasing
number of letterbox contact and direct contact arrangements are well
supported and effectively organised. Children, their adoptive families, and
birth relatives are properly informed about post-adoption support.
Unvalidated data show that 201314 has seen a dramatic increase in the
number of requests for adoption support assessments, from two to 52 in the
last year. While many of these are relatively simple contacts with other
agencies over specific issues, a number of them are longer term and more
complex.
grandfathers and the more established group for birth mothers and
grandmothers are both growing in membership. Feedback shows that the
groups are a source of valued support to their members.
months. This is because of the sound work undertaken throughout the
adoption process, including the provision of post-adoption support.

The graded judgement about the experiences and progress
of care leavers is that it is good
children are looked after. A well-managed transfer process, between the
looked after children team and the leaving care team, supports smooth
transition. This means that when young people transfer to the leaving care
service, their pathway plan has already been established and reviewed by
their IRO.
Inspectors saw examples of young people who had very complex needs
having comprehensive support plans that were effective in easing their
transition to adult services.
with their foster carer under a supported lodgings arrangement, continue
with their education and enjoy leisure activities through a commissioned
package of support, funded by a personal budget.
used has been developed in consultation with care leavers. Plans provide
good information on the young persons health, education, training and


accommodation needs. They include national insurance numbers, details of
financial entitlements, and information about complaints and advocacy. Most
young people confirmed that they receive copies of their plans and that the
plans are reviewed and updated regularly. Care leavers said that it often
takes a long time before they are provided with passports; these are
important for young people to confirm their identity.
Newham Virtual School for Looked After Children. For example, where
English is not their first language, Saturday classes and homework clubs
provide additional help for young people. This enables them to achieve
standards of English and mathematics to access foundation courses or higher
education.
encouraged and supported to continue with their education beyond 18. The
most recent published data, from March 2013, show that 10% of care
leavers who were looked after when they were 16 were still in education at
the age of 19. This strong performance is twice the England average for that
year and better than that of statistical neighbours (6%). The virtual school
creates ample opportunities for care leavers to experience higher education
through organised visits, including ambassadorial talks from previous care
leavers about their experiences. New links with local universities are being
developed to encourage more students to enter higher education.
training (EET) matches performance nationally but is slightly lower than that
of statistical neighbours. In 2013, 33% of care leavers were not in education,
employment or training (NEET), a figure comparable to that of statistical
neighbours and the England average (34%). The local authoritys
unvalidated data for 2014 now include care leavers up to the age of 21.
These data show improved performance on the 2013 figures for care leavers
in education, employment and training.
graduated in the last two years. This is a significant achievement, particularly
given the low levels of educational attainment of many young people when
they first become looked after. The local authority supports young people
with accommodation during the summer break, providing additional funding
to maintain the placement or supporting the young person to return to their
foster placement if possible. This contributes to the young peoples feelings
of security and enables them to complete their studies successfully.
university. However, although this is a positive feature, this route will not suit
everyone. The authority recognises the need to improve its performance in
supporting care leavers to access apprenticeships and employment.


with all of them. It continues to support young people who change their plan
or who do not succeed at the first attempt, such as young people who have
got into financial difficulties and require the local authority to fund a second
deposit for a flat, and others who have been supported to change course at
university or college for another one which suits them better.
address their physical and emotional health needs. They are offered
counselling and, where they are required, specialist therapeutic placements
are commissioned. The CFCS service provides time-limited support to young
people it is working with before they leave care; regular advice and training
for the outreach workers in the leaving care team enable them to support
care leavers emotional needs more effectively. When more specialist help is
needed, care leavers have access to services that provide counselling or
therapeutic support from some voluntary sector organisations. They also
have access to universal health services, including those to keep them safe,
such as sexual health services.
receiving their passport in 2013. However, some young people over the age
of 19 might not all have the necessary documents detailing their health
history. In these cases, they can only rely on the information in their
pathway plan.
individuals needs at various stages of their transition. The range of housing
options is good, so they are able to begin planning safely for independence
before they are 16. Care leavers who need it move into semi-independent
accommodation with support before finally moving into independent living.
Some young people in foster care stay with their carers beyond 18. At this
point their placement is converted into supported lodgings, affording
continuity for the young person. In 2014, 15% of young people were in
supported lodgings, performance that is better than that for England and
statistical neighbours.
hostel accommodation. This was a temporary measure for appropriate
reasons. This performance is consistent with the March 2013 returns; it is
better than the national average and the performance of statistical
neighbours.
outreach workers in the leaving care team and the childrens rights worker.
They felt, in particular, that the Childrens Rights service was a real strength,
providing them with information about entitlements, challenging agencies on
their behalf and effecting changes that made a difference to their lives. Care
leavers were more critical of the information available to support them into
independence. They are in the process of completing a care leavers guide


with the help of the Childrens Rights Service. This has been under
development for 12 months and needs to be completed.
professionals who support them. One young person said that without her
foster carers she wouldnt be where she is today and that being in care had
made a huge difference to her life.


Leadership, management and governance
Key Judgement

Judgement Grade

Leadership, management and governance

Requires improvement

in a pilot, multi-agency child protection inspection in 2012 and in the
safeguarding and looked after children inspection in 2011. However, in other
areas, despite concentrated focus, progress has been much slower. Some key
social work and front-line management activity is still not done consistently well
enough to ensure that children receive a good service.
insufficient to meet demand. Lack of capacity for triage results in delays in nonurgent work and in communicating outcomes to those who made the initial
referrals. Within the assessment service, although workers generally undertake
tasks within acceptable timescales, the quality of the work varies. Contacts with
children are sometimes affected adversely by pressures of time.
short-term plans, approved by elected members, to increase staffing levels. The
plans are linked to a wider, long-term aim of reducing inappropriate referrals by
improving early help. At the time of the inspection, these plans had not been
implemented, and workloads in the triage and assessment service were
unacceptably high.
local authority. Changes in staffing at all levels in the organisation have been
considerable. In the social work workforce, 17% of staff are newly qualified.
They have been recruited under the assessed and supported year in
employment scheme (ASYE). The ASYE programme provides high-quality
support and training, including opportunities for reflective practice. The ASYE
staff to which inspectors spoke felt both supported and challenged. However,
some ASYE staff in assessment and intervention teams did not have protected
caseloads. A further 10% of staff is retained newly qualified social workers
(NQSW). They are concentrated in the assessment and intervention parts of the
service where there is the most pressure.
teams. It ranges from over a third of agency staff in the disabled childrens
team and in the assessment service to 11% in the leaving care service.
However, 57% of the total agency staff in the assessment service has been in
post for more than six months, thereby affording a degree of stability to teams.
social care workforce. Although some of the staffing changes are due to the
purposeful and necessary management of staff performance, staff turnover and


vacancies, nevertheless many children experience multiple changes of social
worker. The local authority recognises that reducing this number is an area
where it needs to improve. The current movement of staff within some
services, combined with a campaign to replace agency staff with permanent
workers recruited from overseas, assists the local authority to achieve its
longer-term goals. However, in the short term, some children will continue to
experience too many changes.
However, senior managers described a coherent, multi-faceted approach, linked
to the local authoritys professional development framework. The framework is
informed by a comprehensive analysis of training needs, and it is well designed
to enable staff to develop the skills and competencies they need at every level.
It offers a clear pathway of career progression, from ASYE onwards, as part of
a wider strategy to retain experienced staff.
children would be beneficial. The lack of a stable workforce means that good
practice learnt from training is lost when staff move on and training needs to be
repeated.
interim director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post for six months.
She has the confidence of elected members and the chief executive (CEO).
Combined with the continuity of a permanent Assistant Director (AD), who also
has the full confidence and backing of the senior leadership team, this has
helped to accelerated progress.
and realistic understanding of strengths and areas for development, both for
the service itself and for wider partnerships. Their understanding derives from
robust local knowledge, information from regular performance management,
and feedback from staff, children and young people.
the CEO and the DCS. The Mayor, Lead Member and Chair of the Corporate
Parenting Board meet officers regularly, both formally and informally, to discuss
problems and raise questions and challenges. This is alongside their attendance
at scrutiny meetings. The scrutiny function has been significantly strengthened
following Ofsteds pilot inspection in 2012. Members show a clear commitment
to and enthusiasm for ensuring that they prioritise issues facing children and
young people.
are identified as key priorities. Aspirational plans to transform services into an
outcomes-driven model, informed by research, form part of the local authoritys
wider strategy to build resilience. These plans have yet to be fully implemented
and it is therefore too early to evaluate their impact.


reviewed in 2013. Leaders recognised that they fell notably short of their own
expectations and ambitions. Subsequently, corporate parenting has been
significantly refreshed. A number of activities have been put in place, but
members and senior officers acknowledge that these have yet to have sufficient
impact. Plans are in place to ensure that members new to dealing with
childrens issues receive relevant training so that they understand and fulfil their
scrutiny and corporate parenting roles.
underdeveloped and that they need to be a priority. Learning derived from
developing the triage and Families First services, as well as significant work
with schools to establish the Foundations for Learning programme, has been
brought together in the Early Help Strategy. This was agreed by the Childrens
Trust during the inspection.
authority nor the Childrens Trust has established effective systems to evaluate
their range, quality, quantity and impact. This means that the partnership
cannot yet be confident that it is identifying or meeting sufficiently the wider
needs of children and their families. It also cannot assure itself that the early
help it provides is effective in avoiding escalation to targeted or statutory
services.
Childrens Trust, the NSCB and the Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG), so that
services for children are planned and developed in close partnership.
Increasingly, childrens issues are being incorporated into the work of the
Health and Well-being Board to ensure that their needs are prioritised
successfully and aligned with developing services for adults. The Chair of the
NSCB acknowledges that the local authority has been a driving force in ensuring
that the needs of vulnerable children remain a primary consideration; this is at
a time of challenging financial austerity and competing demands.
improved significantly since the last inspection. Managers at all levels in
childrens services routinely scrutinise up-to-date performance management
information. However, some areas of scrutiny are underdeveloped, for example,
in early help and in reporting by IROs.
the scrutiny panel, the Childrens Trust and the NSCB. These monitor and
scrutinise services for children and families. Strategic managers within
childrens social care services interrogate performance information regularly and
effectively to plan developments in the service and to identify what requires
greater analysis. Prompt action is taken to analyse any issues that are
identified, for example, through audits or service reviews.


monitor social work activity, such as the timeliness of assessments and the
frequency of visits to children and families. However, managers oversight is
overly focused on compliance with the processes rather than on ensuring that
interventions meet childrens needs effectively. This was reflected in many of
the cases that inspectors selected for the local authority to audit. First-level
operational managers rated the work more positively than more senior
managers; the latter had a clearer focus on outcomes. This demonstrates
disparity between what senior and operational managers consider to be good
practice, and in their expectations of social work staff.
frequency and quality of professional supervision as an area for development.
The service practice guidance on supervision has been updated and recirculated
to managers. Staff report that, in the main, they have regular supervision and
feel well supported by their line managers. However, almost all supervision files
that inspectors scrutinised had gaps in recording. These included the files of
members of staff whose capability or conduct had already been identified as
causing concern. Recordings were brief and task-orientated with little evidence
of reflection. It shows that, while senior managers have acted to assure the
quality and frequency of professional supervision, actions have not yet resulted
in consistently positive results. Progress in improving performance is therefore
not yet secure.
key strategic priorities. This commissioning is informed by a range of
intelligence to determine the needs of the local population. It includes direct
feedback from children and families, contract monitoring arrangements and
performance information, together with the joint strategic needs analysis
(JSNA) which is being refreshed. Some services, such as Child and Adolescent
Mental Health Services (CAMHS), are commissioned jointly with the Clinical
Commissioning Group (CCG). In other areas, the CCG and the local authority
commissioners work well together, at a strategic level, with provider services on
the Child Health Improvement Partnership. Links to the Health and Well-Being
Board have been strengthened in recent months. Such arrangements enable
childrens services to approach commissioning flexibly. Where necessary, the
authority decommissions services that are no longer in line with its key
priorities.
focused activity. For example, services to deal with domestic abuse have now
been brought together in a one-stop shop; two new services have been
commissioned to complement the existing independent domestic violence
advisor (IDVA) service. The impact of this change is not yet measurable.
service development through a variety of means, including surveys and focus
groups. A recent example of change as a result of young peoples feedback is


the refurbishment of the Beckton Road office to make it a more child-friendly
space.
childrens service is growing and it is now considered more routinely. Consistent
themes emerging from advocacy cases are transition planning and placement
moves, communication problems with allocated workers, response times from
social workers to service users and advocates, and foster carers making
referrals because of concerns about childrens care plans.
arising, there is little evidence that learning from complaints improves the
effectiveness of services.
vigorously pursued, including free access to leisure passes, recognition of their
achievements, access to an active and robust childrens rights service and
senior managers attendance at the Children in Care Council.
young people within the two age groups. The children and young people are
engaged constructively in supporting changes in services, for example, in
developing a menu of choice for meetings; a care leavers guide to
independence; and contributing to NSPCC research into the emotional wellbeing of looked after children. It has been more difficult to enable the majority
of looked after children, who are placed outside the borough, to contribute
meaningfully or to engage with elected members in their roles as corporate
parents.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after, and the welfare of care
leavers is safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place. However, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services in which widespread or
serious failures create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm or result in
looked after children or care leavers not having their welfare safeguarded and
promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is good
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
good.

What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
There are no areas of priority and immediate action.
Areas for improvement
easily identified across the range of partner agencies.
early help services effectively.

Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
NSCB Chair meets the CEO, lead council members and the DCS regularly.
Meetings include robust scrutiny and oversight of safeguarding work and the
role of the NSCB. The Chair and other senior managers are actively engaged in
the Children's Trust and the Health and Well-being Board. This enables the
safeguarding of children to be prioritised and reported to each body. The work
of the respective boards is demarcated well, with effective links, communication
and synchronisation between them and their work plans.
partner agencies and through its Performance and Quality Assurance subcommittee. This considers regular performance information, including audits
and service reviews. It has begun to commission, undertake and evaluate multiagency audits. These are based on practice issues identified by partners and on
the NSCBs list of priorities. However, this extensive programme results in
slippage in some of the work. A major multi-agency data report continues to be
developed. Progress over the past year in analysing performance information
has been significant, but multi-agency analysis of safeguarding practice needs
to be more tightly focused.
scrutinised both referrals and case conferences. They have benefited from
external review, commissioned by the NSCB. This objectivity needs to be


maintained as the NSCB begins to develop multi-agency audits undertaken by
its partners.
routinely, as well as individual and multi-agency performance management
information. These sources enable them to understand and evaluate how
effectively they work, both individually and collectively, to safeguard children.
They consider how well looked after children and other vulnerable groups are
supported, such as those involved in criminal and gang-related activity. They
capture the experiences of children and young people. A children and young
peoples group meets regularly to consider safeguarding issues and provides its
views to the NSCB. This helps to inform partners discussions on evaluating and
developing safeguarding services.
to challenge practice. For example, he recently ensured that an academy
engaged in Section 11 audits, something that it had initially refused to do.
and its operational sub-groups. Attendance by almost all partner agencies is
good, and there are arrangements for nominated alternatives or deputies to
attend to provide continuity. Partners engagement has greatly improved over
the past two years. The Chair monitors attendance and challenges absence.
over the past year, particularly in developing MAPPA arrangements. This
engagement needs to be sustained when the probation service is reorganised.
The NSCB Chair is meeting key representatives of the new Offender Services to
secure this. The partner agencies ensure their organisations give suitable
priority to safeguarding and report to the NSCB.
up actions, overseen by the NSCB. Schools have been actively engaged in
undertaking the equivalent of Section 11 audits. The NSCB has agreed
protocols to promote their engagement. The NSCB rigorously tackled poor
responses to Section 11 audits before 2012 by challenging and engaging
partners. As a result, it received a good response from all statutory partners in
voluntary sectors was poor, however, and the Chair acted robustly to tackle
this. These sectors now engage in the work of the NSCB and its sub-groups.
finance is used effectively to underpin the Boards work. The NSCB has targeted
funding to enhance specific areas of work, such as part-funding staff to develop
training, improve data and engage with the faith sector.
and updated with key partners. A well-chaired and well-represented training
sub-group develops and commissions a wide range of targeted, multi-agency
training programmes. The NSCB part-funds a training development officer, who


has effectively reviewed, re-commissioned and expanded training. All the NSCB
agencies support access to training within their organisations, overseen by the
NSCB. A wide range of mechanisms enables NSCB partners to learn effectively
from local and national issues, including learning from case audits, and single
agency and multi-agency reviews. This learning is incorporated in flexible,
responsive work programmes for the operational groups and in developing and
delivering the NSCBs single- and multi-agency training. The Board has
employed a range of qualitative measures to evaluate training, including
observing it, and it has developed a new model to evaluate directly the impact
of training on practice. The training development officer has recently begun to
attend and quality assure the safeguarding training of individual agencies.
local pan-London procedures. These are reviewed regularly to reflect and
incorporate local and national developments.
community on help and protection for children and young people. Its guide to
services is clear, well-presented and user-friendly. It provides a clear synopsis
of the role and range of safeguarding services, as well as guidance on
thresholds for accessing them. All the NSCB agencies that met inspectors
understood the application of thresholds for safeguarding and protecting
children locally. The NSCB was actively engaged in developing the multi-agency
mash/triage service. It has also undertaken recent audits on referral and acted
on the findings.
issues relating to missing children and children at risk of sexual exploitation
(CSE) are understood and well-coordinated. The sub-groups have developed
local plans, benchmarked against national and regional developments and
enhanced by the NCSB Chairs well-established links.
little involvement in developing and monitoring these services. It does not have
evidence to demonstrate the reach or impact of early help services on reducing
the numbers of children in need of help and protection.
local safeguarding issues. The draft report for 201314 is informative, clear and
well-balanced. It identifies key developments, strengths and areas that require
further development, demonstrating a sound understanding of the
improvements achieved by the NSCBs partners and the challenges that need to
be tackled. The findings have been incorporated into a specific, measurable
work programme and plan for the Board. The NSCB Chair has secured
commitment to a long-term strategic plan and framework for the Board, with a
clear vision for future work. These need to be kept up to date and refreshed
regularly to reflect emerging priorities.


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Its evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and its impact is evaluated regularly. The LSCB provides
robust and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas
for improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the above
characteristics.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It does not
understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to identify
where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


