North Somerset
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 12 June  7 July 2017
Report published: 25 August 2017

Childrens services in North Somerset require improvement to
be good

Requires improvement to
be good

permanence

Requires improvement to
be good


Good


Good


Requires improvement to
be good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
A stable senior management team has made improvements in some services for
children since the last inspection in 2012, when safeguarding services were judged to
be adequate and those for looked after children good. However, services for children
are not yet consistently good enough, and there are pockets of poor practice, which
mean that children do not always get the help they need quickly enough.
Some recommendations from the last inspection in relation to making a single record
of strategy meetings, and joint interviews of child witnesses, have not yet been
consistently achieved. The local authority has a good level of awareness of the
shortfalls identified by inspectors during this inspection, but the impact of the newly
strengthened arrangements, including training provided to staff, has not
demonstrated consistent improvements in the responses to children and their
families.
The senior leadership team has worked purposefully to make a number of
improvements across the service. However, the trajectory of improvement has been
adversely affected by a number of barriers. Staff turnover, at all levels within the
service, has contributed to delays in driving improvements to ensure consistently
good-quality services for children. The pace of progress has been further hindered
following a complex investigation into a whistleblowing allegation, which left
partnership working fragile. Partners have re-established effective arrangements and
are now focused on joint priorities to implement key strategies to improve outcomes
for children in North Somerset.
The leadership team has introduced a culture of challenge and continuous learning.
Staff report a good awareness of, and commitment to, the overall plan and the
implementation of key improvements across the service. There is sustained financial
investment and a clear political commitment to provide high-quality childrens
services. The workforce within North Somerset childrens services has now stabilised,
and caseloads are reported to be manageable.
Senior leaders ability to ensure sustained improvement across the service is limited
by the inconsistency of frontline management oversight of casework. While training
and focus on this key area for development have been strengthened, key
weaknesses in social work practice are not always identified in a timely way through
effective and purposeful management scrutiny.
Senior leaders have ensured that the use and implementation of key performance
information have been significantly strengthened. While there remains some
variability by managers in the use of this information to drive improvement, the
leadership team continues to ensure that systematic monitoring of performance is
implemented, and this is beginning to contribute to more effective scrutiny of
activity.


Quality assurance processes are beginning to contribute to identifiable improvements
across the service. While audit activity is completed by senior managers at all levels,
the overall impact of activity has been variable, and findings from audits have only
recently been used effectively to inform staff training and improve practice.
The quality of practice is improving in some areas, such as the strengthening of
early-help services, improved commissioning arrangements and the introduction of a
new framework to assess risk and protective factors for children. A new edge-of-care
service is beginning to improve outcomes for children and the Consult service
provides highly effective in-house counselling and therapeutic services to children,
young people and their carers. Services for children adopted and to care leavers are
now consistently good.
Key areas for development remain in social work practice across the service, for
example the variability in the quality of assessments of childrens needs and child in
need and protection plans. Return home interviews are also variable in quality and
timeliness and are not sufficiently used to inform assessments of young people or to
inform plans to reduce risk. Arrangements to investigate allegations of abuse by
professionals working with children are not always sufficiently rigorous.
Advocacy services for children are not promoted effectively by social workers and do
not sufficiently enable young people to articulate their wishes and feelings. Decisions
to look after children are not always sufficiently timely or robust, and some children
who have been exposed to neglect experience delay before becoming looked after.
Corporate parenting in North Somerset is a key strength. Elected members have high
aspirations for children looked after and care leavers. This commitment is
demonstrated by a range of initiatives, including the recent establishment of seven
apprenticeships, financial support for educational courses and ongoing mentoring, as
well as exemptions from council tax for care leavers.
Children and young people are actively encouraged to share their views on the
effectiveness of the service. This level of engagement has contributed to tangible
changes to services provided and to sensitive consideration of the needs of looked
after children and care leavers.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority does not operate any childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements/
arrangements for the protection of children was in July 2012. The local authority
was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for looked after children
was in July 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since May 2010.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services, public health and housing.
 The chief executive has been in post since November 2013.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since August 2010.
 The local authority commissions an edge-of-care service, using a social impact
bond model.
 The local authority uses the Signs of Safety model of social work.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 42,6163 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in North Somerset. This is 20.3% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 12%4 of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children eligible for and claiming free school meals5:
 in primary schools is 9% (the national average is 14%)
 in secondary schools is 8% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 7% of all
children living in the area, compared with 25% in the country as a whole6.

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with national validated data and/or local unvalidated data where this was available.
Census mid-year estimates 2015, Office of National Statistics.
Child poverty statistics 2014 given before housing costs, Office of National Statistics.
DfE School and Pupil Number 2016
Census 2011, Office of National Statistics.


 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Other White and Asian/Asian British/Indian.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language7:
 in primary schools is 5% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 4% (the national average is 16%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2017, 547 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from 629 at
children and care leavers.
 At 31 March 2017, 150 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 128 at 31 March 2016.
 At 31 March 2017, one child lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a decrease from two children at 31 March 2016.
 Since the last inspection, six serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and four serious case reviews (SCRs) have been completed or were
ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2017, 227 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 52 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 221 (52 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
adoptive placements)
authority area
 one lives in a residential special school8, which is out of the authority
area
 four live with parents, of whom none lives out of the authority area
 nine children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 14 adoptions


DfE School and Pupil Number 2016
These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


returned to be looked after
 six young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to independent
living
 no young people that ceased to be looked after are now living in a house
in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that all contacts benefit from multi-agency checks, that decisions take
account of previous history and that the need to gain consent is properly
considered within the context of national information-sharing guidance.


Ensure that strategy discussions routinely include information from key
partners, that they are used to inform assessment of risk and action planning
and that a single multi-agency record is kept of each meeting.


Review the performance of the disabled childrens team to ensure that it is
adequately resourced and that staff are skilled and trained to respond to the
needs of children.


Ensure that senior managers identify effectively local patterns and trends of
children at high risk of sexual exploitation and that this contributes to robust
disruption activity.


Review arrangements to manage allegations against professionals working
with children to ensure that processes are overseen effectively and monitored,
and that cases are progressed.


Strengthen the quality-assurance role of the child protection chairs and
independent reviewing officers (IROs) to ensure that reviews and conferences
result in effective information sharing and purposeful, timely plans for
children.


Ensure that life-story work is completed for all children, including looked after
children placed in long-term foster placements.


Put in place a system to ensure that initial health assessments for looked after
children are completed in a timely manner, and that notifications from social
workers to inform health colleagues that children have become looked after
are timely.


Ensure that the agency decision-maker clearly records the rationale for
decision-making in respect of adoption matches.


Work with partner organisations to offer specialist health services that more
flexibly meet the needs of young people who have complex emotional needs
made worse by substance misuse.


Ensure that staff are provided with regular, high-quality supervision to support
and challenge practice.



Ensure the consistent use of performance data by frontline managers to
improve practice across the service and aid early identification of weak
performance.


Summary for children and young people
 Not all services for children in North Somerset are good. Some things have got
better since the last inspection in 2012, but not all children get the right help
quickly enough.
 When children first need help, there are a lot of good services in North Somerset,
such as children centres, where they and their families can get help.
 Social workers make sure that children get help quickly when they need it
urgently.
 Social workers dont always ask other people, like teachers or doctors, who know
the children well, for information so that they can decide how best to help them.
 When children need help, social workers complete assessments, so they can think
about how to help them. These assessments dont always take into account
everything the social worker needs to know to make sure that children are given
the right help.
 If children have plans to help them, professionals dont always make sure that
things agreed in the plan are done quickly enough. Some children live in
neglectful circumstances for too long without getting enough help.
 When children go missing from their home or school, they dont always have a
chance to talk to an independent person about why they ran away.
 Some services help children a lot, such as the Consult service, which helps
children with their emotional needs.
 Children arent always able to speak to an independent person when they need
help to explain to social workers their views or worries, or when they need help
to make a complaint.
 Care leavers get on well with their personal advisers (PAs). PAs keep in touch
with nearly all care leavers and help them with practical things like getting a
driving licence or a passport.
 Managers dont always make sure that social workers do everything they need to
do as quickly as they should.
 When children cant live with their birth families, social workers work hard to find
adoptive families for them. Social workers help children to settle in with their new
families and help their new parents to understand how to look after them.
 Childrens views are listened to well by senior managers in North Somerset.
 Senior leaders understand well that it is their responsibility to make sure that all
children are well cared for and have good life chances and high aspirations.
 Senior leaders and managers of North Somerset want to make sure that all
children and their families get good help and support. They understand what they
need to do to improve some services for children.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement
to be good

Summary
A comprehensive range of early-help services provides good support to children
and their families when needs first emerge. Services are well targeted and
coordinated to meet the specific needs of the community.
Responses to children requiring statutory intervention are not yet consistently
good. A minority of children do not receive help as early as necessary. When
immediate risks to children are identified, the response is timely and proportionate.
Social workers see children regularly and know them well. Good-quality direct work
with children, and the engagement of their parents, enable social workers to gain a
comprehensive understanding of childrens experiences. Childrens assessments
and plans are improving overall but are variable in their quality. The disabled
childrens team is not consistently identifying or acting to address childrens
changing needs in a timely way. This means that some families are not receiving
the right support to improve their circumstances.
Child protection enquiries are mostly thorough and robust. The majority of strategy
meetings are timely and result in clear plans for children. However, in a small
minority of cases, information is not always obtained from all key professionals,
and a single record from each meeting is not created and shared. Social workers
are not routinely involved in evidential interviews of children to inform safety
planning. Initial child protection and review conferences are timely and well
attended by agencies. The majority of conferences are effective in identifying risks
to children and inform planning arrangements to reduce risk. While the impact of
scrutiny by child protection chairs is developing, this is not yet routinely leading to
improved practice to ensure better outcomes for children.
There are effective multi-agency arrangements in place to oversee and tackle
activity in relation to sexual exploitation for individual children. However, scrutiny
at senior management level to identify patterns or trends is limited. Arrangements
for children who go missing are variable, and the quality and timeliness of return
home interviews are inconsistent.
Very few children living in private fostering arrangements are identified, and
awareness raising of private fostering thresholds is under-developed. Responses to
homeless 16- and 17-year-olds are effective, and services are well developed.
Arrangements to identify and investigate allegations of abuse against professionals
are not sufficiently rigorous.


Inspection findings

Early-help services in North Somerset are a key strength. A wide variety of
services are available, and families benefit from well-coordinated and
responsive early-help services that are easily accessible in childrens centres or
located in libraries and health centres. Early-help professionals are skilled and
successfully support families for whom domestic abuse, parental mental ill
health and substance misuse issues feature, through the provision of both
intensive and universal early-help interventions. Black and minority ethnic
families and travelling communities have been particularly successfully
engaged in early-help and targeted services.


The number of families receiving support from high-quality early-help services
has steadily increased, and parents spoken with during the inspection highly
value these services. However, the local authority has yet to systematically
evaluate the impact of the early-help offer on meeting the needs of children
and their families and preventing escalation to statutory services. The quality
of early-help assessments and plans is variable.


Thresholds for statutory intervention are well embedded, understood and
applied across the partnership. The inclusion of good-quality information from
referring agencies effectively aids decision-making regarding the best course
of action.


The emergency duty team responds effectively to the needs of children and
families outside office hours. The team works closely with health colleagues
and the police to ensure that children are protected immediately. Information
is shared promptly with daytime staff.


Responses to children who need help and protection are not consistently
good. The referral and assessment team undertakes all initial screening of
concerns about childrens welfare. Responses to referrals are prompt, but
decisions are not routinely informed by historical information or multi-agency
checks. In some cases, referrals are not accepted until parental consent is
gained, and consequently childrens needs are not assessed sufficiently
swiftly. (Recommendation)


The majority of child protection enquiries are timely and robust and childrens
experiences are captured effectively to inform analysis of risk and planning.
However, in a minority of cases, children are not seen, or are seen alone, and
childrens safety and welfare are not always ascertained within timescales that
reflect the presenting concerns.


Well-established relationships with the police safeguarding unit ensure timely
and appropriate initial decision-making to protect children, and outcomes are
proportionate to levels of concern. However, the majority of strategy
discussions do not sufficiently benefit from multi-agency contributions to


safeguarding discussions and planning. Joint investigations of child protection
enquiries are not being undertaken in some cases. Achieving best evidence
interviews of children continue to be undertaken exclusively by the police, and
delays in the sharing of information on the outcome of police investigations
hamper decision-making and service provision to children. The local authority
has continued to challenge this practice with strategic police leaders in an
attempt to remedy this matter. (Recommendation)

Social workers in the children and families teams know their children well and
undertake sensitive and creative direct work with them, which captures their
lived experiences well. Inspectors observed highly effective social work
interventions, particularly by newly qualified social workers, that are clearly
leading to improved outcomes for children and their families. Parents spoken
to were positive about the help they were receiving and the difference that
this is making to their lives. Social workers are persistent in engaging families.
They are successful in building resilience in family relationships and in reengaging young people in education. Experienced family support workers
provide both practical and therapeutic interventions. Creative support ensures
that families receive the help they need and leads to real improvements in
childrens circumstances.


The quality of assessments is improving, and there is a focus on strengths and
risks that results in appropriate services for families. However, assessments
are not always sufficiently analytical or detailed to ensure that needs are fully
understood, or updated when circumstances change, or completed in
childrens timescales. While chronologies are increasingly being completed,
they are often difficult to follow and are not used as a tool to inform planning.


The quality of child in need and child protection plans is improving. Plans for
children are mostly outcome focused and help families understand what needs
to change and the consequence of not achieving this. However, too many
plans do not include timescales for completion of actions, making it difficult to
see whether progress has been made to reduce risk and achieve desired
outcomes. The quality of contingency planning is variable.


The disabled childrens team is not serving all children in need consistently
well enough. The changing needs of children are not always identified or
acted on in a timely way. Safeguarding responses to children who have
disabilities are mostly robust and well coordinated. However, where families
receive direct payments, the majority of plans seen by inspectors were not
sufficiently comprehensive, and a minority of children in need have not been
seen by a social worker regularly. As a result, families are not receiving timely
support to improve parenting capacity and reduce the risk of family
breakdown. The local authority recognises this area for development and is in
the process of strengthening arrangements to support these children.
(Recommendation)



The quality of supervision and management oversight is not yet consistently
good. Staff are positive about management support and the availability of
managers at all levels. However, supervision is not always regular or driving
planning and reviewing overall progress. As a result, changes in childrens
circumstances are not fully explored, and, for a small number of children, this
has led to drift and delay in taking action to meet their needs and to ensure
that they are protected.


The independent reviewing service, which includes child protection chairs, is
not yet monitoring outcomes effectively for children, or the performance of
the local authority. The majority of disputes are resolved at an informal level,
and high caseloads have had an impact on chairs ability to monitor progress
and identify whether risks are reducing and outcomes are achieved in a timely
way. (Recommendation)


Despite staffing pressures, the IRO service has ensured that child protection
conferences are timely. The majority of conferences are robust and consider
needs and risks to inform planning effectively. However, chairs are not
consistently applying categories of abuse to reflect the presenting concerns
and, as a result, childrens plans do not always actively address their family
circumstances. Advocacy is not currently available to children involved in child
protection processes and this is a missed opportunity to maximise the voice
and experiences of children in the child protection process.


Operational multi-agency arrangements for overseeing and reviewing missing
children are well established. A missing coordinator within the referral and
assessment team tracks and records all missing episodes effectively. However,
the collation of information gathered from individual episodes of missing is not
yet sufficiently informing mapping locally. Return home interviews are not
always timely or of sufficient quality to consistently identify changing risks or
to inform safety planning. Recent strengthening of arrangements and staff
training have not yet had a satisfactory impact on multi-agency coordination
and responses to children missing from either home or care.


There are effective arrangements to identify and monitor children who are
missing education. Good alternative provision is available, and the majority of
children receive at least 25 hours of education per week. Childrens progress
and attainment are rigorously monitored, and a high number of children
successfully return to mainstream school.


Arrangements to identify and support children at risk of sexual exploitation are
mostly robust, timely and well coordinated. Social workers are skilled in
recognising and responding to sexual exploitation, including changing risks.
The recently introduced sexual exploitation risk assessment form is providing
a comprehensive framework to ensure that social workers plan effectively for
children and that risks are reducing.



While there is a variety of services and organisations to support families who
are affected by domestic abuse, substance misuse and parental mental illhealth, current interventions for perpetrators of abuse are not sufficient to
meet need. Partner agencies work well together to ensure that the children
who are exposed to domestic violence are identified and assessed. Multiagency risk assessment conferences arrangements are robust and well
embedded. However, children and young people do not benefit from specific
services to build resilience and to deal with their experiences of living with
domestic abuse.


Arrangements to assess and meet the needs of 16- and 17-year old homeless
young people are well understood. The majority of assessments are timely.
Data is scrutinised on a monthly basis to identify patterns and trends; this is
used to inform preventative service provision. Accommodation options are
sufficient, and helpful counselling support and other services are available to
young people.


Arrangements to promote and identify private fostering in North Somerset are
extremely limited, and there have been no private fostering notifications in the
last year. This means that the local authority and its partners cannot be
confident that they are safeguarding effectively all children and young people
who are living with adults to whom they are not related. (Recommendation)


Arrangements to identify and investigate allegations of abuse against
professionals are not sufficiently rigorous. The designated officer service does
not consistently track casework to ensure that investigations are well
coordinated and responsive to the needs of the children. Allegations meetings
are timely and well attended; however, action plans and case recording are
not comprehensive and childrens disclosures do not routinely inform planning.
The role and function of the designated officer is well understood by key
agencies, but further work is required to raise awareness across the wider
partnership. (Recommendation)


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement
to be good

Summary
Outcomes for children looked after in North Somerset require improvement to be
good. Decisions to look after children are appropriate but not always timely, and a
small minority of children experience drift and delay prior to coming into care. A
new edge-of-care service has recently been introduced, but it is too early to
identify the impact of this. No cases were found of children entering care
unnecessarily.
Most social workers know their children well and visit them regularly, although the
voice of the child is not always sufficiently evident on the case record. Support
services to address the emotional health needs of looked after children are a key
strength in North Somerset. The Consult service provides a range of valued
support to carers and children. Support to unaccompanied asylum-seeking children
and children who have a disability is well coordinated and child centred, and there
are efforts made to promote their cultural and diversity needs effectively within
placement. The virtual school offers effective support to ensure that the
educational needs of children looked after are met and are monitored effectively.
There is limited placement choice for older children who have complex needs.
Recent recruitment campaigns have not yet been successful in increasing the pool
of local carers.
Care plans vary in quality and are not always robust; weaker examples do not
have clear timescales or contingency arrangements. There is limited direct work
undertaken with children, and, while life-story work is well embedded for most
children, there are very few life-story books for children in long-term foster care.
Foster carers are well supported, but are not always provided with information
about the children they care for in a timely way.
There is insufficient evidence of IRO challenge and scrutiny, especially in relation
to placement stability and driving care planning for children effectively. Childrens
participation in service development is a strength and is evidenced by a clear,
child-focused pledge, and the annual survey seeks, and acts on, childrens views.
The local authority is in contact with almost all care leavers, and young people
receive good care and support in relation to gaining education and training
opportunities. For the very few care leavers with mental ill health and with a
history of substance misuse, the provision of suitable, flexible accommodation and
effective specialist health services does not meet their needs well enough.


Permanence through adoption is considered at an early stage and children are
prepared well for their transition to their adoptive families. Adopters have access
to a wide range of support services.

Inspection findings

Decisions to bring children into care are appropriate but not always timely.
Children sometimes wait too long in neglectful situations and assessments of
parental capacity to change are too optimistic. Services put in place are not
always effective in reducing risk to children experiencing neglect. This can
sometimes lead to drift and delay and missed opportunities to intervene
earlier. In a small number of cases seen, the home situation deteriorated
quickly following a step-down of support, which led to emergency, rather than
planned, intervention to make children safe at a later date.


The local authority has worked hard to improve the timeliness of court
proceedings, and over the last 12 months these have averaged 26.5 weeks.
Assessments provided to the court are mostly detailed and thorough and
provide a clear rationale for care thresholds. A dedicated case manager holds
regular performance meetings to check on progress and oversees the Public
Law Outline tracker. There is clear guidance available to social workers to
assist in all aspects of court work, including the capacity to change toolkit,
developed in conjunction with Bristol University. However, these tools are not
yet fully embedded across the service. The Children and Family Court Advisory
and Support Service (Cafcass) reports that practice can be inconsistent,
especially in relation to cases of neglect.


When children return home from care, the quality of care plans informing
such decisions is inconsistent and some lack rigour. For some children, there
is evidence of carefully balanced, therapeutic assessments of need prior to a
return home. In recognition of these inconsistencies, the local authority has
recently commissioned a new turning the tide edge-of-care service, which
has begun to work with 11 children and families in the last few weeks. While
this service has the potential to help children to safely remain at home,
through the provision of a range of intensive support, it is too soon to
measure the impact of this service on children.


Viability assessments of childrens family members provide a clear analysis of
the suitability of connected carers and the nature of support required.
However, diversity needs are not always explored fully in the assessment,
which leads to uncertainty regarding the capacity of connected carers to meet
a childs cultural and ethnicity needs. Support is available to those carers who
go on to secure a special guardianship order, via a dedicated kinship support
team, and there is access to in-house psychological support and parenting
training.



Children are mostly seen regularly by their social worker. In most cases, social
workers know their children well and are able to clearly articulate the wishes,
feelings and experiences of children. However, this is not always well reflected
in case records. Some records of visits to children are too brief and task
focused and contain limited commentary about the childs wishes and feelings.
Advocacy for children looked after is not promoted effectively and, although
there is a system for children to access an advocate, very few children do so.


Arrangements to support children missing from care are not sufficiently
robust. Return home interviews are not routinely completed or purposeful,
and many contain only limited information, which does not sufficiently inform
risk-reduction measures as part of care planning in a timely way. The early
identification and coordination of services to support looked after children at
risk of sexual exploitation is effective. Sexual exploitation risk assessment
forms are completed appropriately for looked after children and robustly
inform planning.


Health assessments for children are not always timely, and performance has
declined in the last 12 months. The designated nurse is working hard to
ensure that the timeliness of both initial and review health assessments
improves. Recently introduced tracking mechanisms are just beginning to
make improvements. Social workers are not notifying health colleagues that
children have become looked after, and this has further compounded delays in
health assessment timeliness. (Recommendation)


The local authority has taken positive action to sustain an in-house
psychological support service. The Consult service works with children
following a referral to the improving outcomes panel. Support is available to
children and their carers via a range of therapeutic approaches, training and
groups for mindfulness and other topics. Staff and foster carers value this
service highly. The local authority is in the process of implementing plans to
help foster carers to further develop therapeutic skills to work with
traumatised children.


Most children who are looked after achieve and make good progress at
school. Attendance at school is good and in line with that in similar
authorities. Slightly more absences are authorised than in similar authorities,
or in the England average, while the number of absences defined as persistent
is below these comparators. There have been no children permanently
excluded in the current year. The gap in achievement between children who
are looked after and their peers in the early years of education (key stage 1
and key stage 2) is narrower than in similar authorities. By GCSE stage (key
stage 4), the gap is wider but still below that of similar authorities.


Children who are looked after attend good education in North Somerset.
Children who do not attend school full time access at least 25 hours a week of


alternative education, or they are closely monitored while such provision is
arranged.

Headteachers champion the importance of providing children who are looked
after with stability in their education, and work well together to avoid
unnecessary moves between schools. When children would benefit from a
period of time in alternative provision, headteachers work very supportively
through the out of school panel, chaired by the head of the virtual school, to
determine the best outcome for the child.


The virtual school functions effectively in its role of monitoring the attendance
and progress at school and alternative provision of looked after children and
of overseeing improvement where necessary. Children are monitored closely
for signs of bullying or discriminatory behaviour shown towards them by other
pupils.


After a sharp rise in the number of children whose parents elected to educate
their children at home, the numbers have stabilised. The authority maintains
regular contact with families and provides good transitional arrangements for
those who choose to re-enrol their children in school.


In a minority of cases, schools have reportedly not been well supported by
social workers to help children. Headteachers report that social workers
sometimes fail to attend personal education plan meetings. As part of its role,
the virtual school has been supporting training for teachers and social workers
to adopt the new electronic personal education plan (ePEP). The ePEP is used
effectively to track and monitor the educational achievements of children
looked after. Despite significant training provided by the local authority,
headteachers have not found this training to be sufficient to enable them to
adopt best practice in using the new system or to provide opportunities for
designated teachers and social workers to benefit from training together. The
local authority recognises that more work needs to be done to ensure that the
ePEP is successfully established and to improve the quality of target setting in
ePEPs to ensure that they are appropriately specific, measurable and time
bound.


Unaccompanied asylum-seeking children are well supported by social workers,
who have the relevant experience and expertise to assess their wide-ranging
needs. Although these children are not always living in foster placements that
culturally match their heritage or background, clear plans are in place to
ensure that their cultural, health and educational needs are met.


The majority of children looked after who have disabilities are supported
effectively by care and other services that are well matched to their individual
needs. There is a good variety of support services available for children and
their carers, including a range of activities throughout the school holidays,
evenings and weekends. The transition from childrens to adult services is well


managed, and adult services staff attend relevant meetings after the childs

Most children who are looked after live in foster homes, either in the local
authority or within a 20-mile radius. This means that children have the
opportunity to grow up in family settings close to their community, and the
local authority works hard to promote contact for children with friends and
family, including for those children living out of the area.


Placement stability for children looked after in North Somerset is improving
overall. While placements for teenagers who have complex needs are limited,
the local authority is striving to recruit foster carers to meet this demand. The
local authority has put in place a new fostering strategy in recognition of the
need to recruit more foster carers to meet demand. However, there has been
limited progress to recruit more carers at this time, and this remains a
significant challenge for the local authority.


A permanence policy is not fully embedded across the service, and a new
matching matrix is helping some, but not all, children awaiting a match. This
means that some children wait too long to be matched with permanent foster
carers.


While there is age-appropriate life-story work undertaken with children in
foster care or living with family members, not all children understand why
they are looked after, or why they have moved on to live with different carers.
This is a missed opportunity to help many children to make sense of their
history and to support better outcomes, and the local authority has already
recognised this as an area for development. (Recommendation)


Children mostly live with their brothers and sisters in safe, secure homes
where their needs are well met. Childrens attachments are analysed in
detailed together and apart sibling assessments, and these inform care
planning and contact decisions. There is evidence that delegated authority
decisions are discussed and recorded on the case record.


The quality of care plans is not always robust; they often lack detail and do
not consistently include clear timescales or contingency arrangements.
Reviews of childrens care plans are not always timely, and the quality of
recording is variable. Social workers reports to the review meetings are not of
a consistently good quality. There is insufficient evidence of IRO challenge
and scrutiny, especially in relation to permanence decisions for children in
long-term foster placements. Some IROs reported that they prefer to resolve
issues informally and, as such, there is minimal use of the dispute resolution
protocol. The manager has recently implemented a new quality assurance
alert system, but this is not used consistently. This means that the IROs
review of the childs care plan is not consistently influencing improvements in


care planning. Childrens participation in their reviews is good, and meetings
are kept small to encourage their attendance. (Recommendation)

Foster carers and connected carers are well supported and provided with a
range of training opportunities. However, foster carers reported that they are
not always provided with information about children prior to placement, and
that childrens social workers are inconsistently responsive to their requests
for information. The fostering panel operates on a frequent basis, but does
not always offer sufficient rigour or balance in the minutes of meetings to
ensure that the rationale for decisions is fully understood.


The local authority is striving to be child focused and to shape its services in
response to the wishes and views of children in its care. The annual Bright
Spot survey is an effective mechanism for communicating with children, and it
has led to new initiatives, such as the document and keep safe boxes for all
children coming into care. The materials in the boxes are helpful, informative
and relevant for children.


The Children in Care Council (CiCC) is not as well established for younger
children as it is for care leavers. The Unite group (18 years and above) is
coordinated and vocal and has led on a number of developments, such as the
information leaflet for care leavers. The younger group, Ambitious Voice, has
struggled to build its membership. While some children are regular attenders
and contribute consistently, the group is very small and not fully
representative of all children. The local authority is aware of this and has
plans in place to forge closer links with a number of groups set up to address
childrens emotional well-being, in order to build the CiCCs membership and
to develop a stronger profile. The local authority is, however, well informed of
the views of younger children looked after through feedback from the Bright
Spots survey, which has an excellent response rate.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

The North Somerset adoption and permanence team is ambitious for children
and makes determined efforts to achieve permanence through adoption for all
children who need it. Adoption is considered by the second statutory review
for all children who cannot be cared for by their birth family. In the last year,
sisters together and children who have complex needs and disabilities. No
children have had their adoption decision reversed in the last year.


Overall performance in relation to the timeliness of adoption is improving. Its
success in finding placements for older children, brothers and sisters together
and placements for disabled children, which are very positive outcomes for
these children has, however, had a negative impact on its overall performance
data.



Social workers and managers know their children well. They track all of those
children awaiting permanence. Social workers have promptly referred the
majority of the 13 children currently awaiting a match to a full range of
regional and national links. Good use is also made of adoption exchange days
and adoption activity days, resulting in adoptive families being identified for
the majority of children without delay.


The arrangements for recruitment and preparation of adopters are thorough.
A comprehensive preparation course provides adopters with a good
understanding of the needs of adopted children. Newly approved adopters
spoken to during the inspection felt that the emphasis on attachment and
PACE (playfulness, acceptance, curiosity and empathy) techniques has
prepared them well for their adoption journey.


Foster to adopt is actively promoted, with prospective adopters having to opt
out, rather than opt in. Of the eight sets of potential adopters currently
being assessed, half are seeking dual approvals for fostering and adoption.


Assessments of potential adopters are good and are undertaken in a timely
way and in line with national requirements. Assessments comprehensively
reflect the adopters history, motivation, capacity to adopt and their practical
and emotional circumstances. This enables the adoption panel and agency
decision-maker to make informed decisions about approvals.


Child permanence reports are of a mixed quality. Managers are aware of the
need to improve the consistency and quality of reports, and have taken recent
action to improve these.


Overall, matching is effective, and a particular strength is a meeting that takes
place between every adopter, the medical adviser and a clinical psychologist
prior to a match. This meeting informs the creation of relevant and
individualised adoption support plans. There has only been one adoption
disruption in the last year. The low number of disruptions highlights the
effectiveness of matching processes and support services.


The adoption panel is well established and has members from a range of
different backgrounds and with a range of different skills. Panel minutes
demonstrate scrutiny and appropriate challenge. While the agency decisionmakers minutes regarding adoption plans demonstrate appropriate scrutiny,
the rationale for decisions in relation to matches is less clearly recorded. The
minutes fail to show what documents have been considered and they do not
clearly explain the reason for the life-long and life-changing matching
decisions made for children. (Recommendation)


Adopted children benefit from well-assessed, meaningful contact with birth
family members. A dedicated social worker facilitates and promotes letterbox


contact, enabling children to benefit from receiving letters from their birth
family that will add meaning and value to their lives.

Social workers use a range of tools to help children to prepare for their move
to their adoptive family. Beautifully presented life-story books, written in childfriendly language, alongside lots of photographs, bring childrens histories to
life. All adopted children also receive a later-life letter, which is extremely
detailed and written for an older audience.


Adoption support is a strength. The North Somerset adoption and permanence
team provides an effective range of support for children and their parents.
This includes a sitting service, support groups for adopters, children and
young people, therapeutic parenting programmes, individual therapy, school
holiday activities and play schemes and celebration events. Adopters spoken
to during the inspection were unanimous in their praise of the support they
have received, describing how the non-judgemental, can-do and extremely
supportive approach of their social workers has made a significant difference
to their and their childrens quality of life. Good use is made of the adoption
support fund, ensuring that families who require specialist support receive it.
Birth parents also have access to appropriate counselling and support and are
routinely signposted and referred to this.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good

Care leavers in North Somerset are well supported by an experienced team of
PAs who are committed to meeting the young peoples needs. The local
authority is currently supporting 121 care leavers, while 12 care leavers have
been supported to remain with their foster carers. A further six young people
are currently in custody, but are well supported and monitored by PAs and
other key professionals. PAs visit young people regularly, plan effectively to
meet their needs and ensure that preparation for independence is robust and
that young people experience a smooth transition to adulthood.


The authority is very successful at keeping in touch with care leavers until
they are at least 21 years old. PAs are in touch with almost all those young
people who left care in the last five years. Many young people regularly visit
the attractive and welcoming base room set aside for their use in the town
hall. Young people value highly the care and support they receive from their
PAs and the practical support they are given with basic needs, such as food.
PAs know the care leavers they are in contact with well, and work effectively
to support them to understand the impact of their life choices and to ensure
that they reduce the risk of potential harm that they are exposed to. Care
leavers who are parents, or expectant parents, benefit from the introduction
of volunteer peer mentors who work alongside their PAs.



The progression coach provides a mentor role for care leavers and holds a
weekly employment search surgery in the base room, which young people
attend well and value highly.


The vast majority of care leavers have an up-to-date and robust pathway plan
that includes their health history, records of national insurance numbers, birth
certificates and passport applications. Plans are sufficiently detailed, and the
best include a detailed review of previous targets and information about
whether they have been fully or partially achieved. A minority of weaker plans
do not include a robust review of measurable outcomes, and in these
examples targets are repeated. An audit of the quality of pathway plans
completed in January of this year was thorough and appropriately self-critical
and resulted in strengthened arrangements to ensure that plans for care
leavers are measurable and outcome focused.


Support for care leavers to take up education or training opportunities, such
as apprenticeships or university places, is very good. The local authority funds
vacation and term-time accommodation, and young people are paid an annual
bursary. Additionally, care leavers receive a one-off payment to buy books or
a laptop and software, and receive financial assistance with travel if needed.
Young people taking up an apprenticeship do not have to pay council tax. The
authority currently employs 12 apprentices and has recently confirmed the
appointment of a further seven, all of whom are care leavers. The number of
care leavers who are not in employment, education or training is slowly
declining from a high rate at the end of 2016.


The care leaving team helps its young people to celebrate their achievements
by running an annual celebration event and care leaver of the month awards.
Young people requested that this annual celebration took place outside the
town hall last year, and the team enabled this to happen. The young people
responded very well to this expression of trust and respect.


Young people leaving care understand their entitlements well and speak very
highly of the help that they receive from their PAs. Young people particularly
value the support they receive to access gym membership, passport
applications, driving tests and benefit claims. A care leavers forum has been
established by a former care leaver, in conjunction with staff at the care
leavers service. This group is both energetic and actively engaged in service
development, such as the redesign of the leaflet that explains entitlements to
care leavers. Young people said that this updated version is very clear and
helpful.


The financial impact on care leavers who live in supported housing and take
up employment instead of living on benefits is a disincentive to seeking
employment. Young people are safe and feel safe in supported
accommodation and are understandably reluctant to move out until they are
ready. The authority has been slow to roll out the accredited programme it


helped to design, which is intended to encourage and enable young people to
develop the practical and emotional skills needed to move on into
unsupported accommodation.

The range, type and locations of suitable accommodation are not sufficiently
extensive to meet the needs or wishes of those care leavers who have the
most complex support needs. The authority knows this from the report it
commissioned in January 2017 and is exploring inventive ways of trying to
resolve the matter. Overall, there is enough accommodation and young
people said that the authority is quick to place them, but that occasionally the
placement breaks down because they are not ready for the move. The use of
bed and breakfast accommodation has significantly decreased and is now only
rarely used, in emergency circumstances. However, the local authority
recognises the need to cease the use of bed and breakfast accommodation, as
this is an inappropriate placement for vulnerable young people.


While a number of services are in place for care leavers who have mental ill
health, coupled with a history of substance misuse, the provision of help and
support by health services does not consistently meet their needs. PAs and
the designated nurse for children who are looked after support these most
vulnerable young people well. Outreach services are provided in some cases,
however, and group work takes place at a local centre that is used by clients
of all ages, some of whom have extreme drug dependency and can display
challenging behaviour. This inevitably deters some young people from seeking
this help. (Recommendation)


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement
to be good

Summary
Senior managers, elected members and partner agencies are committed to
improving outcomes for children and demonstrate understanding of their roles.
Recently strengthened partnership working is leading to improved delivery of
services. Senior managers are well aware of the strengths and weaknesses of
childrens services, having identified and taken action on many of the deficits seen
in this inspection. However, action taken to address areas for development
identified in the last inspection in 2012 have not resulted in consistent and
sustained improvements in some key areas. The local authority recognises that
more work is needed to ensure that practice is consistently good.
Supervision and management oversight are not sufficiently helping to raise practice
standards or ensure timely progression of childrens plans. The IROs quality
assurance role, while developing, is not yet effective in driving the improvement of
casework to improve outcomes for children.
Strategic arrangements to safeguard children and young people who go missing or
who are at risk of sexual exploitation are improving. However, scrutiny of potential
disruption activity is limited, as, despite a robust initial response, subsequent key
activities, such as return home interviews and support to all children at lower levels
of risk, are inconsistent.
Senior leaders and partners have implemented a comprehensive and wellresourced early-help offer to enable children and families to receive the right level
of support, when they first need it. Services to children who are adopted and to
care leavers have been prioritised effectively and are now good. The authority has
established an effective initial response to children and families in need of services,
through its front door arrangements. However, not all social work practice is as
effective as it should be, so not all children receive a timely response.
The scrutiny and use of performance information have been reinforced in North
Somerset and are now beginning to have a positive impact on outcomes for
children. Quality assurance arrangements and audit activity are improving and
these are contributing to the improved quality of social work across the service.
The workforce is increasingly stable as a result of the implementation of a wellconsidered workforce and recruitment strategy. Many social work staff are
relatively inexperienced, so the provision of high-quality staff development is a key
priority.


Inspection findings

The senior management team in North Somerset has a clear vision for
improvement across childrens services. The local authority knows and
understands the strengths and weaknesses of the frontline services. Senior
leaders have recognised most of the areas of deficit identified in this
inspection and have already started improvement actions. However,
significant challenges remain, as not all children are receiving a good enough
service. While some improvements have been made in the services offered to
children and families, these are not yet sufficiently widespread or embedded.
Some areas for development, identified at the last inspection in 2012, have
not yet been implemented or sustained. The pace of change in the local
authority has been adversely affected by staff turnover and variability in the
use of performance information and quality of management oversight.


Improvements have been made and strengthened arrangements are in place
to respond to children in need of help and protection. The edge-of-care
service has been reinforced, services to care leavers and adoption services are
now good and partnership working is now better established. Responses to
children at risk of sexual exploitation are improving at strategic and
operational levels, although the local authority recognises that this needs
consolidating.


Senior managers and political leaders demonstrate a strong commitment to
external scrutiny and challenge. Investigations into a significant
whistleblowing concern, while rigorous, had a detrimental impact on the
quality of partnership working. This, in turn, delayed the pace of improvement
in the authority. Leaders in North Somerset have since worked hard to repair
relationships, to develop a learning organisation and to embed a culture of
openness and transparency, with the intention of driving and sustaining
improvements across the service. Research projects, such as the, Your life,
your care survey, conducted with a local university and a national charity,
involving young people in care, have resulted in improvements in services for
children in care and care leavers. However, the lead member is not fully
aware of the variability in the quality of frontline practice, and this limits the
effectiveness of challenge and scrutiny to improve outcomes for children.


The childrens joint strategic needs analysis (JSNA) provides a comprehensive
summary of the issues and services for vulnerable children in North Somerset
and is used to inform commissioning arrangements effectively. The JSNA is
used to inform the work of the Health and Wellbeing Board (HWB), and these
are well aligned and set out local priorities for children in North Somerset.


Appropriate and clear governance arrangements between key strategic bodies
are overseen and coordinated by the HWB, which is chaired by the leader of
the council. These recent arrangements combine much of the work
undertaken previously by a series of boards and partnerships, and this


strengthens the support for plans progressing and holding partners to
account.

While the early-help offer is comprehensive, and there is a wide range of
appropriate services available for children and young people in all age ranges,
not all services are evaluated effectively by the local authority. As a result,
senior managers are unable to fully assess the impact of these preventative
services on outcomes for children.


Arrangements to identify and respond to individual children at risk of sexual
exploitation have been strengthened and continue to be a key priority for
senior leaders. However, senior management scrutiny of those children most
at risk is limited, and intelligence about this group of children is not being
used effectively to track and disrupt perpetrators. While the local authority has
recently undertaken a recommissioning process to increase the availability of
intervention services to children at risk of sexual exploitation, work with taxi
drivers and hoteliers has yet to be fully completed.


The local authority has further strengthened the corporate parenting
arrangements, and corporate parenting is well embedded and energetically
pursued across the partnership. Effective arrangements are in place to ensure
that children looked after are prioritised and the local authority is ambitious in
the pursuit of opportunities for children in North Somerset. The local authority
now offers a comparatively high number of apprenticeship opportunities and
provides relief on council tax to care leavers.


The views of children looked after and care leavers are routinely gathered and
considered by the local authority, and this is a key strength in North
Somerset. The Children in Care Council (CiCC) is an active group of young
people, and their views are shared effectively with senior leaders, leading to
improved outcomes for children looked after and care leavers. Feedback has
resulted in creative improvements that looked after children and care leavers
have identified as important to improving their lives.


The use of performance information has recently been strengthened and now
includes a robust suite of data. Managers at all levels do not yet use this
information consistently. While some managers use this information
effectively, others do not use data systematically to analyse and improve
performance. For example, the timeliness of assessments and frequency of
visits to children are not robustly scrutinised by all managers.
(Recommendation)


Quality assurance arrangements are improving but are not yet ensuring that
all children receive a good-quality service. Managers at all levels, including the
DCS, audit childrens case files. The monthly thematic audit cycle is well
supported by a clear methodology, and this auditing programme contributes
significantly to senior management oversight of specific cases. Audit findings


are well identified, learning is disseminated effectively to staff and findings are
used to identify key training priorities for staff. However, the quality assurance
function of the independent reviewing officers is underdeveloped and not yet
contributing to addressing drift and delay for some children. The IRO annual
report has been considered by the LSCB executive meeting members and
Childrens Champion Group. However, the IRO service has not submitted an
annual report to the LSCB, and this has therefore affected the LSCBs ability to
monitor the effectiveness of frontline practice and outcomes for children.

Management oversight in North Somerset is inconsistent. Frontline managers
do not consistently identify weaknesses in casework or challenge drift and
delay. There is a lack of focus, particularly in relation to the timeliness of
assessments and on influencing the progression of plans for children. While
most social workers are supervised regularly and feel well supported, the
quality of supervision records is variable. Some good examples were seen of
reflective and analytical supervision notes, but weaker examples lack sufficient
detail and do not reflect the quality of supervision that is reported by social
workers to take place. Senior managers are aware of these ongoing
weaknesses but have made insufficient progress in dealing with them.
(Recommendation)


Workforce development is a key priority for senior leaders. The training
programme is comprehensive and wide ranging, and the impact of improved
training opportunities is beginning to contribute to improving practice
standards. However, the evaluation of training events is not yet sufficiently
robust.


The principal social worker is committed to ensuring that improvements within
social work practice are made, sustained and monitored effectively and
reviewed. The principal social worker delivers regular training programmes,
easily accessible to social workers. Best-practice standards are disseminated
effectively. This scrutiny and oversight, coupled with consistent training and
monthly newsletters, are starting to drive improvements in practice.


A well-targeted and effective staff recruitment framework has contributed to
an increasingly stable workforce. Key messages from the annual staff survey
are used by senior leaders to inform decision-making regarding service
development and to identify key learning needs across the workforce. The
local authority has significantly reduced the use of agency staff over the last
year, and a high proportion of the remaining agency staff have now been in
post for a considerable period of time. As a result, social worker turnover
rates are reducing and are now at 14%. Eighteen new social workers have
joined the local authority in the last 12 months.


Caseloads are reported by social workers and managers to be manageable. A
very small number of social workers in specific teams carry a higher number
of childrens cases, but there are clear plans in place to reduce these to an


acceptable level, and managers monitor these cases closely. There is a
comprehensive support package for newly qualified social workers, which
includes dedicated support from consultant social workers, regular workshops
and a supportive newly qualified social worker peer system.

Commissioning arrangements and sufficiency strategies are clear, but these
are not yet resulting in sufficient choice of placements for some looked after
children, particularly teenagers. The quality of independent placement
provision is overseen by the assistant director, and key partners scrutinise
effectively the quality and standard of provision provided. Inspectors saw how
this quality assurance mechanism has improved the outcomes for individual
children by, for example, reducing the use of residential units, by matching
skilled foster placements to specific young people.


The complaints process in North Somerset has been strengthened and is now
effective. Senior managers collate and disseminate well any learning from
complaints, and this has contributed, for example, to improvements within the
IRO service as well as to the introduction of advocacy services to child
protection processes. A newly designed complaints leaflet for children is in the
process of being introduced to ensure that children are easily able to access
the complaints process and share their experiences.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate

Executive summary
The LSCB in North Somerset is inadequate. It does not fully understand the
experiences of children locally and therefore does not always identify where
improvements can be made.
A comprehensive dataset is not available to assist the board in monitoring and
evaluating frontline practice or holding partners to account. Important
performance information, such as annual IRO reports, has not been presented to
the board, and the first private fostering report has only recently been presented.
This means that the board has not been aware of activity in these areas of work
and, therefore, it has not held partners to account or focused attention on service
improvement. Despite some challenge by the chair, there is a reliance on board
members to report information to the board as it arises. This means that the board
is not sufficiently proactive in investigating and understanding local practice.
There is a developing system in place for the board to assure itself that all
recommendations from multi-agency audits are being progressed, or that practice
has improved. Similarly, there are no single-agency audits regularly reported, or a
system in place for the board to assure itself that partners are examining their own
practice robustly.
The board has an effective learning and development framework, and a range of
multi-agency training courses is available for partners. However, there has been no
complete training needs analysis conducted and there is limited evaluation of the
quality, availability and take-up of single-agency training. Evaluation of training
courses requires further strengthening to show learning and practice improvement.
The annual report does not provide a thorough and robust assessment of the
performance and effectiveness of local services.
The board has been effective in developing multi-agency arrangements regarding
sexual exploitation and missing. However, arrangements to train taxi drivers and
hoteliers have been too slow, and planned work has not yet started.
The child death overview panel (CDOP) and SCR sub-group are well run and
effective. The SCR, Holly, has been widely publicised and has contributed to the
boards work to revise and monitor thresholds. A refreshed threshold document,
improved training and a neglect strategy and toolkit are now available. The young
peoples subgroup is an emerging strength of the board, and young people are
directly involved in the work of the board.


Recommendations

Ensure that a comprehensive dataset is developed in order for the board to
monitor and challenge partners regarding safeguarding performance and to
measure outcomes against its business priorities.


Ensure that the board requests and receives annual reports from a range of
partners in order to scrutinise practice and hold partners to account.


Ensure that the business manager is sufficiently resourced to meet the needs
of the board.


Ensure that a full training needs analysis is completed and that the quality,
availability and take-up of single-agency training are monitored. Ensure that
methods are developed to evaluate all training courses over time.


Develop a system to report on single-agency audits and ensure that
recommendations from all audits are tracked to ensure partners compliance
and improved practice.


Develop reporting arrangements to the board following recommendations of
section 11 audits and widen their reach to encompass community, leisure and
faith groups.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The LSCB in North Somerset is inadequate. Despite evidence of a great deal
of board activity, it is often difficult to discern the impact that this is having on
the help, protection and care of children. The LSCB does not fully understand
the experiences of children locally and therefore does not always identify
where improvements can be made. Lack of dedicated hours for the business
manager, who covers several other managerial roles within the local authority,
has not assisted in the boards effectiveness. (Recommendation)


Partner agencies are well represented on the board. An executive group,
made up of senior leaders and the sub-group chairs, meets quarterly and
ensures that progress is made against board priorities. The lead member sits
as a participating observer and two lay members ensure that the voice of the
local community is heard. Board members participate in other boards and
partnerships, and there is an expectation that this crossover will ensure
alignment of priorities. Governance arrangements are weakened by the fact
that the DCS acts as the boards vice-chair, and this dilutes the level of
independent challenge of performance and impact of practice on children. The
DCS sits on the HWB, and the LSCB chair is also the Adult Safeguarding Board


chair. The chair has been proactive in ensuring a more joined-up approach to
safeguarding arrangements, and some sub-groups, such as sexual
exploitation/missing, are now jointly organised between children and adult
boards. Terms of reference for sub-group members set out roles and
expectations, but attendance at some sub-groups has not always been
consistent and has led to challenge from the chair.

A comprehensive dataset is not available to assist the board in monitoring and
evaluating frontline practice. Information obtained is weighted towards the
local authority, lacks sufficient detail and is inconsistently recorded from one
month to the next. The numerous gaps include insufficient data regarding
child protection cases, childrens health, education, workforce profile, children
who have disabilities, private fostering and staff training. The chair is
ineffective in challenging partners to improve the volume and quality of data,
but currently the LSCB does not have an accurate understanding of services
and trends in order to fully monitor service provision or hold partners to
account. (Recommendation)


Although the board receives reports and presentations, there have been some
omissions of important performance information. For example, annual IRO
reports and information from child protection chairs have not been presented
to the board, meaning that the board is unaware of whether key meetings
and reviews are happening on time, of whether children and families are
participating, of the level of multi-agency involvement or of how practice
concerns are being addressed. The first private fostering report has only
recently been compiled and presented to the board, and therefore there has
been a lack of urgency in holding partners to account for awareness raising
and activity to improve the quality of the response to children living in such
arrangements. Some areas of work are not comprehensively reported to the
board annually, such as childrens complaints or the work of Cafcass, and
there is a reliance on board members to provide feedback that they regard as
significant from their own agency. This means that the board is not being
sufficiently proactive in investigating and understanding local practice.
(Recommendation)


The early-help sub-group has worked effectively to raise the profile of early
help and to develop services. Work to develop the triage system as part of the
One Front Door is leading to better analysis and swifter identification of need
by early-help coordinators. The sub-group recognises that more needs to be
done to increase early-help involvement in schools and, therefore, has
deployed schools ambassadors to work with staff and designated teachers to
promote awareness and to consider potential crisis points, such as school
transitions. An early-help dashboard is not enabling the board to
systematically evaluate the effectiveness of early-help services to children and
their families. (Recommendation)



The board has provided a robust response to raise awareness and develop
multi-agency arrangements regarding sexual exploitation and missing. The
sub-group has become a joint children and adult group in recognition that the
safeguarding needs of care leavers and those of vulnerable adults both
require scrutiny. Strategies, guidance, action plans and practitioner tools, such
as risk assessments, have been developed, following a child sexual
exploitation audit in 2016. Sexual exploitation/missing remains as a business
priority in recognition that more needs to be done. Work with the licensing
team to train taxi drivers has been slow, and planned work with hoteliers has
not yet started.


Although there is a comprehensive learning and development framework,
more needs to be done to ensure that practice improvements are made and
sustained. There is no complete training needs analysis for all partners, or
information regarding the quality, availability or take-up of single-agency
training. There is a wide range of multi-agency training courses available, but
the training evaluations designed to measure impact at four months are not
being completed. There are no alternative measures being consistently used
in order to demonstrate how learning or practice has improved.
(Recommendation)


Recent audits on domestic abuse and child sexual exploitation reflect the
boards business priorities, and at the time of the inspection an early-help
audit was just being finalised. Audits are collated in two parts, regarding
children (subjects) and then practitioners knowledge and understanding of
the audit theme. Audits seen during the inspection did not provide clear
messages from children regarding the practice or services received, and there
was no feedback from parents or carers. Although there is evidence that some
recommendations from audits are being progressed, there is no robust
mechanism in place for the board to track whether partners are acting on
recommendations or that practice has improved. Similarly, there is no regular
reporting of single-agency audits or a system in place for the board to assure
itself that partners are examining their own practice robustly.
(Recommendation)


The LSCB works with other Local Safeguarding Children Boards to conduct
section 11 audits, and work is under way to develop peer challenge
workshops. A section 11 report from 2016 highlights the strengths and
weaknesses found in North Somerset, but board minutes do not reflect how
these findings have been addressed. The board has yet to reach out to faith,
community and leisure organisations to conduct similar audits. The board is
working on section 175 returns from early years providers, schools and
colleges regarding safeguarding arrangements. (Recommendation)


The LSCB annual report does not provide a comprehensive assessment of the
performance and effectiveness of local services. There is insufficient
information in some areas, such as audit findings. It is over-reliant on sub-


group reports, which vary in quality, and overall it is too descriptive and fails
to illustrate the difference made by the board. The LSCB recognises the
deficits in the recent report and has devised a new template to improve
quality in future.

The board has demonstrated some effective work in monitoring thresholds. An
audit presented in 2016 showed that there was confusion regarding the earlyhelp process, and work from this has led to the early-help triage process. The
published SCR, Holly, brought further scrutiny of thresholds and has led to a
refreshed threshold document and the introduction of a neglect strategy and
toolkit. The board has monitored the SCR action plan effectively, and an
action plan from health has resulted in improved safeguarding arrangements.
For example, health visitors and general practitioners (GPs) are meeting at
least monthly to discuss families of concern and are now able to use a shared
electronic recording system. Training since the SCR has been bolstered to
include more information on neglect, and a further threshold audit planned for


Decision-making in response to potential SCRs is swift and effective, as the
SCR sub-group meets as a panel bi-monthly to consider whether cases reach
the SCR criteria. Actions from the last published SCR, Holly, have been
monitored and completed by the board. Training and learning have been
widely disseminated and are included on the LSCB website, and this has led to
improved practice and outcomes for children in some areas.


The CDOP arrangements covering North Somerset and three other local
authorities are strong. Agencies work well together on the panel and all
provide relevant information regarding child deaths. The CDOP annual report
provides clear information regarding numbers of deaths, themes and actions
taken. Suicides of young people using bunk bed slats to hang themselves
have been taken up with the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents,
and the panel has worked with local planning departments regarding the
proximity of roads and pathways, following a cyclist being knocked from her
bicycle.


The recent development of a young peoples sub-group is an emerging
strength of the board. Young people, aged 16 to 18 years, have made
presentations to the board on concerns such as online safety, have developed
promotional materials and are working on improvements to the LSCB website.
The group has developed its own priorities, such as anti-bullying, internet
safety and the accessibility of policies and procedures in schools, particularly
for pupils who have learning difficulties. Its work is assisting the board in
developing priorities that matter to young people and ensuring that their voice
is heard at all board activity.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Emmy Tomsett
Deputy lead inspector: Joy Howick
Team inspectors: Lorna Schlechte, Rachel Griffiths, Karen Wareing, Nick Gladfield,
Nicola Bennett
Senior data analyst: Matthew King
Quality assurance manager: Janet Fraser


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


