Nottingham City Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 11 March 2014  2 April 2014
Report published: 14 May 2014
The overall judgement is requires improvement.
There are no widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being
harmed or at risk of harm. The welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and
promoted. However, the authority is not yet delivering good protection and help and
care for children, young people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
requires improvement.
The LSCB is not yet demonstrating the characteristics of good.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the local safeguarding children board


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority requires improvement and is not yet good because

Common assessments are of variable quality. Some are good and include the
voice of the child but others contain insufficient detail.


In a minority of cases seen, the escalation process was not utilised effectively
to ensure that disagreements about the level of support children receive was
resolved. This occurred within childrens social care as well as between
community-based teams and childrens social care. This meant that childrens
needs remained unassessed and/or unaddressed during the period of dispute.


At the time of inspection 89 children assessed as being in need of statutory
services were awaiting allocation to a social worker. These children are actively
monitored and visited, but a small minority of the childrens files sampled
identified children who have needs that are likely to escalate unless they
receive an appropriate service promptly.


Some children experience poor quality assessments and weak plans. In a small
minority of childrens files seen, there was drift in the childs plan and in their
progress.


Drift in childrens plans is exacerbated by a lack of robust challenge or
escalation by the child protection conference chairs. The chairs have caseloads
which are too high and this limits their capacity to use their independent
oversight of childrens progress to effect change.


The high caseloads of the child protection conference chairs limit their overall
contribution to quality assurance in childrens social care, for example in
undertaking themed audits of casework.


Some children and young peoples assessments and plans make insufficient
reference to their personal characteristics such as their ethnicity, disability,
sexual orientation and culture.


The consultation forum is valued by social workers, but its impact has not
been formally evaluated so its effect on planning for children is not clear.


Many plans for children and young people are not measurable and lack clear
outcomes. They often consist of a list of tasks, some with no clear timescales. A
small number of plans are significantly out of date, and when the plan for the
child is considered by a core group or review conference they are not routinely
updated. Poor planning is also a feature of looked after childrens case files.
The lack of thorough plans makes it difficult to monitor and review the progress
made by children and young people, and makes it difficult for the childs


advocate and/or independent reviewing officer (IRO) to challenge slow or
insufficient progress. This has led to delay for some children and young people
in having their needs fully met.
sister(s) records unedited. In these cases the record does not show that each
child has a personalised assessment of need and a plan to meet those needs.
work recording practice. The dual recording systems run slowly and contribute
to considerable amounts of wasted time, delays in uploading documents and
frustration for staff and managers in childrens social care. Having dual systems
makes it difficult to see the full picture in relation to a child/young person and
their progress, and increases the likelihood of missing key documents when
undertaking a review of the childs history and current circumstances. The poor
quality of these arrangements encourages workers to find alternative methods
of recording work, which is stored elsewhere. As recording takes a
disproportionate amount of social work time, this reduces the time available for
direct work with children and their families.
decisive action earlier, which would have reduced the length of time children
experienced neglect.
not always carried out quickly enough and health care plans are not always
present on their files or kept up to date.
variable. Attendance at school has shown an improving trend, but during this
academic year absenteeism has risen.
expected of them than those of primary school age. Attainment of children at
ages 7 and 11 years is below that of the national average. The attainment gap
between looked after children and the rest has narrowed, but too many 16 to
employment.
and young people is underdeveloped. There are no arrangements in place to
alert the virtual school at an early stage when children begin to experience
problems in their education. Activity only takes place at the point of crisis rather
than at the point of preventing concerns escalating. The virtual school ceases to
monitor young people after the age of 16.


child when they first come to live with them.
Reviewing Officers (IROs) between reviews. IRO caseloads are too high and
this is affecting the quality of the service they can offer.
not always present in their files and this makes it difficult to see how well they
do once they have returned home.
manner or present on childrens files. All meetings chaired by IROs should have
a minute taker, but inspectors saw instances when this did not happen. Delays
in minutes being written up by the centralised administration unit are common
and means that minutes are not distributed promptly to all those who have a
role in supporting the child.
timescales so the local authority cannot be sure that drift and delay does not
occur for some children.
available immediately upon placement. Providers are not always supplied with
key documents about the child or young person when they are first placed.
young people make and what needs to change to improve things for them, but
care plans are not routinely updated and agreed in line with changes. The care
plan is not regarded as the key document which summarises the childs
circumstances and clearly sets out the arrangements to ensure that their needs
are met.
Fostering Service (England) Regulations 2011.
to improve their impact and quality, but there is more to do to ensure that
there is sufficient technical knowledge and expertise within both aspects of the
service to maintain and strengthen this recent improvement.
adoption. Delays are often built in at an early stage, with family finding not
being started quickly enough. Adoption is ruled out too readily for a small
minority of young children.
children achieving permanence.


commissioned independent social work provider is variable.
appropriate to their needs. The referral pathway and criteria for support are
unclear and some requests are not being responded to in a timely way.
sufficiently outcome focused. Some young people do not see the point of their
plan.
carers after the age of 18 years.
history.
children and young people have experienced too many changes of social
worker. This has impacted on effective relationship building and their plans
being progressed in a timely way.
infrequently and experienced changes of managers. Records of supervision
show little evidence of reflection about casework practice.
mentor or protected caseloads.
risen recently and, for a minority of staff, they are higher than the local
authoritys preferred maximum.
on measuring outputs rather than the quality of service or outcomes for
children.
across all areas and information from audits is not being aggregated effectively.
The local authority has the following strengths
families benefit from and can access easily.
ensures that children and families receive help appropriate to their needs.


where they have a concern are robust.
responds promptly, undertakes good assessments, refers on to appropriate
services, including childrens social care, and has good access to expert social
work advice.
model of assessing and responding to childrens needs  the Signs of Safety
model. This is increasingly leading to a shared language and shared
understanding of risk and protective factors. Parents report understanding the
model and it helping them to understand why people are concerned and what
they need to do to reduce concerns.
and their numbers are reducing because of prompt action.
which ensures that children at most risk are identified and protected.
which enables them to discuss children whose progress feels stuck. They
describe good outcomes from this.
of sexual exploitation are identified and tracked, to ensure that they receive
appropriate services to reduce risks. The police officer co-located with other
staff that support children in care has a positive impact on early identification of
young people most at risk, enabling interventions to be put in place to help
them quickly.
high risk of becoming looked after receive intensive support services, which
keep the family together and improve outcomes for the child/young person.
children and young people and the time to get to a final hearing continues to
reduce, which means that childrens plans can progress more swiftly.
authority, which makes good use of Special Guardianship Orders; an increasing
number of children are being adopted year on year.
new marketing strategy, is leading to more inquiries and more families for
children. Some children who have been waiting a long time have now been
found adoptive families including older children, children with complex needs,
and brother and sister groups.


difficulties are able to have specialist mental health assessments and services
quickly. This includes children and young people who are placed outside the
local authority area.
residential providers each year, which adds to the robust quality assurance of
external provision.
partnership between the local authority and Nottingham City Homes has
increased the availability of suitable accommodation, including more in-house
semi-independent units. Young people report that they feel safe where they live
and have good support if they have any concerns.
resulted in some care leavers gaining permanent employment with the
authority.
this does not work out, they receive prompt support and can return to more
supported accommodation until they are ready to move on.
the transition from childrens services to adult services support. Support
continues until the care package is fully established.
developed. There are clear links between One Nottingham, the Childrens
Partnership Board, the Health and Well-being Board, Nottingham City
Safeguarding Childrens Board (NCSCB) and the Corporate Parenting Board with
robust reporting arrangements in place.
Member for children and families understands the service pressures well and
champions the needs of children and young people effectively.
uses this information to target resources where they are needed the most.
Commissioning activity is needs-led and evidence-based.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
Areas for improvement
effective and high quality social work and other statutory services to children
and young people. In particular, that the caseloads of social workers and IROs
are manageable and allow them to undertake their statutory duties to a high
standard.
that provides the right level of critical challenge and support.
supervision and mentoring support, including protected caseloads.
fast, and that it supports social workers and managers in their primary tasks of
improving outcomes for children.
that meetings are minuted well, promptly uploaded and distributed swiftly. This
applies to child protection arrangements as well as services for looked after
children.
and measurable, ascribe tasks clearly, and specify the desired outcomes for the
child.
how managers should oversee this to ensure that they are sufficiently
comprehensive and take account of all relevant information.
impact as well as content, and ensures that they capture the voice of the child.
Reviews of common assessments should be clearly recorded and retained with
the childs other records.
sufficient challenge to improve plans and avoid drift and delay for children and
young people. This is relevant for child protection arrangements as well as
services for looked after children.
contain good quality chronologies, and make clear the purpose and
effectiveness of direct work with children and families.


of a child or young persons needs, are specific about roles and responsibilities,
and are updated as necessary.
speed up their access to health and education services.
after children, including extending the remit and capacity of the virtual school.
about a child when they are placed, including essential key documents.
that the plan is informed by a full assessment of the childs circumstances and
the plan sets out how the child and their family will be supported.
where they are going to live when they need to move.
bigger families to remain together, and for children in care to be looked after by
families from similar backgrounds.
statutory regulations.
children to ensure that the best outcomes are achieved without delay.
decision that it is in their best interest to be adopted.
support are assessed promptly and, where appropriate, provided with packages
of support.
employment.
the age of 18 where it is in their best interests to do so.
Senior managers should enable the workforce to understand key priorities and
the action required by them and their managers to meet those priorities.


framework that focuses on outcomes as well as outputs and improves the
experiences of children, young people and families.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Sheena Doyle
Team inspectors: Nigel Parkes, Pauline Turner, Carolyn Spray, Susan Myers, Hilary
Crossley, Jon Bowman and Tina Shepherd.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 62,394 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Nottingham City. This is 20.4% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 35% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 32.3% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 29.8% (the national average is 15%)
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 45.9%
of all children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a
whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are Pakistani, Black Caribbean, and White and Black Caribbean.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 28.0% (the national average is 18%).
 in secondary schools is 23.4% (the national average is 14%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 2,713 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an
increase from 2,207 at 31 March 2013.
 At 31 March 2014, 479 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is an increase from 440 at 31 March 2013.
 At 31 March 2014, 14 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from 16 at 31 March 2013.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 584 children are being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 93 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 561 (89 per


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


authority area
 six live in residential special schools and all are out of the authority
area
area
 five live with parents
 seven children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 42 adoptions
returned to be looked after
on to independent living
 nine children and young people ceased to be looked after and are
now living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates seven childrens homes. Three were judged to
be good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection. One of the
homes opened December 2013 and is yet to be inspected.
 The previous inspection of Safeguarding and Looked After Children Services
was in December 2010. The local authority was judged to be good.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since November 2013.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since March 2012.


The local authority has delegated the assessment of prospective carers to a
social work provider: Social Work Choices.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
require improvement
services, including strong family support schemes. The Common Assessment
Framework (CAF) and the lead practitioner role are well embedded in agencies
in the city. More children are now benefitting from a CAF although their quality
is variable. Good information sharing at the Locality Access Panels ensures that
children receive additional support when they need it.
support teams, and the increasing number of closed CAFs shows that their
needs have been met well and they no longer need extra help. Good outcomes
achieved include: parents understanding and managing their childrens
behaviour better, improved attachments between children and their parent(s),
better sleep patterns, better behaviour and achievement at school, and better
support for young carers. Children receive help that is proportionate to the risks
they experience, or are likely to experience, and this includes children at risk of
neglect.
children and their families are safe and efficient. The co-location of the Children
and Families Direct Service with the social care screening and duty teams
ensures that staff who take phone call enquiries from professionals or members
of the public have easy access to qualified social work advice and expertise.
These arrangements lead to good quality communication and speedy referrals
to childrens social care when required. The systematic use of safety net audits
ensures that those children and families where there are recurrent concerns are
identified and they are not allowed to fall through the net.
enquiries are carried out in a timely fashion. The interface between the out of
hours emergency duty team and day time services works well. Where issues of
greater concern about a child are identified, strategy discussions are held
promptly and involve relevant professionals.
Social workers apply the Signs of Safety model well and this clearly identifies
known risk and protective factors for a child, leading to analysis and next steps.
This approach robustly identifies key risks such as domestic violence, substance
misuse and poor adult mental health. When childrens circumstances are being
assessed, they are seen and talked to on their own.
to their changing needs and risks. This includes transferring support to
childrens social care or transferring them from statutory services to community


based services when their needs have lessened. These step up and step down
procedures are clear and robust. In nearly all the childrens cases seen, children
transferred quickly from screening and duty to targeted family support (step
down) or to childrens social care (step up), appropriate to their level of need.
conferences and made the subject of child protection plans. Conferences are
well attended by parents, who are encouraged to contribute throughout. They
are helped to understand the concerns that others have about their children
through good use of the Signs of Safety model. This helps them to understand
what people are worried about and what needs to change to reduce concerns
and ensure their child is safe. Parents say they now feel more involved in
developing child protection plans. However, there is more to do to fully embed
the Signs of Safety model in conferences and maximise its full potential by all
chairs.
are taken seriously and dealt with promptly. The local authority designated
officer (LADO) ensures that all allegations are robustly followed through with
clear outcomes recorded.
safeguarded and receive an appropriate education. Reducing numbers of
families are choosing to home educate their children because they are
dissatisfied with the school. There is a good reduction in the number of
teenagers whose parents choose home education.
by two disabled childrens teams. Families can access low level services without
a social work assessment, removing unnecessary bureaucracy for them, and all
initial assessments are jointly undertaken by a social worker and an
occupational therapist, which is good practice. Disabled children and their
families benefit from good multi-agency working and integrated meetings.
Disabled children can access a variety of support services and their transition to
adult services is facilitated well by the multi-agency transitions team.
station provides a thorough response to all notified domestic abuse incidents.
Those children and families in need of support are identified swiftly. The team
ensures that a full picture of the household is built up by gathering further
information from police, health and social care systems. This information is
considered alongside the specialist domestic abuse risk assessment completed
at the time of the incident. There is a good range of support services for
survivors of domestic abuse and their children, which they are put in touch with
promptly. In the most serious cases, referrals are made swiftly to childrens
social care and/or to the Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference (MARAC)
for assessment, services and detailed monitoring.


quality information is shared and actions are agreed. The pregnancy liaison
group ensures that unborn childrens needs are considered well and results in,
for example, supportive intervention programmes for parents who misuse
drugs.
services were awaiting allocation to a social worker although all child protection
and children in care were allocated. Prompt allocation is being hampered by
social workers high caseloads. These children are actively monitored by team
managers who make sure that duty social workers visit the children regularly
and seek updated information from other professionals. Despite these
measures, a small minority of the childrens files sampled identified children
who have needs that are likely to escalate unless they receive an appropriate
service promptly.
others do not address all the issues affecting the child. Poorer assessments
result in weaker plans. In a small minority of childrens files reviewed by
inspectors, there was drift in the childs plan and in their progress. This was due
to a variety of factors, including non-engagement by parents. Drift is
exacerbated by a lack of robust challenge or escalation by the child protection
conference chairs. The chairs always bring their views about a childs plan to
the relevant social worker and team manager, but they have high caseloads
and, while their commitment to championing childrens welfare and safety is
strong, they have limited capacity beyond this to ensure that children are
always making sufficiently rapid progress and that their plans are on track. High
caseloads also limit their overall contribution as a service to quality assurance
and strategic development plans within childrens social care.
took very good account of their individual characteristics such as any disability,
their ethnicity, and personal identity issues. Other records made insufficient
reference to the personal characteristics of the children, and the general
standard of recording in this area requires improvement and better consistency.
workers to benefit from the opportunity for high quality reflective discussion
about work with a child and family which feels 'stuck'. The group makes
recommendations which often give a new direction and impetus to case work.
The forum is highly valued by social workers who can describe anecdotal
benefits, but its impact has not been formally evaluated so its effect on
planning for children is not clear.
desirable outcomes. They often consist of a list of tasks, some with no clear
timescales. A small number of plans are significantly out of date and, when the
plan for the child is considered by a core group or review conference, they are


not routinely updated. In the majority of the childrens case files reviewed by
inspectors it was difficult to see what the plan was achieving for the child. Most
childrens files contain a chronology, but these are of variable quality and most
need updating.
childs needs, characteristics and circumstances well. They are also able to
describe a good variety of direct work undertaken with children and young
people. This is less evident in their written records, which tend to lack accounts
of direct work with children/young people. The electronic recording system
allows staff to duplicate a childs record to their brother(s) and sister(s) records
unedited. Although staff have been given clear instructions about the need to
personalise records after duplication, this is not always done, and in a few
cases the record does not show that each child has a personalised assessment
of need and a plan to meet those needs.
effectively oversee and coordinate arrangements for identifying children and
young people vulnerable to child sexual exploitation as well as those who are
missing from home or care. Children identified as being at risk of sexual
exploitation, or who might be at risk from going missing, are discussed at multiagency strategy meetings which are independently chaired to determine next
steps. These arrangements are good and they lead to co-ordinated plans to
tackle the risk. Young people at risk of sexual exploitation are provided with
additional support from the NSPCCs Respect and Protect project. All plans are
robustly monitored by a senior manager to make sure they are working and
helping to keep children and young people safer.
team of family support workers and educational welfare officers, who offer
support as appropriate and troubleshoot difficulties. The team is currently
tracking 282 children and young people. Of these, 208 are being supported by
education welfare officers to improve their attendance, and 74 children and
young people are currently without a school place. A small proportion of those
missing education remain untraced, such as those who apply for a school place
but then leave the area, but thorough efforts are made to identify them and
take remedial action whenever possible. Persistent action in one case led to a
school phobic pupil thriving in alternative provision.
educated who benefit from the support and tracking of the Elective Home
Education service.
worker or other professional, but the reasons for the behaviour are unclear or
there are insufficiently serious consequences, practitioners benefit from being
able to present their case to the concerns network, which enables expert
advice to be provided and supports better practice.


to ensure that children are visited sufficiently frequently and additional visits
are made if a concern is raised. Good efforts are made to raise awareness of
private fostering, including briefing sessions to school and health staff, and an
ongoing publicity campaign to raise professional and public awareness.
work recording practice. It is likely that the slowness and lack of user
friendliness contribute to the poor recording practices identified above, as there
is a clear difference between the knowledge of children and their families that
social workers have and the information which is recorded. The dual system of
recording information about children and their families within the electronic
client record and within a separate electronic document storage system creates
many difficulties for staff and managers. It is difficult to see the full picture in
relation to a child/young person and their progress, and it is possible to miss
key documents when undertaking a review of the childs history and current
circumstances. The two systems interact very slowly with each other and the
slowness of this interface creates frustration and wastes valuable staff time.
Recording takes a disproportionate amount of social work time which, in effect,
reduces the time available for direct work with children and their families.
others have experienced more infrequent supervision and changes of
managers. There is a high proportion of social workers who have recently
qualified in the workforce. Some experience good support for their assessed
and supported early career which is an entitlement, but others do not benefit
from a protected caseload and support from a mentor who is not their line
manager. Supervisions relating to childrens progress are uploaded to the
electronic document storage system and provide additional evidence of
managerial oversight of practice. However, they tend to focus on identifying
tasks for the worker to complete rather than achieving clearly defined outcomes
for children.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence requires improvement
their best interests and are, on the whole, made in a planned way. The local
authority reviews each childs circumstances carefully to ensure that it only
looks after those children and young people who need to be removed from
their families and cannot be supported at home safely. One care leaver said: I
thought they had ruined my life by bringing me into care when I was 15 years
old. Now Im 17 I know it was the best thing that could have happened to me,
now I have a life, I have a future.
a wide range of effective prevention services. Of the 42 children presented to
the edge of care multi-agency panel in a three month period only 13 came into
care, with all the others receiving good services to support them in the
community and remain with their families. The local authority is getting better
at acting more swiftly and robustly where children and young people are
experiencing neglect, although in a small minority of cases seen the local
authority could have taken more decisive action earlier.
means that parents understand the consequences of failing to look after their
children, what needs to change, and the consequences if there is insufficient
improvement. Good quality social work assessments inform plans for children
and young people and this helps care proceedings to move along more quickly.
orders for children and young people who need alternative legal security and
these are accepted by the court as appropriate. Timescales for securing final
legal orders for children are good and continue to improve with decisions being
made increasingly quickly. Social workers and childrens guardians work
together well to agree the best plans for children and young people. The local
authority always considers the full range of permanence options for children,
including whether a child would benefit from a special guardianship order
(SGO) for a settled future. Of the 107 children and young people presented to
the SGO panel, 63 were felt to be suitable for a SGO as of February 2014 with
alternative permanence options being recommended for the other children. This
includes SGOs made for foster carers where this is in the childs best interests.
rarely come back into care and are successfully rehabilitated. Some children
benefit from support from the commissioned reunification project.
and young people. They carry out direct work with children and some social
workers use tools such as the three houses from the Signs of Safety model to
help them to understand how children feel, and to analyse this within the childs


whole context. The majority of social workers know their children well and can
articulate the plans for the child.
aspects of the childs journey and life are often contained in different
documents. The end result of assessments and analysis is not always reflected
in their care plans, which are often out of date, lack detail and lack timescales
for actions. Social workers reports for review meetings offer this detail in the
large majority of cases, however the care plan is not utilised as a key essential
document bringing everything together. The lack of thorough plans makes it
difficult to monitor and review the progress made by children and young
people, and makes it difficult for the childs advocate and/or IRO to challenge
slow or insufficient progress. This has led to delay and drift for some children
and young people.
has meant that children benefit from consistency of worker. However, more
recent organisational changes and turnover of staff means that some children
and young people have experienced changes of social worker. This has
impacted on effective relationship building and their plans being progressed in a
timely way.
young people who go missing from care, are at risk of child sexual exploitation,
misuse substances or are involved in offending, with a good range of
intervention services. A strength of the arrangements is the co-location of an
experienced looked after children police officer in the 15+ service for older
looked after children and care leavers. This means that children and young
people at risk are identified quickly and receive a swift assessment and service.
Interventions are demonstrating positive outcomes for the large majority of
children and young people in helping to keep them safe.
assessments when they first become looked after are not always carried out
quickly enough and health care plans are not always present on their files or
kept up to date. The local authority recognises this is an area for development.
Children and young peoples emotional health needs are responded to promptly
and are well informed by up to date strengths and difficulties questionnaires,
which helps to gauge their emotional health. Children and young people benefit
from a dedicated Child and Adolescent Mental Health service (CAMHS)
specifically for looked after children and young people, including those who are
placed outside the city. The service makes sure that children and young
peoples therapeutic needs are being met in the specialist placements they live
in.
variable. Attendance at school has shown an improving trend, but during this
academic year absenteeism has risen. Persistent absence is decreasing


significantly, as is the use of fixed-term exclusions. While there is generally an
improving trend in the attainment of looked after children, it is not consistent
nor yet sustained. The proportion of young people gaining five GCSEs with
English and mathematics is around the national average for looked after
children, with a good number gaining five GCSEs. Children make reasonable
progress from their starting points between the ages of 5 and 11 but fewer
children of secondary school age make the progress expected of them.
average. The attainment gap between looked after children and the rest has
narrowed, but too many 16 to 18 year olds do not participate in any kind of
education, training or employment. The quality of planning childrens learning
varies considerably. In the best examples, Personal Education Plans (PEPs)
capture children and young peoples progress and their academic and personal
targets well. The use of data and information to track the progress of looked
after children and young people, and alert managers with responsibility for
overseeing the education progress of looked after children (the virtual school),
are underdeveloped. Arrangements are not in place to alert the virtual school at
an early stage when children begin to experience problems in their education.
The virtual school does not have a secure enough understanding of the quality
of education of all looked after children and ceases to monitor young people
after the age of 16. Not all looked after children attend good schools,
particularly following an inspection of a large number of schools in 2013 which
saw their gradings reduced. The local authority is considering the educational
needs and services for each looked after child carefully, balancing the merits of
each child staying in the same school with the consequences of moving them.
Additional support arrangements are in place for looked after children to
improve their attainment, but the local authority is aware that it needs to do
more to improve their outcomes.
children and young peoples lives and encourage and support their education
and interests. They attend review meetings, contribute fully and have delegated
authority to make day to day decisions in relation to the children and young
people they care for. Foster carers report that they do not always receive
sufficient information about a child when they first come to live with them to
ensure that they are able to immediately meet the childs whole needs. This is
rectified but not always as quickly as it could be.
outstanding by Ofsted. Some evidence was seen by inspectors of highly
individualised positive and proactive placement matching based on young
peoples specific needs, including their ethnicity, disability and sexuality/gender
and identity. However this is variable in quality and breadth, and the
information is not consistently held on childrens and foster carers files. This
means that although some children and young people live in homes that are
tailored to their very specific needs, this is not the case for all children.


which is higher than statistical neighbours and the England average (10% and
placements and have not been involved in decisions about placement moves.
However, decisions to move children and young people are appropriate for
almost all, and are based on ensuring that young peoples needs are met and
risks managed. Long term placement stability is in line with comparators with
years.
creative methods to engage them in sharing their wishes and feelings. This
includes children and young people who use alternative methods of
communication and for whom English is not their first language. Children and
young people are seen by their IRO prior to their reviews and a small minority
of young people even chair their own meetings. Children and young people
have their IROs contact details and are able to contact them between
meetings. However, they are not routinely seen by IROs between reviews. This
is because IRO caseloads are too high and this is affecting the quality of the
service they wish to offer. For example, if an IRO is concerned about the plan
or progress being made by a child or young person, they are able to raise a
concern through the established escalation process, but do not usually have
any capacity to follow this up to ensure that robust action has been taken in
line with the concern raised. They are reliant on the social work service
following up on actions required without any independent oversight or
challenge, which hampers their effectiveness.
manner or present on childrens files. All meetings chaired by IROs should have
a minute taker but inspectors saw instances when this did not happen. Delays
in minutes being written up by the centralised administration unit are common
and have a negative effect on progressing plans for children, as minutes cannot
be distributed promptly to all those who have a role in supporting the child. The
actions decided at children and young peoples reviews lack specificity and
timescales so the local authority cannot be sure that drift and delay does not
occur for some children.
children and young peoples lives are promoted and given high priority to
ensure that family bonds are maintained.
due to the lack of provision within the citys boundary. However, many are
placed within 20 miles in Nottinghamshire county. Planning for placement with
external providers is thorough and timely, informed by risk assessments and
information about the childs history. One provider spoken to was extremely
complimentary about the support offered by the local authority, including an
unannounced visit by commissioning staff. The commissioning team undertake


unannounced visits to all external residential providers each year, which adds to
the robust quality assurance of external provision. However, children placed
externally do not always have education and health resources available
immediately, although good work is undertaken to secure this soon after.
Placement providers are not always provided with key documents about the
child or young person.
workers and they are seen and seen alone, with visits increasing if necessary.
This includes children placed outside the local authority area. Records of visits
describe the progress children and young people are making, and what needs
to change to improve things for them includes changes of services being
offered. The young people placed at a distance from the local authority visited
by inspectors were positive about their placement and the support they receive,
including regular visits and contact from their social worker and IRO. Providers
were complimentary about the quality of planning and preparation prior to
placement. There is evidence of the young peoples needs being met
comprehensively. One young person was not attending school before moving to
his current placement but now has a 100% attendance record. Another young
person expressed satisfaction and feeling safer by living away from her home
area, and said that this helps her stay away from drugs and sexual exploitation,
which led to previous placement breakdowns. However, changes to services
being provided, or changes in childrens progress, does not lead to care plans
being updated.
peoples case files, with assessments and plans being routinely endorsed and
commented on by managers. Some good examples of reflective analysis and
evaluation by managers were seen on core assessment documents, and social
workers benefit from additional informal case discussions with their managers
as well as formal discussions in supervision sessions.
recorded. The quality of notes is satisfactory with the workers training needs
identified and some reflective case discussion. However, a small minority of
social workers have experienced long gaps between formal supervision sessions
which is unacceptable and means that these social workers do not always have
sufficient time and space to reflect on their practice.
been robust in recent years. This means that there is an insufficient range of
placements within the city presently. The local authority has taken steps to
rectify this with a robust and creative marketing strategy. Early signs are that
recruitment and retention of carers is improving as a result. There has been an
increase in enquiries about fostering and plans are in place for targeted
recruitment within specific communities to better reflect the needs of looked
after children and young people. This includes specialist remand placements
and placements for larger groups of brothers and sisters. The training


programme for foster carers covers all the essential topics. Revised procedures
for managing and reporting on allegations are now in place and are sufficiently
robust. The progress of all allegations about carers are overseen by a senior
manager who ensures these progress to proper conclusions. At the present
time, foster carers files do not contain all the information they should in line
with the Fostering Service (England) Regulations 2011. However, all reviews of
foster carers are now up to date to ensure that placements meet the needs of
children and young people. The fostering and adoption services have benefitted
from recent robust action to improve their impact and quality, but there is more
to do to ensure that there is sufficient technical knowledge and expertise within
both aspects of the service to maintain and strengthen this recent
improvement.
rights and entitlements. They have access to an independent advocacy service
and they are encouraged and supported to attend their reviews. The majority
of children and young people report that they are happy with how the local
authority looks after them. They are represented by an active and influential
Children in Care Council whose views are listened to and acted upon by senior
officers and elected members.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is requires improvement
being adopted in Nottingham. In the twelve month period before the
inspection, 40 children were adopted. In the same period 43 children achieved
permanency through SGOs. Adopters spoken to said that they found the
introduction to adoption sessions helpful and informative. Initial enquiries are
responded to promptly and prospective adopters do not have to wait long
before attending information or preparation training. The two stage process of
assessment is working well with the sessions giving prospective adopters a
good insight into the reality of adoption. Adopters talked of some delays in the
approval process but, overall, were satisfied with the service they had received.
more families for children. The team is highly thought of by social workers and
is devising creative and ambitious ways to attract potential adopters including
open evenings, mail shots and collaborations with other authorities. The new
marketing strategy has increased the number of initial enquiries from potential
adopters. Plans are in place to increase the range of adopters by targeted
recruitment in diverse communities. Adopters are also identified through local
consortia arrangements and national networks. This means that some children
who have been waiting a long time have now been found adoptive families,
including older children, children with complex needs, and brother and sister
groups.
increased frequency of meetings is helping to minimise delays in achieving


permanency for children. The four independent panel chairs scrutinise and
quality assure the written work, including assessments, about the children and
carers brought to panel. The chairs provide constructive feedback to social
workers and their managers, and identify how staff can improve their practice,
leading to a continuing overall improvement in the quality of reports. This is
leading to more suitable matching and placements. The agency decision maker
thoroughly and promptly considers the recommendations made by panels and
arrangements are robust.
approved currently takes 52 weeks on average instead of the recommended 26
weeks. The average time taken between a child entering care and moving to
live with an adoptive family takes two months longer in Nottingham than the
national average.
medical information required by the panel for both children and carers.
Managers have made good progress to improve this timescale, which is
reducing year-onyear, by doubling the number of panels each month from two
to four, and increasing the capacity of medical advisors. Overall, this means
that children are being adopted more swiftly. Currently 54 children with a
placement plan are waiting to be adopted with another five having been
matched to carers. A further 32 children whose original plans for adoption
proved unsuccessful are now achieving permanency through long term
fostering or SGOs. SGOs are regularly considered by the local authority and
some long term foster carers have converted to adopters for children. This has
helped some children to achieve permanency with fewer moves.
children including direct work with children and support services from CAMHS.
Life story books are of good quality and information provided to children about
adoption is age appropriate and also good quality.
progressing plans for adoption. Delays are too often built in at an early stage,
with family finding not being started quickly enough. Although plans for
permanency are considered routinely at their second review, not all children are
considered for adoption or it is ruled out too readily. This includes some very
young children for whom adoption might offer some very clear benefits. There
is insufficient challenge from IROs when plans are delayed or changed.
social workers and their managers lack a clear understanding of the value of
such approaches in helping to reduce delays for children.
provider. The quality of these assessments is variable, but feedback from
panels and from managers in the adoption and fostering service to the provider


has led to better quality assessments. Adopters are not routinely spoken to or
given information about fostering to adopt. The local authority is aware of this
and intends to rectify these shortfalls.
provided with a package of support. The referral pathway and criteria for this
service are unclear and some requests for support are not being responded to
in a timely way.
authority produced good recommendations about how to improve the service.
Not all the recommendations have yet been implemented and other actions
have been slow to secure positive outcomes for children. Senior managers are
aware of the need to accelerate the pace of progress.
The graded judgment for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
requires improvement
in a timely way, and they are routinely involved in writing and reviewing their
plans. Many of the plans are too lengthy, lack rigorous analysis and are not
sufficiently outcome-focused. Some young people spoken to by inspectors said
they do not feel the plans have any impact on their lives or serve any
meaningful purpose. Some did not understand the reason for the plan. The
quality of pathway plans is an area recognised by the authority as requiring
improvement. Good work is underway to improve their format and quality in
consultation with young people.
is performing well in this area in comparison with statistical neighbours and
England. Strong partnership arrangements between the local authority and
Nottingham City Homes has increased the availability of suitable
accommodation for care leavers, including more in-house semi-independent
units. This means that all young people leaving care have access to
accommodation that meets their needs and circumstances. Care is taken to
place young people in neighbourhoods that are considered to be safe, with a
number in close proximity to childrens homes to provide additional support for
the young people. Young people report that they feel safe where they live and
have good arrangements in place to seek support should they have any
concerns. Young people who become homeless receive timely help and advice
to find suitable accommodation. Unaccompanied asylum seekers have access
to specialist accommodation and expert advice, ensuring that they receive
appropriate services and support.
This equates to 10 per cent of care leavers. This is limiting the opportunity of
continued family living and choice in relation to young people moving to
independent living at the appropriate time. The staying put strategy is


currently being reviewed with the intention of enabling more young people to
remain with their foster carers where this is in their best interests.
authority invests considerably in a scheme run by Business in the Community 
the Routes Into Sustainable Employment (RISE) programme for care leavers.
However, this is not proving to be effective in securing sustainable employment
for young people. Too few young people participate in the programme and only
a small number move on to employment. In contrast, the small in-house
apprenticeship programme is effective and has resulted in a higher proportion
of care leavers gaining permanent employment with the authority.
to go to university, including some who are studying at Masters degree level.
Young people say they have good support while at university and the effective
use of discretionary funding is helping them to achieve their goals.
people well and encourage them to make the transition to independence. When
young people do not adapt to independent living or there is a tenancy
breakdown they receive early support and, where appropriate, return to more
supported accommodation until they are ready for independent living. Young
people spoken to by inspectors describe warm and helpful relationships with
the staff who support them. They express satisfaction with the support they get
to move towards independence and feel they have enough support to ensure
that their transition is successful. One young person said No matter what I
threw at them they stuck by me. I was really bad but they didnt give up on
me, now I have a college place and plan to go to university and I know they
will be with me all the way making sure I achieve my goal.
cooking, budgeting and shopping. They are visited regularly by their personal
advisers and provided with a setting up allowance. The frequency of visits and
the size of the grant frequently exceed the statutory minimum requirements.
Young people are helped to understand their rights, including their entitlement
to state benefits such as the Disabled Living Allowance, and how to make a
complaint.
access primary health services and receive suitable advice and guidance on
issues such as sexual health, drugs and alcohol from their personal advisor.
There are easily accessible services to support care leavers with a range of
issues, including a specialist advice service that has extended opening hours
seven days a week. Care leavers have priority access to the CAHMS service for
initial assessment and are seen quickly. They have access to therapeutic
services and specialist placements to meet their identified needs. Care leavers
are supported to access all their key documents such as their National
insurance number and birth certificate.


health history; the local authority recognises this as an area of development.
delivery. They are represented on the corporate parenting board and their
contribution is valued. There are good examples of how they have influenced
change, including the introduction of bus passes for apprentices, ensuring that
they are not disadvantaged by taking up employment. Good succession
planning is ensuring that young people are prepared to take over key roles as
other young people move into adulthood and cease to be eligible to represent
their peers. Participation is inclusive and individual views and opinions are
valued equally.
that their voices are heard. They are involved in decisions that affect their lives,
including: a residential weekend to help develop a setting up your home pack,
re-design of the Have your Say document to encourage greater take up, and
participation in the Benchmarking Forum, contributing to their overall
confidence and presentation skills.
positive about their future. Senior managers and staff working directly with care
leavers know them well and speak proudly of their achievements. The
achievements of care leavers are regularly celebrated with young people
playing key roles in all such events.
family. Where circumstances prevent this, young people have appropriate
support to help them understand why.
disabled young people. The multi-agency transition team includes staff from
both childrens and adults services who jointly develop a care package the
young person will need in adulthood. Support continues until the young person
has completed the transition and the care package is fully established.


Leadership, management and governance requires improvement
plans that are not sufficiently outcome-focused or measureable have all
contributed to shortfalls in the quality of some services provided. While
expending a great deal of time and effort, senior managers have been slow to
identify and respond to problems as they emerge and have not been sufficiently
focused on those issues and areas that will have the most impact.
experience of managing the combined roles of Director of Childrens Services
(DCS) and Director of Adult Services (DAS) has been appointed. She is taking
decisive action to identify areas of weakness and improve outcomes for children
and young people. Senior managers now have a good understanding of areas
in need of further development and are taking remedial action to rectify
shortfalls. Given the range of improvements required, along with the
longstanding nature of some poor management which has now been rectified,
senior managers recognise the need to prioritise activities and outcomes. The
failure to identify management shortfalls previously has also highlighted for
them the need to be able to identify problems at an earlier stage.
There are clear links between One Nottingham, the Childrens Partnership
Board, the Health and Well-being Board, Nottingham City Safeguarding
Childrens Board (NCSCB) and the Corporate Parenting Board, with robust
reporting arrangements in place. The local authoritys high level strategic
objectives are clear, explicit and linked to key performance indicators, each of
which is owned by a named manager, ensuring unambiguous lines of
accountability.
regularly with the independent chair of the NCSCB and the DCS and there is
good evidence of two-way challenge. The Lead Member for children and
families is highly visible, extremely active and engages with children, young
people and foster carers in a variety of different forums. Care leavers speak
well of him and say he has championed their cause.
strategic needs assessment (JSNA), commissioners are working closely with the
voluntary sector to develop local needs analyses. An annual programme of
strategic commissioning reviews means that commissioning activity is needs-led
and evidence-based. This approach has led to, for example, a young carers
service designed and developed in consultation with young carers themselves,
the development of a domestic violence service targeted at teenagers, and the
drug aware programme in schools across key stages 1 to 4, which has seen
more young people successfully completing treatment programmes.


independent social work service that has been commissioned by the local
authority to undertake prospective adopter assessments. The local authority is
aware of the current variability in the quality of this service, and has plans in
place to address the shortfall through the re-tendering process.
intervention and prevention, for example, by continuing to fund 18 childrens
centres. Further refining of performance management data in relation to the
use and effectiveness of CAFs has led to a greater emphasis being placed on
the importance of CAFs to support children and families. Completion rates
which had previously dipped are now increasing. The investment in auditing
improvements.
early help packages of support delivered through the CAF. More recently, multiagency targeted family support teams have been set up to focus on those
families in need of more extensive support but who do not require the
involvement of childrens social care statutory services. It is too soon to
evaluate their impact and, for the moment, there is no reduction in the volume
of referrals to childrens social care.
the local business community. Nottingham City Homes involvement in the
Corporate Parenting board ensures that care leavers have a good range of
suitable accommodation. The partnership with health has helped to deliver a
responsive, high quality CAMHS which is delivering prompt and effective
support to children and young people. The partnership with the police has
resulted in significant improvements in identifying and responding to domestic
abuse. Victims are now more confident in the support available, as evidenced
by increased referral rates.
working with education partners, including academies. The forthcoming
appointment of a Principal Education Strategy Lead is intended to address this
shortfall. Key tasks will be to improve the engagement of academies with other
child welfare agencies, and improve the education of looked after children.
situations when looked after children are already in crisis. Systems are not
sufficiently developed to alert the virtual school when children and young
people begin to experience difficulties. There is not a secure enough
understanding of all of the issues, for example, why absence from school rises
when it does, or how effective the funding to support individual children is. The
areas of good performance cannot be closely linked with action taken by the
virtual school.


Member, the Corporate Parenting Board has helped to eliminate the CAHMS
waiting list for looked after children, set up an apprenticeship scheme for
children in care and negotiated the appointment of a designated police officer
for children in care resulting in fewer police visits to childrens homes. The
Board has been less successful in addressing issues around the variable quality
of personal education plans (PEPS) and health plans for children in care,
although concerted action is now being taken.
quality assurance audits to understand the experiences of children and young
people. Performance management tends to be compliance driven and relies
heavily on quantitative data. An extensive data set is used to hold managers to
account and to assist operational teams in managing the day-to-day business
and inform commissioning activity, but its emphasis is on outputs rather than
on the quality of service or outcomes for children. This has contributed to the
failure to identify and address shortfalls in the quality of some services currently
being provided.
across all areas, and information from audits is not being aggregated
effectively. Childrens social care urgently needs the kind of comprehensive
performance management and quality assurance framework that has recently
been launched for use across the family community teams, including childrens
centres and targeted family support teams.
supported, there is little evidence of reflective supervision and the poor quality
of most plans for children suggests a lack of sustained critical challenge or a
lack of awareness of the importance of such plans. The level of support for
newly qualified social workers is also variable. The newly qualified social
workers in the screening and duty team receive regular mentoring support in
addition to monthly case work supervision, but other newly qualified staff do
not. Given their high number in the workforce, it is important that they have
access to high quality support and supervision in order to maximise their
learning and promote their retention.
inspectors were impressed by the level of commitment shown by staff. While
turnover rates are not significantly higher than the national average, capacity
has been and still is a significant issue. The size of social work caseloads makes
it difficult for social workers to do high quality work and the IRO service is overworked and under-resourced. The situation is aggravated by the acknowledged
shortcomings of the current electronic recording system and the level of
business support available. Both issues need to be addressed. There also needs
to be a more robust approach to recruitment and retention.


are being used effectively to ensure that the childrens workforce has the right
level of knowledge and skills. To date, 485 members of staff in childrens social
care or the family community teams have completed Signs of Safety training. A
further 445 have completed the strength-based communications styles
programme. The local authority currently has no way of evaluating these
programmes as they are not fully implemented. However inspectors saw
emerging evidence of the impact of these initiatives, particularly Signs of
Safety.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the local safeguarding
children board
The effectiveness of the LSCB requires improvement
Areas for improvement
children in need and that this contributes to effective step up and step down
arrangements between community and statutory services so that children
receive the most appropriate level of service according to their needs.
Annual Report reflects statutory requirements, in particular that it provides a
robust analysis of service development and impact across the partnership.
that the Board can be assured that children in these households who require
support and protection are provided with this in a timely manner.
children and that this contributes to the Boards future effectiveness.
practitioners attendance at formal NCSCB training to ensure that training
effectively contributes to practice improvement.
chair of the NCSCB and assure themselves of the effectiveness of partners
contributions to safeguarding children and young people.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
ensure compliance to statutory responsibilities. Attendance by agency
representatives is good with the large majority of members attending all board
meetings, which indicates the seriousness and priority that partners give to the
NCSCB. No agency has left themselves unrepresented where changes in
personnel have occurred and all members hold sufficiently senior posts within
their own agency to deliver on the key priorities of the well-developed and
targeted NCSCB business plan. Recruitment of lay members has been
specifically targeted to bolster and support the further engagement of schools
with the NCSCB, although it is too early to see the impact of this approach.
the NCSCB chair attends, ensures that strategic priorities across the partnership
are aligned, avoid duplication of activity and drive continual improvement. This
is an effective forum for unblocking barriers and achieving timely solutions.


NCSCB annual report, the governance arrangements are not sufficiently robust
and the panel do not hear directly from the NCSCB independent chair on
safeguarding issues or other priorities of the NCSCB.
constructive and robust challenge to the Board. He also chairs the Nottingham
City Adult Safeguarding Partnership Board (NCASPB), which ensures that the
profile of children is also a focus for agencies that work with vulnerable adults.
The NCSCB independent chair has a good understanding of the Boards
strengths and areas for development and uses his influence to continually drive
improvements. While the linkages between the childrens and the adults Boards
have good potential for synchronising service development, its full potential
remains under-developed. For example, recent data analysis suggests that
there has been an increase in referrals from adult services to childrens social
care. However, the NCSCB has not yet assured itself of the quality of adult
services intervention so that children in such households are actively considered
and, where necessary, appropriately helped and protected.
provides effective and appropriate challenge. In particular, the Board has
explored the effectiveness of early help in terms of supporting children and
young people before their need escalates to the point when statutory services
are required. This was undertaken by looking at the number of children with
child protection plans, including those who have experienced neglect, but who
had not had the opportunity to benefit from early help. This challenge is
beginning to result in increased completion of common assessments (CAFs)
that are appropriately targeted to all vulnerable children, but the impact on
children who are subject to child protection plans is not yet evident.
child sexual exploitation and missing children. The NCSCB has an increasing
focus on looked after children. This has led to some improvements such as the
ready availability of CAMHS services for looked after children. However other
issues, such as the educational attainment of looked after children remains poor
compared with similar areas. It recently conducted an audit on looked after
children placed outside the area and has a working group that considers looked
after children who go missing. This ensures that the focus on the most
vulnerable children is prioritised across the partnership, but the effectiveness of
this focus is still too variable.
commitment from the partnership to strong collaborative working. The NCSCB
independent chair meets them on a bi-monthly basis to ensure that sub groups
are making progress against agreed action plans. As a result priority activities
are progressed in a timely manner.


Improvement Framework, which appropriately co-ordinates learning activity
from serious case reviews (SCRs), Significant Incident Learning Process (SILPs)
audit activity, data analysis and local intelligence. Since January 2013, five
serious incident notifications have been made to Ofsted by Nottingham City.
Serious incident notifications are managed effectively, with recorded outcomes
for all five that have led to SCRs, SILPs, single agency reviews or been
appropriately managed via the Child Death Overview Panel (CDOP).
SILPs. Partnership rigour given to discussions about the application of the
criteria is well evidenced and reflects the mature professional relationships that
exist locally. SCR action plans are specific, thorough and have clear timescales
for completion. The sub-group effectively tracks actions to completion. At this
point the NCSCB Quality Assurance sub-group tests, through dip sample audit,
that actions have led to improved practice.
offered by NCSCB, and specific briefings about neglect, learning from SCRs and
child sexual exploitation have all been run for front line practitioners by the
NCSCB. These events are supported by the NCSCB Excellence in Safeguarding
Practice briefing note which is a short, easily accessible document for
practitioners. It translates learning from local SCRs and SILPs into guidance for
good practice on issues such as domestic abuse, emotional abuse, distressed
young people or those at risk of self-harm, sexual abuse, parents that resist
engagement with services, and direct work with children who have a disability.
Although the document is clear, there is no systematic evaluation of its impact
on practice.
practice. Recent audits reflect the increasing use of the Signs of Safety model
that is being rolled out across the partnership. This is supporting practitioners
to deliver increasing consistency and focus on childrens needs. However, multiagency auditing of partner records has stalled. The Board has recognised this
and a new multi-agency audit framework has been agreed and multi-agency
auditing processes re-started at the time of the inspection.
Section 11 audits are monitored through to completion. Year-on-year the
NCSCB has seen greater compliance and almost all agencies show green on a
rag rating of compliance to all areas, with few at amber and no red areas.
supplemented by comprehensive practice guidance. These are reviewed and
updated regularly to reflect learning, and further capacity has been secured to
ensure continued robustness of updating.


intervention with families does not yet provide sufficient guidance on
arrangements for children in need. The NCSCB is aware of this and a current
refresh is underway. While this document clearly highlights how professionals
can escalate their concerns about any agency decision making, the NCSCB does
not monitor how effectively this is used.
community to secure their views in influencing the development of its work and
safeguarding practice, and this is a shortfall. While a good level of engagement
between the NCSCB chair and the Youth Council is informing the 201415
NCSCB business plan, the NCSCB is not yet hearing the voice of the most
vulnerable children and young people, such as those in receipt of safeguarding
services or who are looked after.
training, agencies have been slow to evaluate the impact of training on
individual practice. Partners have yet to embed evaluation of training into
routine staff skills development. It is not evident that the evaluation of training
is effectively used strategically.
descriptive. Most significantly, it does not present service weaknesses, causes
of weaknesses and action being taken to address weaknesses, nor provide an
evaluation of the performance of local services, and this is a significant
shortfall.


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work based
learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and
other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


