Plymouth City Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 22 October  12 November 2014
Report published: 6 January 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services require
improvement
The authority is not yet delivering good protection, help and care for children, young
people and families. It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and
young people receive good help, care and protection
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Plymouth require improvement because:
Leadership, management and quality assurance
 Strategic leadership is driving forward an early help offer that meets the needs of
children, young people and their families. Although recent improvements are
evident, the pace of change needs to accelerate. The number of children
receiving early help via the common assessment framework (CAF) has declined.
Partner agencies do not fully understand thresholds, which results in a high
number of inappropriate referrals to childrens social care.
 High caseloads inhibit workers ability to fully assess childrens needs and to plan
help effectively. Frequent changes in social worker inhibit the building of effective
relationships with children, young people and parents.
 The supervision and oversight of social workers is not sufficiently challenging and
does not encourage reflective practice.
 Management oversight, performance management and quality assurance
processes are not yet robust enough. In some scrutiny activity by senior
managers, an over optimistic approach is evident. IROs are not fully carrying out
their roles and responsibilities.

Care leavers
 Services for care leavers do not do enough to help and support young people.
Too many (47%) are not in education, employment or training (NEET).
 The quality of plans for care leavers is poor. Young people are not always actively
involved in their creation or review. Plans do not ensure accountability for timely
action.

Quality of practice
 The quality of most social work assessments, plans and recording is not good
enough.
 The majority of looked after and adopted children do not receive good quality life
story work. This means that they do not have relevant information to make sense
of their life history.
 Over one third of looked after children do not benefit from timely initial health
assessments. There has been a decline in the take up of dental provision.

Missing children and child sexual exploitation
 The quality of the recording of interviews carried out when children return after
going missing is poor. Information derived from the interviews is not used
adequately to analyse patterns and trends.


 The development of multi-agency arrangements to protect children from sexual
exploitation (CSE) is relatively recent and, while there are signs that they are
effective, it is too early to see the full impact.

Partnerships
 Attendance by police and general practitioners at child protection conferences is
poor. This means that important information about childrens lives is not always
shared.
 Children who require child protection medical examinations wait too long for
them. Neither the local authority nor the Local Safeguarding Childrens Board
(LSCB) has been effective in challenging health commissioners to remedy this
deficit.

What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Leadership, management and governance

Ensure that practitioners have reasonable workloads.


Improve management oversight on casework and the quality of staff
supervision.


Improve the electronic social care record system so that it delivers accurate and
timely data and performance information to improve the quality of service.

Child protection medicals

Robustly challenge commissioners to ensure that child protection medical
examinations are conducted without undue delay.

Areas for improvement

Missing children

Improve the quality and analysis of return interviews of missing children so that
they are an effective tool to safeguard individual young people and inform the
strategic response.

Leadership, management and governance

Accelerate the implementation of the early help framework to prevent the need
for escalation to childrens social care and ensure that children get help at the
earliest opportunity.


Conduct a further test of assurance, including a risk assessment, of the dual
role of the Director of Childrens Services (DCS).



Ensure that IROs and child protection conference chairs carry out their quality
assurance roles in a way that provides robust scrutiny of practice and, where
necessary, strong challenge.


Ensure that short-term placement stability is improved for looked after children.

children who require adoption.
planning for children who require adoption.

Care leavers
and training (EET).
set out clearly significant steps that will help them in their transition to
independence.
pledge that reflects their needs and that is in clear and accessible language.

Quality of practice
timescales; are reviewed and updated following significant events; and are
written in straightforward language that parents, carers and children can
understand.
statutory timescales and are attended by relevant partners.

The local authoritys strengths
families and prevent children from coming into care. During 201314, these
conferences prevented 108 children from entering care by helping extended
families to make safe, alternative plans for them.
demonstrated at both strategic planning and commissioning levels, and in direct
front line practice.


Plymouth, despite high workloads they are positive about the support they
experience from their managers and each other.
authoritys most recent unvalidated data shows 24.4 weeks. This is good
performance and helps to reduce uncertainty for children.
England average. In 201314, the total was 40.
Commissioning Group (CCG). Staff are located together and plans for pooled
budgets are at an advanced stage. There is a plan to take forward the joint
commissioning of early help, which will include the remodelling of family
support services and the creation of a single point of contact.
highly effective psychological interventions in the Parent and Child Assessment
Team and the Family Intervention Project (FIP).
quality, child-focused work.
assessments alongside specialist fostering provision. This manages the potential
risk of harm while assessing parents capacity. The assessments are of high
quality, with good analysis, and are well regarded by the courts.
young people and families. Strategic commissioning is informed by a welldeveloped joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA), which includes key
information on child safeguarding issues and vulnerability.
commitment to the needs of looked after children from elected members and
senior leaders.
social workers during their assessed and supported year in employment (ASYE),
and for staff in their second and third years after qualification. This includes a
range of mandatory training and opportunities to gain advanced qualifications,
including a postgraduate diploma in child and family studies.
people over 11 years old, and has prevented young people aged 16 and above
coming into care.


Progress since the last inspection
children was in May 2010. The local authority was judged to be good for both
services.
remained evident during the current inspection. These include the need to
improve management oversight and to improve the quality of chronologies and
case recording. Nevertheless, action plans following the last inspection have led
to some practice improvements particularly in the identification of chronic
neglect.
on to pilot a reconfiguration of services that if successful will reduce the
number of changes of social worker children and young people work with
during their involvement with childrens social care. Under the Councils
transformation agenda, some improvements are being achieved in the early
help offer and the Early Intervention and Partnership Board is reviewing
priorities and the operational plan.
the police and health service have committed resources for this to be achieved.
The impact of this is yet to be realised, though it will seek to address the
ongoing uncertainties in relation to thresholds. The inspection team saw much
evidence of committed and ambitious staff who wish to contribute to the
improvement of services. Issues of capacity and workload remain stubborn
obstacles for more rapid and substantive change.
(HWB), the Childrens Partnership and the Local Safeguarding Childrens Board
(LSCB), with the Director of Childrens Services (DCS) a member of all three.


Summary for children and young people
 Inspectors found that services for children and young people in Plymouth require
improvement to be good.
 Social workers have too much to do, which means that they do not spend enough
time with children and young people.
 Some children have too many changes of social worker. This makes it hard for
children to get to know and trust them.
 Improvements need to be made so that children can contact their social worker
when they need to speak to them.
 When children need help and protection, social workers act quickly.
 When children need support to live within their family, in most cases childrens
services hold a Family Group Conference. This helps families to try to find their
own solutions to any problems they may have.
 Children and young people only become looked after by Plymouth City Council if
this is the right decision for them.
 There are not enough foster carers in or near to Plymouth. This means that some
children have too many changes of foster carer when they first become looked
after.
 Most looked after children go to good schools and have good attendance. When
they do not attend, this is followed up to see what the problem is.
 When young people aged 16 or 17 have nowhere to live, for whatever reason,
youth workers and social workers provide them with good support, including
accommodation or foster care if they need this.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 51,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Plymouth. This is 20% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 22% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 21% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 16% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 5% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Mixed and Asian or Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 5% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 5% (the national average is 14%).
 The Black and Minority ethnic (BME) population in Plymouth is small but growing
rapidly. The latest census information (2011) shows that just under 4% of
Plymouths population were not of White British or White Irish descent compared
with just under 15% nationally.
Child protection in this area
 At 30 September 2014, 1,734 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a 16% decrease
from 2,067 at 31 March 2013.
 At 30 September 2014, 423 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a 41% increase from 300 at 31 March 2013.
 At 30 September 2014, 50 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a 72% increase from 29 at 31 March 2013.
Children looked after in this area
 At 30 September 2014, 425 children are being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 83 per 10,000 children). This is a 14% increase from 372 (73 per


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


authority area
authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 29 adoptions
returned to be looked after
on to independent living
now living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two childrens homes. One was judged to be good
and one to be adequate in the most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Plymouths safeguarding arrangements and
arrangements for the protection of children was in May 2010. The local authority
was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of Plymouths services for looked after children was in
May 2010. The local authority was judged to be good.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since January 2012.
 The Chair of the LSCB retired in August 2014. An interim Chair has been in post
since October 2014. A new Chair has been appointed and is due to take up post
in January 2015.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
The local authority and its partners know that improvements are needed in early help
services, and they are working together to ensure better coordination and targeting.
However, work remains to be done to achieve this. As yet, thresholds are not fully
understood by all partners, which means that not all children receive the right help at
the right time. This has contributed to high levels of inappropriate referrals to
childrens social care.
Nevertheless, children and young people who are at risk of harm are identified
appropriately and swift action is taken to make sure they are safe. Strategy
discussions make the right decisions about how to proceed when there are concerns
about risk to children, but they do not always involve all of those they should, and
they are not well recorded.
There is widespread awareness of CSE, and the response of the local authority and
its partners to children who are or may be experiencing CSE is good. However,
records of return interviews for children who go missing from home and care are not
thorough enough and information from these is not collated or analysed to form a
clear picture of prevalence or patterns in this area.
There are delays in convening child protection conferences, and multi-agency
attendance is low. Child protection reports and minutes are written by professionals
for professionals; therefore, they are difficult for young people, parents or carers to
understand. Most children who are on child protection plans are visited regularly by
their social workers, though in 10% of cases visiting was not frequent enough.
Caseloads of individual social workers are too high and this compromises the quality
of practice. Management oversight of casework is not sufficiently robust or
challenging. The quality of assessments is not consistently good and records of
decisions are not always clear or detailed enough.
Family Group Conferences are well established and have helped extended families to
find their own solutions and prevent children from coming into care.
Arrangements to identify and assess children and young people who are privately
fostered are good. Awareness raising and training have resulted in a 72% increase in
the number of private fostering arrangements known to the authority in the last 12
months.


referrals (21.5%) in the last 12 months. Staff providing universal services do
not fully understand the thresholds framework introduced at the end of last
year. This has led to a rise in inappropriate contacts and referrals to social care,
particularly to the advice and assessment service. This can make decisionmaking and prioritisation more difficult and means that not all children and
young people in need of help have access to the support they need at the right
time.
Future service. To date, 415 of the 650 families it has worked with have shown
improvement. There is a wide range of early help services, including the family
nurse partnership, infant mental health services, rapid response and early
intervention. Childrens centres play a key role in providing early help to
children and families in the city. For example, Safe at Home is a city-wide
project supporting vulnerable families to keep their children safe at home 
with 480 home safety visits completed during the last 12 months.
Framework (CAF) has decreased by a third in the last 12 months, dropping
from 1,271 to 872. The local authority attributes this to strengthening the
criteria for the completion of a CAF to ensure they are not completed solely as
a tool for referral to childrens social care but rather to promote team around
the family work. The quality of CAFs is variable, and the monitoring of quality
requires improvement. Six (46%) of the 13 CAFs sampled were incomplete,
lacked clear analysis of the childs and familys needs and did not set out how
these needs would be met. The local authority has increasingly robust data to
measure the impact of the range of early help services. However, work remains
ongoing to establish a fully integrated outcomes framework.
need or at risk are effectively escalated from early help to child in need, and
then to child in need of protection, where appropriate. Similarly, evidence was
seen of the effective stepping down of cases, supported by the established use
of Family Group Conferences (FGCs). Professionals working with children and
families seek parental consent prior to sharing of information with childrens
social care. In all sampled CAFs, parents had both consented and signed
assessments.
information and help. Contacts and referrals are received by the advice and
assessment screening team. An experienced, qualified team manager
undertakes all decisions in the team. However, these decisions are not clearly
recorded, lack a written rationale and do not establish next steps.
Consequently, social workers are sometimes unsure of the action required of
them.


inspectors, children should have received a service when first referred but
instead their cases were closed. It was only on re-referral that their needs were
properly assessed. These decisions led to delays in children receiving the
service they needed, but did not leave them at risk of significant harm.
or assessment, and are allocated promptly to social workers. However, systems
for allocation do not ensure that social workers are immediately made aware
that a new case requires their attention. In a small minority of cases sampled,
social workers were unaware that they had been allocated new work. This has
the potential to cause delay in visiting children and responding to their needs.
takes place between police and childrens social care team manager. Other
agencies are not always involved. This means that potentially significant
information from other agencies is not always considered at an early stage. This
sometimes compromises opportunities to understand risks to children and
young people. The outcome of strategy discussions, including grounds for
decision, identified actions and timescales are clearly recorded but not sent out
to partner agencies, leading to a lack of clarity about what actions should be
taken.
agencies present. They result in good quality decisions and subsequent work,
which considers risk and prioritises the needs of children.
that children and young people who may be victims of abuse are required to
wait for long periods, which adds unnecessary stress and delay to what is
already a distressing experience for a child.
since March 2013. Audits undertaken in 2013 by the local authority suggest that
this is partly due to a greater recognition of disguised compliance and the
significance and impact of chronic neglect following targeted work and training
to raise awareness. The local authority is monitoring this trend to gain a fuller
understanding of the reasons behind it.
convened within 15 working days of strategy discussions. The local authority is
aware of the issue but little sustained improvement has been made. This means
that children are experiencing delay between risk being identified, and multiagency consideration of plans to protect them. The delay is a result of a lack of
capacity to chair the conferences, and social workers not requesting
conferences in a timely manner.


September 2014, with general practitioners (GPs) attending just 2% of reviews
in the same period. This means that information about children is not always
available to inform decisions about how they should be protected. In a number
of cases seen by inspectors, conferences were not quorate and the chair had to
contact agencies outside the conference. This compromises opportunities to
fully understand risks to children and young people. Further work is required to
improve contributions and attendance, in particular of police and GPs.
conferences. They have high caseloads (80-100) which include both looked
after children and children subject to child protection plans and additional
responsibilities, including the chairing of complex strategy meetings and those
where concerns are raised involving professionals who work with children. This
limits their capacity to track and monitor cases between reviews and to provide
effective quality assurance. The vast majority (96%) of child protection review
conferences are held on time. Evidence was seen that children and adults in the
child protection process had good access to advocates.
child protection plans. Neglect features in 54% of plans, emotional abuse in
unsafe parenting (64%) are the most commonly recorded risk factors, parental
mental health features in 12% of plans and substance misuse in 19%.
children living in households where there is domestic abuse. It is well
established and attended by partner agencies. A good range of domestic abuse
services is effectively co-ordinated by Plymouth Domestic Abuse Partnership.
The Freedom Project supported 131 families during 2014. All staff working
within Childrens Centres have domestic abuse, stalking and honour-based
violence (DASH) risk assessment training, and health services demonstrate
innovation in creating opportunities to ask the question. The Encompass early
help initiative promotes the effective sharing with schools of domestic abuse
incidents. Work with families where there is domestic abuse is appropriately
aligned to a wide range of services in response to drug, alcohol and mental illhealth concerns. For example, the parental alcohol treatment service works
with adults whose children are subject to a child protection plan.
families with multiple and complex issues. It works effectively on a multiagency basis at all levels of need. Evaluations evidence improved outcomes for
children where domestic abuse has been an issue.


need plans seen by inspectors required improvement. Plans for children do not
identify clear outcomes, and the majority do not have specific, achievable
targets with timescales and contingency plans. They are not clear enough to be
used as effective documents for families.
are not written in language that is accessible to parents and carers. In most
cases considered by inspectors, there was evidence of working agreements with
parents being used alongside plans. Although simpler to understand than other
reports or records, in a few cases sampled (12%) these were not monitored or
reviewed. They were also used with some families who are unlikely to comply
with stated objectives, which diluted their effectiveness.
line with the local authoritys requirement for fortnightly visiting. According to
the authoritys figures, the frequency has improved in recent months (August
one child in ten is not seen as often as needed.
rationale for decisions and the actions required are rarely documented. This
makes it difficult for social workers to understand what actions are required of
them. Supervision is evident in the majority of case records but is not always
purposeful as it lacks opportunities for staff to reflect on their practice. Case
recording is not effective in providing evidence of the work done. This was
particularly apparent in the advice and assessment teams, where records do
not always make clear the reason for visits and lack evidence of challenge to
parents.
comprehensive or regularly updated. In 19% of cases seen by inspectors, some
significant events held within the wider electronic record were not recorded
within the childs chronology. As a result, important information is not
immediately available to social workers to inform decision-making, assessments
and plans.
work teams. The quality of the assessments is variable, with the majority
(71%) requiring improvement. Assessments are too descriptive, lack analysis
and do not recognise or consider all risk factors. Very few of those reviewed
(11%) use research to inform social work practice. Within nearly all
assessments, the voice of the child was present and their wishes were known.
Assessments completed by the Parent and Child Assessment Team were of
good quality, clearly identified risks and provided a good level of analysis.


Educational Needs and Disabilities (SEND) service has a comprehensive online
advice and information facility which signposts parents and young people to the
range of services available from health, education and childrens social
care. Service user feedback comes from a parents forum, Your Voice Your
Child, which is represented on the strategic SEND implementation group.
to language, culture and ethnicity. This includes good use of interpreters and
the translation of letters, assessments and reports. Learning from a recent
police operation led to specific training to ensure understanding of the cultural
needs of a group of children from a specific minority group who required foster
care. However, these strengths are not consistent and further improvement is
required: in the past month, the records of 49 contacts and referrals
(approximately 9%) did not include details of the ethnicity of the child or young
person.
and young people. Legal advice is available to the team and there are clear
criteria for authorisations. For example, independent fostering agency
placements must be agreed by the Assistant Director. Communication between
the OOH service and daytime services is effective in ensuring that emergency
activity is followed up.
developed well. Effective action is now in place to locate children who have not
taken up their school place or who are no longer accessing education, and to
increase access to education for those on a reduced timetable. The inclusion
manager regularly reviews the list of children, and partnership with the
Reducing Absence for Children in Care or Home (REACH) Team is developing to
ensure that children at risk are known. Currently the list includes 18 children
and young people on a reduced timetable, 32 children who were born in the
city but did not take up a school place in reception and six children and young
people who are considered missing from education. A range of activities and
further checks are completed to establish the whereabouts of children and
young people. These include contacting schools, home visits and checks with
other agencies. One case sampled during the inspection demonstrated
persistent and successful efforts to locate a child missing from education. The
local authority reports some difficulties in data collection and work is underway
to formalise local information sharing protocols with the NHS, Department for
Work and Pensions and border control agencies.


Complementary Education Service (ACE) provides an effective monitoring and
support service to ensure the appropriateness of elective home education (EHE)
through regular home visits. Where there are concerns, prompt referrals are
made to the multi-agency Exceptional Provision Panel (EPP) to encourage
children to return to school or to consider more formal action. The number of
children on the EHE register is falling slightly year-on-year, from 158 in 2011
improved following national reports. Training and awareness has been coordinated by the LSCB Missing and Child Sexual Exploitation (MACSE) subgroup. Work has proved successful in promoting an increased use of a CSE
screening tool for those who are at risk or are victims of CSE, and this is well
supported by a wide range of voluntary sector, local authority and partnership
services. Evidence was seen that these activities are having a positive impact
on reducing risk and keeping children and young people safe. A number of
targeted police operations have protected young people and led to
prosecutions.
and undertake return interviews within 72 hours. The team received 584
referrals in the first nine months of 2014. Forty two per cent (246) were
children in care, 19% (132) were children in need and 41% (290) were not
known to childrens social care. However, the majority of return interview
records sampled in the inspection were of poor quality. For example, of six
return interview records reviewed by inspectors none clearly identified when
the young person had gone missing, or when the interview had taken place.
The interviews are not routinely transferred to childrens social care records in a
timely manner. This means that information is not readily available to inform
decision-making. This also restricts the gathering of intelligence that may help
to identify patterns and trends in activity, and identify vulnerable young people
and potential perpetrators.
been reported missing or are vulnerable or at risk of CSE. The panel shares
appropriate and timely information and targets additional support to improve
early intervention and prevention. Protect and Respect (NSPCC) and BASE
(Barnardo's Against Sexual Exploitation) attend the REACH panel and provide
help and support to young people who have been or are at risk of CSE. Staff
provide individual and group work programmes for young people, as well as
offering sessions to raise awareness to both young people and professionals.


have their needs assessed effectively by a dedicated private fostering social
worker. Significant publicity and training have taken place, resulting in a 72%
increase in the number of private fostering arrangements known to the
authority since March 2013. During the period of inspection, 50 children were
living in private fostering arrangements, with 43 of these being children
attending language schools. Children and young people in these arrangements
are assessed and visits take place as required. The private fostering social
worker attends the Multi-agency Child Sexual Exploitation group (MACSE) in
order to assess whether any private fostering arrangements can be identified
through this work.
reporting and investigative processes are in place to respond to allegations of
abuse or poor practice. Associated strategy meetings are well attended and
most of them are timely. The majority result in robust action plans and
arrangements to protect the child and support the professional. Strategy
meetings are chaired by IROs with the LADO in attendance. In 201314, there
were 88 LADO cases including 17 allegations against foster carers, 14 of
physical abuse, two of sexual abuse and one of emotional abuse.
become homeless. The intensive support team (IST) offers support and
mediation between parents and young people in a bid to resolve problems and
return the young person home. In all cases sampled, young people were
offered placements appropriate to their needs. These included foster care and
supported accommodation.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Children and young people only become looked after when it meets their needs and
in circumstances where they can no longer live with their family. Decision-making
and application of thresholds are consistent and robust.
The time taken for care proceedings to be completed is better than average and in
the past year has been well within government targets. This ensures that children
are clear about their permanent placements as soon as possible. The number of
looked after children living in or close to their home town is high, enabling them to
maintain links with their friends, family and local community.
Care plans are variable in quality and while a minority were good, most were not
explicit enough about the childs needs. Reviews take place within required
timescales, but the level of scrutiny and challenge provided by IROs is not sufficient
to ensure that plans are always implemented fully and promptly.
Children and young people experience too many changes of social worker and in the
early stages of their time in care they have too many changes in foster placement.
This is unsettling for them at a time when they are particularly vulnerable and need
to be able to build enduring relationships with adults who are important in their life.
Children report that they feel safe in their long-term placements and described their
foster carers as supportive, caring and committed to their needs.
A high number of children leave care through adoption, and many are placed without
undue delay. However, too many children do not have good quality life story books
and later life letters. Although support is available when children are placed, once
they are adopted it is less available and is not always effective in improving their
outcomes.
Too many care leavers are not in education, employment or training. Plans to
support these young people through the re-introduction of mentors are well
advanced, although yet to show impact. More work is required to ensure that all care
leavers are aware of both their medical histories and their entitlements.
in September 2013 to 425 in September 2014. The local authority attributes
this to greater recognition of the significance and impact of chronic neglect.
Consistent thresholds for entering care are ensured through effective
management oversight and decision-making at legal planning meetings.
Inspectors saw no cases where children had entered care inappropriately.


Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) have supported effective use of
the Public Law Outline to reduce the average length of care proceedings, which
was 27 weeks in the first quarter of this year. This has partly been achieved by
the increased and high use of supervision orders (59) to assess and monitor
children living with their families where there are still concerns. Inspectors saw
no cases during the inspection where this was inappropriate. However, it is a
practice that has the potential to cause delay in securing permanence for
children, something that the local authority has not yet analysed. Cafcass and
the court report that applications are appropriate, and that high quality
assessments by the parenting assessment team have reduced the use of expert
independent assessments.
families helped to make their own support plans. In 201314, FGCs helped
divert 108 children from entering care.
young people to return home from care, decision-making is based on a clear
assessment that considers and addresses risk. Children and families benefit
from a range of support on their return home. Only two out of 21 children and
young people who went home under a care plan to return home in the last six
months have returned to the care of the local authority. This compares well
with similar authorities and the national average, and shows that support
provided to prevent readmission to care is effective. Assessments to determine
whether relatives or other connected persons could look after a child are
comprehensive and timely, with clear evidence and a rationale for
recommendations and decisions.
children experiencing three moves in a 12-month period. The local authority
has identified the need to increase placement choice for children who come into
care in an emergency, in order to reduce the number of moves. They have
developed contracts with providers that include emergency access to foster
placements, to increase resources. Placement stability meetings are held for
any child where there is a risk of a placement ending in an unplanned way.
looked after children remaining in the same placement for over two years. This
is the result of good matching of children with carers. When children cannot
return to live with their families, plans are made for permanence through
adoption or foster care. Long-term foster placements are identified for children
based on their needs. Children have been matched with suitable carers, often
together with their brothers and sisters, and their outcomes have improved
because of the stability this brings.


of children and young people told inspectors that they were unhappy about the
frequent changes of social worker. This had resulted in them having to re-tell
their story, and meant that they had not been able to build trusting and
meaningful relationships with a social worker. They also described difficulties in
making contact with their social worker by telephone.
recording reflects some persistent and sensitive work with parents by social
workers to ensure that they are well engaged and understand planning
arrangements.
effectively demonstrate a robust analysis of the child's needs. Care plans are
not routinely updated following significant events. Issues of equality and
diversity such as ethnicity, sexual orientation and faith are not always recorded
or effectively considered within assessment and care planning stages.
feelings of looked after children are well considered and reflected in their
reviews. The number of children and young people attending their reviews is
improving (68%); good advocacy arrangements are in place and IROs actively
encourage children and young people to attend. Looked after children are
encouraged to chair their own review, and effective arrangements are in place
to support and encourage this, but take-up is low. The local authority has not
undertaken an evaluation to learn from the experiences of children and young
people who have chaired their reviews in order to improve practice. In the
majority of cases, there is little evidence of documented IRO challenge within
review and case records.
as experiencing a delay of more than one month at the time of the inspection.
This means that children, parents, carers and professionals do not have a
formal copy of any actions that may need to be completed. This has the
potential to lead to drift.
According to the local authoritys own figures, the frequency has improved in
recent months (August 62%, September 69% and October 95%) but this still
means that a small number of children are not seen as required by regulations
or in line with an assessment of the childs needs.
services. At the time of the inspection, 28 young people were receiving
effective support from an independent visitor.


support workers where necessary, who provide comprehensive reports to social
workers. Children and young people spoken to during the inspection report that
contact takes place in venues that are child-friendly and meet their needs.
decline in dental checks. The majority of children and young people (84%)
have timely health assessments. However, dental checks are low at 63%.
Further work is required to ensure that all children and young people have
access to timely health and dental assessments.
services (CAMHS) ensures that looked after children and young people receive
a timely response. A dedicated Plymouth CAMHS nurse ensures that young
people, including those placed outside Plymouth, have access to the support
they need.
outside Plymouth. However, only 13% of these are placed 20 miles or more
from home. In the large majority of these cases, arrangements are closely
monitored and access to education and health services is timely. One young
person placed a long distance from Plymouth was visited by an inspector and
seen to be making good progress and to be well looked after by the carers.
contact and oversight from their supervising social worker. Regular foster carer
support groups help to ensure that foster carers are able to share experiences
and skills and to support one another. Assessment processes and panel
arrangements to approve foster carers are robust and well organised. Foster
carers have good access to training. All connected person carers have a
supervising social worker, are funded in line with the Fostering Network
allowance rates and have access to support and training offered by the
fostering service.
placement choice or improved outcomes for looked after children. The number
of approved foster carers is stable and, while 16 have been approved in the last
year, 11 left the service. There are 158 approved fostering households,
providing 325 places. There is an identified shortage of fosters carers for
groups of brothers and sisters and for children with complex needs. The local
authority has recognised this deficit and procured services from external
providers to increase sufficiency, to ensure that brothers and sisters are placed
together and to meet the needs of children with complex needs. There is very
recent evidence of increased placement choice for young people who need
urgent fostering placements, but it is not yet possible to demonstrate if these
developments will be sufficient to meet childrens needs.


recreational opportunities in Plymouth. Those young people spoken to by
inspectors described access to The Life Centre and gave examples of activities
enjoyed, including rock climbing, swimming, caving and diving.
commitment from elected members and senior leaders to meeting the needs of
looked after children. The Corporate Parenting Group (CPG) meets bi-monthly,
receives a good level of quantitative and qualitative performance information,
and challenges performance effectively. The impact of scrutiny from the CPG is
evident, with examples including increased advocacy services and CAMHS
provision for looked after children.
ensures that they attend school regularly. The Virtual School Management
Board set a target of at least 95% attendance, and attendance for all children
in care is currently at 92% and just below the attendance level for all Plymouth
children. Attendance is not a concern for primary aged children, but gives cause
for concern for pupils in years 9, 10 and 11; for example, the average
attendance for Year 10 pupils was around 90% in 2013/4. As a result, individual
action plans have been developed for each student where there is a concern.
There have been no permanent exclusions from school for any looked after
child and 2013-14 saw a slight decline in the number of fixed-term exclusions
from 25 to 23 students, with the average number of days falling from six to
four. Most school-age looked after children (70%) attend a school that is
judged good or better by Ofsted. If a school is downgraded at inspection,
careful consideration is given to the individual needs of the child to ensure that
it is right for them to stay at the school.
completed. An electronic system (e-PEP), introduced in September 2014, is
helping designated teachers to improve the quality of target setting and check
the progress children make. The virtual school head now signs off each PEP and
authorises the appropriate use of pupil premium funding. PEPs that are not
good enough are returned to the school with identification of the improvements
required. Currently, 15% of PEPs (17) are overdue.


continues to improve. Over the last two years, the attainment gap between
them and their peers has narrowed. For example, provisional data for 2014
show that the attainment gap reduced by 7.5% in reading at the end of Key
Stage 1, with 71% of children in care gaining a Level 2 compared with 87% of
all Plymouth pupils. At the end of Key Stage 2, 67% of children in care gained a
Level 4 or above in maths, compared with 83% of their peers, which means the
gap has reduced from 26% to 16%. However, provisional 2014 data show the
number of children in care achieving five GCSEs grade A* C (including
mathematics and English) has declined significantly, from 16.7% in 2013 to
and their peers showed signs of reducing, the gap has increased in 2014. The
virtual school and the local authority, while recognising the small cohort size
and high number of children with special educational needs, are looking
carefully at the reasons for this decline in order to identify the lessons to be
learnt.
people with vocational taster sessions. Requests for funding are made to the
post-16 Single Multi-agency Panel (SMAP), ensuring that young people with a
statement of special needs can access appropriate training and education.
Currently 63% of children in care and care leavers in year 13 are participating
in education and training, and the virtual school keeps a close check on the
looks for opportunities that are of interest to encourage their engagement in
training.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement

through adoption than in comparable authorities and the rate is also better than
the England average. In 201314, some 40 children were adopted. Current
performance indicates that 16% of children leaving care are doing so via
adoption. This is a reduction from the performance for 2011 to 2014, which
was 21%, but is still above similar authorities and the England average. The
figure includes some older children and some with very complex needs, who
are harder to place. In 2011 to 2014, children aged over five years made up


families. In 2011 to 14, children waited an average 525 days between coming
into care and moving in with their adopters, which meets the national targets.
There has been an apparent decline in performance during early 201415, but
this is due to the local authoritys success in placing some children with complex
needs who had been waiting for a longer period. This is now improving but will
affect the performance figures for 201415.
matched with adoptive families has also been an area of good performance.
The average for 2011 to 2014 was 99 days, which was within national targets.
Again, as a result of the placement of some children with more complex needs
who have waited longer, current in-year performance has declined to 281 days.
enough robust management oversight to care planning and decision-making for
all children with complex needs. As a result, care plans are not always realistic
and deliverable within an acceptable timescale for all children. There is a lack of
detailed analysis at a strategic level of childrens needs, insufficient availability
of adoptive placements and ineffective use of alternative permanence options.
changed. Current performance information indicates that this figure has risen
and is now 13%. This is a result of the local authority undertaking a review of
not been able to place for adoption. Despite this increase, performance remains
close to the England average of 12% for 2011 to 2014.
members of staff responsible for co-ordinating this work. A wide range of
options are used, including links with adopters approved by Plymouth, use of
the South West Adoption Consortium (SWAC), and the use of national and
regional events. The local authority has taken part in three adoption activity
days, resulting in nine children being matched and placed with adopters. The
commissioning arrangements with a voluntary adoption agency help to find
placements for harder to place children.
placed. Of these, seven children have a plan to discharge their placement order
and seek alternative permanence options. Of the remaining 25 children, seven
currently have no link or match to an adoptive family and four of these are to
have a review of progress. There are an additional seven children with should
be placed for adoption (SHOBPA) decisions but no placement order, where
family finding is underway.


demand. There was a decline in enquiries from adopters during 201314, and
the number of adopters approved in 201314 remained at the same level as
the previous year. There are currently 15 adopters approved in Plymouth, all for
single children under the age of five. Fostering to Adopt is only in the early
stages of development; two children have been placed in a fostering to adopt
placement. The local authority is actively engaged in a range of activities and
partnerships to increase sufficiency, including for specific children who are hard
to place and for sibling groups. However, the authority does not know whether
this work will meet the needs of their children and therefore plans to review the
strategy in December 2014.
dedicated worker in the team. The two-stage adoption process to assess
adopters has been implemented and timescales have improved. The required
checks and references are undertaken and adopters attend appropriate
training. Most assessments are completed in the required timescales. Adopters
spoken to report that assessment processes are thorough and professional and
that workers are experienced and support them well.
SHOBPA cases is not set out clearly in childrens records. This means that
important information about how and why decisions were made may be
unavailable to children who wish to read their files later in life.
a good range of experience amongst its members. There is evidence of access
to appropriate legal and medical advice. Workers and adopters describe the
panel as robust in its challenge to the matters it considers. Despite identifying
areas that require improvement in practice, particularly life story work, the
adoption panel chair and the ADM have not yet been able to ensure positive
change.
well recorded and analysed. The quality of childrens permanence reports is
getting better, but still requires improvement. Matching processes are
appropriate, with placement planning meetings ensuring information is shared
with adopters. Adoption support plans sampled (three) all demonstrated
appropriate support in place for children at the point of being matched, which
underpins low disruption rates.
are not routinely available for children being placed for adoption. Life history
work is not always undertaken when it should be, and when it is, the quality is
not good enough. As a result, children live in adoptive placements where their
adopters do not have material available to support them to understand their life
story.


that improves outcomes for children and families. However, there is a monthly
adoption support group facilitated by an independent clinical psychologist
experienced in adoption and with a member of the adoption support team in
attendance. The team also works with adopted adults who wish to access their
records. During 201314 a commissioned service supported 47 birth parents,
some adopters and adult adoptees with independent counselling advice and
support.
under special guardianship orders (SGO) arrangements. It currently has 172
children identified as receiving support (including SGO and adoption), which
includes 53 new requests for assessment in the last six months. When children
and families are referred for post-adoption and special guardianship support,
the assessment and planning processes to support this are unclear and
ineffective.
the point of matching. There are currently 312 letterbox arrangements in place
and a further 54 in the process of being established. In addition, there is
evidence of direct post-adoption contact being well supported, including direct
contact for siblings.

The graded judgment about the experience and progress of care leavers is
that it requires improvement

left care. In addition, the children in care team supports 104 looked after 16and 17-year-olds who are still looked after and eligible by age for care leaving
services and seven 16- and 17-year-olds who have left care. The children with
disability team supports a small number of children in transition to adult social
care.
Department to children's social care. The assistant director for childrens social
care will have full responsibility for the service and intends to implement the
well-considered and robust action plan for improvement.
supported by their personal advisors (PAs), whom they described as
knowledgeable and accessible. Direct practice observed during the inspection
demonstrated purposeful and trusting professional relationships. PAs work with
individual young people to promote their independence, providing opportunities
for them to learn about budgeting, cooking and healthy lifestyles.


and staff know the young people well. The team has held a number of staff
vacancies. This has led to high caseloads, but these have recently been filled.
The impact of this is that workers have not always had enough time to spend
with their care leavers. A further consequence is that the quality of pathway
plans is too variable and not all young people have had the opportunity to
contribute to their plans. The majority of plans seen by inspectors do not reflect
individual young peoples goals and future needs in a meaningful way.
entitlement to services, it was apparent that they receive appropriate financial
support. The local authority has doubled the care leaver grant to the national
recommended grant of 2,000. Care leavers demonstrated limited knowledge of
their entitlement to health information. A Health Passport system for care
leavers was introduced in September 2014, but to date only five have been
issued to care leavers. The majority of care leavers do not have access to
important information about their health histories, which means that they may
be unaware of important details when seeking treatment.
with young people aged 16 and 17 in care and with care leavers who have
complex health and social needs, and who are in need of targeted intervention.
This has led to the development of a weekly drop in clinic that care leavers can
use to receive help and advice, for example on sexual health, and to complete
and receive their health passports.
training (EET) is showing a downward trend. In 2012, 73% of care leavers
were in EET. This dropped to 60% in 2013 and only 53% in September 2014.
The local authority is looking to introduce mentoring programmes supported by
Jobcentre Plus, and has also recruited 36 students from Plymouth University to
support care leavers individually, while acting as positive role models. Training
for these roles is ongoing, so the impact is yet to be seen. Currently six care
leavers are at university. All receive financial assistance, including access to
bursaries to support learning, and other support. Five care leavers have
apprenticeships in the local authority.
Southwest to ensure that young people make a smooth transition in their
education as they leave care. Currently 67% of children in care and care
leavers in Year 13 are participating in education and training and the virtual
school keeps a close check on the significant minority of 33% who are not yet
engaged.


young people aged 13 to 19 years, helping them to make decisions about their
future careers. Courses are accredited, with purposeful links to local
employment. Priority is given to vulnerable and disadvantaged groups of young
people including children in care and care leavers, who take up 25% of
available places.
been undertaken to understand the reasons for this. Work is underway with the
Youth Offending Team (YOT) to introduce protocols for reducing offending
behaviours for children in care. It is intended that learning from this work will
inform future work with care leavers.
accommodation. Young people told inspectors that they felt safe where they
were living and were content with their accommodation and living
arrangements. Fifteen young people are benefiting from the staying put
arrangements. These arrangements are increasingly considered in
commissioning placements, so that young people placed with independent
fostering agencies have similar access to those young people placed in house.
Some of these placements have converted to staying put arrangements.
by Devon Home Choice and supported lodgings appropriate to young peoples
needs. In partnership with Devon Home Choice, care leavers housing needs
are prioritised, and they are given Band B access to social housing, the second
highest category of need. Eleven young people are living in houses of multiple
occupancy. These include foyers and purpose-built units, similar to halls of
residence, and are not seen as permanent options. At the time of the
inspection, three young people were in bed and breakfast. While this is rare,
and only used in short-term emergencies, the local authority was unable to
provide evidence that it draws up risk assessments to mitigate this
unsatisfactory form of accommodation.
number of these are unaccompanied asylum seeking children who left the area
without trace very soon after arrival. Staff make active efforts to trace these
young people and resume contact. Young people are encouraged to keep in
touch with support workers by attending a drop-in service.


has care leaver representation that contributes to service improvements. This
includes work to identify the ten wishes of children and young people in the
city. A care-leaving booklet is available to all young people when they become
care leavers. This contains a mission statement which indicates that Plymouth
has adopted the Department for Education charter for care leavers. However,
this has not been developed by managers, staff and care leavers into a bespoke
Plymouth pledge. Not all care leavers are aware of the booklet and more work
is required to make both the council and the statement more accessible to care
leavers. The local authority took action during the inspection to ensure that
copies of the charter are available to care leavers and that PAs explain the
commitment to them.
a yearly award ceremony that includes care leavers. Care leavers report that
they receive cards and vouchers from their PAs on their birthdays. Many were
supported to attend a rock concert on Plymouth Hoe through the provision of
complimentary tickets. The local authority is planning a Christmas meal for care
leavers on Christmas Eve, and elected members and senior officers will join the
event. For those who may feel lonely or vulnerable at this time of year, a youth
centre will be open on Christmas day.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
The local authority was already aware of the areas for development in services to
children and families identified through this inspection. There is a commitment to
driving improvement and plans are in place, though there now needs to be an
emphasis on delivering them at pace. The local authority and its partners are
committed to effective early help but have not yet succeeded in ensuring that it is
making a difference in reducing demand for childrens social care services.
Thresholds for services are not sufficiently well understood by partners. In both
these areas, senior managers have plans in place and now need to drive the change
as quickly as possible. Appropriate governance arrangements are in place, including
an effective relationship between the authority and the LSCB and the DCSs
membership of the Health and Wellbeing Board and the Childrens Partnership.
Management oversight, performance management and quality assurance processes
are not sufficiently robust. Social workers have high caseloads, and this affects their
ability to ensure core standards of service, including that statutory visits to young
people are undertaken within timescales. High caseloads in the independent
chair/IRO service mean that this service does not offer sufficient challenge and is not
effective as a quality assurance agent.
The authority has strong commissioning arrangements for placements for children in
care. However, it requires a more sophisticated understanding of what it needs to do
to ensure that there is a range of adoptive placements available for all those children
who need them.
The local authority understands its corporate parenting responsibilities and
arrangements are well embedded. There are effective arrangements to ensure that
children and young people contribute and their voices are heard.
The authority, together with partners, has been able to develop a range of services
to protect children and young people in Plymouth from the risks of child sexual
exploitation and going missing from home, care and education.
The local authority needs to do more to ensure that outcomes for the most
vulnerable young people are the best possible, in particular in relation to the
educational achievement of young people in care and successful entry to education,
training and employment.
Social worker vacancy rates and staff turnover have reduced and are now below the
England average for 2013. There is a professional development framework in place,
but the quality of supervision of staff requires improvement to ensure that there is
enough time for reflection and recording of decisions.


individual and collective statutory responsibilities. Leaders and managers know
the strengths and weaknesses of services and practice. Progress has been
made in some key areas but there remain a number of weaknesses which need
to be addressed as a priority. The DCS and senior managers are visible to staff,
are respected and take an active role in quality assurance. There is political
commitment to childrens services and, despite significant overall savings
having to be made in the local authority, further financial commitment has been
made to meeting demand and increasing the range of placements for looked
after children.
of a strong commitment to more effective early help across agencies. Phase
two of the early help programme was implemented in July 2014 as part of the
local authoritys transformation programme to bring together the coordination
of early help services across the city. Phase one of the programme pulled all
the internal functions into one place to support an integrated approach.
However, it is too early to see any significant impact.
particular weaknesses in the quality of supervision of staff which, despite its
regularity, demonstrates little reflection or focus on outcomes. Management
sign-off of plans and casework does not demonstrate consistency of approach
or rigour in ensuring an audit trail of why decisions are made. A new
supervision protocol was implemented in September 2014 but has not had
sufficient time to demonstrate impact and improvement in this area.
provides appropriate information to senior leaders but has not led to consistent,
proactive and timely action to address performance weaknesses. Teams also
receive performance information, and work has been done to try to ensure staff
ownership of data accuracy. However, the number of data errors remains high
and considerable effort is required to ensure that information is amended for
accuracy. This has resulted in some areas of service retaining or creating
manual systems of data collection because confidence in the electronic
recording system is low. Senior managers cannot be confident in the overall
accuracy of the data they receive. During the inspection, there was
considerable mismatch between the operational data provided by the local
authority and published data.


audits, and benefits from multi-agency case audits and scrutiny of social work
practice. However, the pace of improvement has not been swift enough, with
significant weaknesses remaining in practice. These include, too many poor
quality assessments, minimal recording on some case files, failure to meet
statutory requirements for visiting young people and too high a proportion of
cases showing poor recording of decision-making and management oversight.
Inspectors disagreed with the local authority about the quality of work in 35%
of audits of tracked cases, indicating a lack of effective management oversight
and too positive a view of performance.
qualified workers, responsible for more than 30 children. This has affected the
overall quality of work across services and is a contributory factor in the slow
pace of improvement in practice; for example, the local authoritys inability to
ensure statutory visiting on time. The role of the IRO and independent child
protection chair in quality assurance and challenge remains ineffective, in part
due to high caseloads. Management intervention has been too slow to ensure
change and improvement. Senior managers have not succeeded in tackling
these issues effectively and lack a clear strategy for doing so.
does not undertake sufficient analysis of complaints made and upheld. Learning
from complaints is therefore limited in scope.
However, this does not adequately scope the whole range of duties and
responsibilities of the DCS and lacks an analysis of risk. This means that the
authority cannot be sure that the DCS has sufficient capacity to effectively lead
and manage the range of services expected.
specific services to improve the sufficiency of adopters, but still has difficulties
in identifying placements in a timely way for sibling groups and children with
more complex needs. Further work is required to analyse gaps in provision and
the authoritys ability to meet need when the number of children on an
adoption pathway exceeds the number of adopters available.
have the skills and educational attainment to realise the best possible
outcomes. The gap between the educational attainment at secondary school
level of children in care and their Plymouth peers is concerning, with a
considerable deterioration between 2012/13 and 2013/14. Achievement is well
below the national average and the gap within Plymouth has grown
significantly. Not enough 19-year-old care leavers are in education, employment
and training (EET). The local authority needs to undertake further work to
ensure that it has a clear understanding of these deficits and develop robust
plans to respond to them.


for care leavers. The care leavers charter is the unamended national charter
and is not readily accessible to care leavers. The web-link to the charter was
only restored during the inspection. It does not take account of specific
circumstances of care leavers in Plymouth. The local authority does have a
Leaving Care Guide which is distributed to and discussed with Personal
Advisors. This covers the offer and young peoples rights when they leave care
and clearly explains what the Young Person should do if they are not happy
with the service.
care proceedings, and Cafcass reports good relationships with the local
authority. There has been an increase in the use of supervision orders with a
statement of intent for the local authority to return to court without delay if risk
increases. The local authority has not completed any analysis to consider
whether this may place children and young people at increased risk or result in
delayed outcomes because of returns to court.
Childrens Partnership and the LSCB, and the DCS is a member of all three. The
childrens plan, although at the end of its cycle, is focused on a range of key
priorities for children and young people and those most vulnerable, including
those in care and those experiencing the transition to adult services. It has not
ensured or delivered improved outcomes for all targeted groups.There is a track
record of development of services in conjunction with the LSCB. These include
services for children at risk of sexual exploitation and those who go missing.
Examples include REACH and the development of MACSE, with weekly meetings
to consider children at risk of CSE and those missing from home, care and
education.
young people and families. Strategic commissioning is informed by a welldeveloped joint strategic needs assessment, which includes key information on
safeguarding issues and vulnerability. There is a focus on strategic planning on
childrens services, and the authority has well-developed plans with the CCG to
establish pooled budgets and a joint commissioning approach to early help.
This includes plans to remodel family support and create a single point of
contact for early help.
partnership) has included the Family Intervention Project, the domestic abuse
advocacy service and work within schools on healthy relationships. However,
despite a range of services on offer, the local authority with its partners does
not yet offer an effective analysis of impact. This limits learning, and despite its
positive relationship with the CCG, it has not been able to ensure sufficient GP
engagement in child protection planning or that children who need child
protection medicals are seen as soon as possible in a suitable environment.


partnership, and is able to demonstrate a focus on commissioning, through its
commissioning plan for care placement provision which takes into account its
sufficiency needs. New tender specifications developed in 2013 include
additional capacity to place the most challenging children and a specific 16-plus
specification to facilitate staying put. However, there remains an insufficiency
of Foster to Adopt placements.
commitment to the needs of looked after children from elected members and
senior leaders. Young people in care are represented on the corporate
parenting panel. The panel has been able to challenge performance, leading to
improved outcomes for some young people, for example, ensuring CAMHS
access for young people placed out of Plymouth and an increase in the budget
for advocacy.
social workers assessed and supported year in employment (ASYE), and for
staff in years two and three after qualification. This includes a range of
mandatory training and opportunities to gain advanced qualifications, including
a postgraduate diploma in child and family studies. The local authority reports
that vacancy levels at the time of the inspection were 6.9%, which compares
well with the 2013 national average of 14%. At 13%, the local authoritys figure
for turnover of staff was also lower than the national average of 15% in 2013.
However, the proportion of newly qualified staff in some service areas is higher
(23% in the Children in the Community Teams and 19% in Children and Young
People in Care teams). This is a result of a strategy to place NQSW staff in
teams where work is conducive to the learning and development needs of
NQSWs. Arrangements for additional support for newly qualified staff include
mentoring and reflection time. However, newly qualified staff interviewed
during this inspection had high caseloads that included child protection cases.
This limits the effectiveness of the support framework for these staff.
Council), which is supported by the Young Devon organisation and is active in
terms of corporate parenting, representing children and young peoples views,
taking part in recruitment of staff (including the LSCB chair), and helping to
develop the 10 wishes list of expectations of staff and agency behaviour
towards young people.


incident notifications have been received by Ofsted between 31 March 2013
and 1 April 2014; two have resulted in serious case reviews (SCRs) being
commissioned by the LSCB. These were underway at the time of the inspection.
The authority is able to demonstrate that it learns and acts on lessons from
SCRs and serious incidents. For example, it has carried out internal social care
practice reviews and delivered a programme of training for managers.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children

require improvement

Summary of findings
The LSCB requires improvement because:
Understanding of practice
 The Board does not understand fully the quality of safeguarding practice
undertaken by agencies within the partnership.
 The Board has not ensured sufficient evaluation of multi-agency training and in
particular its impact on practice, in order to understand its effectiveness in
keeping children safe.
 The annual report does not provide sufficient analysis of the performance or weaknesses
of the partner agencies.

 The Board has not provided enough analysis of known and emerging risks in
relation to CSE, so does not fully understand the local extent of the issue.
 The Board has not had a sufficient overview of deficits in social care practice in order to
challenge performance effectively and require the local authority to demonstrate
improvement.

Partnerships
 The Board is yet to assure itself that there is effective coordination of the early
help offer in Plymouth and that practitioners across agencies understand and
implement the thresholds for service provision.
 The Board has had only limited impact in persuading schools to engage in s.175
safeguarding audits.

Performance
 The Board has not yet ensured that data presented to it are sufficiently
comprehensive or accurate in providing information on safeguarding issues,
trends and activity.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Areas for improvement

Understanding the quality of practice
the impact of that practice in keeping children and young people safe
effectiveness.

Work programme
agencies fully understand thresholds.
information.
challenge offered to partners in ensuring that safeguarding practice is robust.
undertaken of risks to children and young people in Plymouth related to child
sexual exploitation and going missing, including responses to trends and
specific areas of concern.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
appropriate multi-agency membership and includes faith representation and
two lay members. Meetings are well attended by members, and where
attendance has not been at an appropriate level this has been challenged by
the Chair. The Board has a number of sub-groups, including the child death
overview panel (CDOP), learning and professional practice, an SCR sub-group,
a policy and procedures group and a multi-agency child sexual exploitation
work stream.
meets regularly with the local authority Chief Executive and lead member.
Written notes of these meetings evidence challenge. The Chair has had a
separate appraisal completed by the Chief Executive.
Wellbeing Board (H&WB) and the Childrens Partnership Board and is able to
ensure that board priorities and safeguarding issues are appropriately
represented. The Chair is not a member of the H&WB and is an invited
observer at the Childrens Partnership.


staffing issues in social care, CAMHS waiting time performance, partners
engagement with the CAF process, and challenge to the Department of Health
and the Secretary of State regarding the absence of a forensic pathologist in
the region. However, in a number of significant areas including the poor
attendance of key agencies at ICPCs and poor practice in relation to child
protection medical examinations, evidence of challenge is not apparent. This
means that aspects of poor practice for the most vulnerable children and young
people are yet to be addressed.
time.
the initiation of serious case reviews (SCRs) and management case reviews.
The board publishes reviews and ensures that lessons from local and national
SCRs are disseminated to staff through multi-agency training. There are
currently two serious case reviews being undertaken. The Board seeks to learn
lessons before completion of reviews, including identification of issues to be the
subject of multi-agency case audits, with subsequent action plans for change.
provides a comprehensive overview and analysis of child deaths and
recommendations for action to be monitored by the Board. The Board ensures
that s11 audits are undertaken. However, the last s11 audit required only a
submission or a declaration from agencies, which meant that there was no
independent scrutiny of agency compliance. The Board has recognised this gap,
and from 2015, there is to be an element of independent verification. The
Board undertakes s175 reviews of school safeguarding procedures.
Business Manager. However, so far, in 2104, only five out of 86 schools have
taken up the offer, and the Board needs to do further work to encourage
schools to assure themselves that they are fully compliant.
appropriate timescales in place. The Board has identified the need for further
work to enhance its engagement with young people, and plans to develop a
shadow young peoples board. It also recognises the need for further scrutiny
of the effectiveness of CAFs and early help, and to understand how each
agency ensures that practice is robust.


training strategy and plan, setting out a comprehensive multi-agency training
programme. The programme provides a wide range of training at foundation,
advanced and specialist levels. However, evaluation of this training is not fully
developed with regard to assessing how the training is influencing practice. The
Board has completed a pilot evaluation on one of its courses to see how
training has influenced practice after three months and plans to apply this to
the remaining courses. On this basis the Board is not yet able to fully measure
how training is influencing practice.
management reviews, serious case reviews, child deaths, private fostering, IRO
activity and s11 audits. However, it does not provide sufficient analysis of
performance or weaknesses. The report also lacks specific contributions from
partner agencies on safeguarding activity and analysis and comment on agency
performance. On this basis, the Board does not demonstrate a sufficient
overview of safeguarding.
adoption of a new framework. This requires all partners to provide a range of
performance information (70-80 indicators). However, this is still in
development and further work is required to ensure that the Board has a clear
view on the data it requires and that all partners comply with the Boards
expectations. The Board does not sufficiently scrutinise, for accuracy, childrens social
care data provided from the local authority, particularly as there are some data quality
issues. The Board needs to assure itself that all data provided are both

comprehensive and accurate if it is to have a coherent view of activity and
demand.
system of multi-agency case audits, which include actions arising and progress
on these. Issues arising from SCRs, including chronic neglect, have informed
some case audit themes. However, the Board has not been able to establish
robust single agency audits among board members as routine, and does not yet
have an agreed programme of themed audits in place. These absences mean
that the Board will not have sufficient information to ensure that it has
independently assessed the quality of practice and compliance with
safeguarding procedures across partners in Plymouth.
further development. It has led to the establishment of the multi-agency child
sexual exploitation group (MACSE) and the development of an action plan
arising from the adoption of the Peninsula CSE strategy. Further developments
have included a new multi-agency service, REACH. This brings together youth
workers, police and a social worker to ensure return interviews for those who
go missing from home, care and education, and to map networks of children
and young people who share risk-taking behaviours that make them vulnerable
to sexual exploitation.


focus on female genital mutilation and forced marriage. Work on the new
thresholds resulted in guidance, including CSE, in examples provided for
practitioners in responding to these issues. Multi-agency training on CSE also
includes early identification for all universal service practitioners.
and emerging risk themes requires further work. There is no evidence that the
Board receives a regular report on activity together with analysis. This gap
means that the Board is not able to assess prevalence and trends, or provide
sufficiently informed challenge or effective scrutiny on the response to child
sexual exploitation.
Online Safety (COS). The group includes leading statutory and voluntary
agencies, representatives from schools and youth services, and has achieved
national recognition for its work.
with children regarding mental health ill-health and alcohol and drug
dependency are aware of safeguarding issues. The Board has also challenged
these services to show impact in relation to better outcomes for children, but
these have yet to be demonstrated.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and a
contracted inspector from Ofsted.

The inspection team
Lead inspector: Linda Steele HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Sean Tarpey HMI
Team inspectors: Peter McEntee HMI, Emmy Tomsett HMI, Paula Thomson-Jones
HMI, Martin Parry HMI, Wendy Radcliffe HMI, Dominic Porter-Moore (Contracted
Inspector)
Quality assurance manager: Simon Rushall SHMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


