Poole Borough
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 September 2017 to 5 October 2017
Report published: 24 November 2017

Childrens services in Poole require improvement to be good

Requires improvement to
be good

permanence

Requires improvement to
be good


Good


Good


Requires improvement to
be good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Poole require improvement to be good. Since the last
inspection in 2011, the director of children services (DCS) and her senior leadership
team have worked purposefully with partners to implement a number of systemic
changes to sustain and improve outcomes for children. These include the
introduction of a new electronic casework system, the appointment of an interim
service head, the development of a stable and committed workforce, the creation of
the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH), the transfer of adoption services to a
regional adoption agency, the strengthening of early help services and restructuring
of services to children in need.
As a result, some children receive helpful interventions. Yet, despite these
developments, outcomes for children across the services are inconsistent. While the
councils adoption performance and its support for care leavers are strong, the pace
of overall improvement across the service has been variable, and weaknesses have
emerged in services for children looked after and in need of help and protection.
Senior managers know that there is still work to do to strengthen many aspects of
social work practice to make it consistently good.
Leaders and politicians have a good understanding of strengths and weaknesses.
Nevertheless, this has not translated into swift enough action to drive improvement
and achieve consistent standards across the service. Clear governance arrangements
are in place. The improvement boards role in overseeing performance and progress
has been strengthened by independent validation. The councils improvement plan is
focused on the right areas and has led to some improvements, such as regular visits
from social workers, timely children looked after reviews and a reduction in social
workers caseloads. Nonetheless, there has not been sufficient impact to improve all
key areas of practice. In particular, a minority of strategy meetings and child
protection investigations are delayed, and partners are not consistently attending
child protection conferences or core groups. Weak management oversight and some
poor practice in the out-of-hours service have left some children vulnerable.
Senior leaders introduction of a comprehensive quality assurance framework has
strengthened service improvement in some areas. Still, quality assurance activity is
not yet improving outcomes for all children across the whole service, due to
inconsistent management oversight of frontline practice. Regular supervision takes
place for the vast majority of social workers, but the quality is variable and not yet
sufficiently reflective to challenge ineffective practice.
Vulnerable children benefit from comprehensive and coordinated early support to
prevent problems from escalating. Staff act quickly to protect children at risk of
serious harm. Strategy meetings, where appropriate, lead to child protection
enquiries and timely conferences for those most at risk. A lack of capacity in the
MASH has, however, affected the timeliness of responses to non-urgent referrals.
Additionally, the authority has not put in place the performance data needed to


monitor the effectiveness of step-up and step-down processes. Staff are not
consistently recording parental consent or the reasons for overriding it.
Assessments, including pre-birth assessments, are informative and include the childs
views or perspectives, with a clear analysis of ongoing needs. Conversely, staff do
not always adequately capture the childs identity and cultural heritage. Most plans
facilitate positive change. However, there is neither sufficient attention to
contingency planning or identification of potential alternative carers earlier, which
creates potential delay. The authority makes effective use of the Public Law Outline
(PLO), as confirmed by feedback from the family justice courts and the Child and
Families Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass).
The local authority looks after children when necessary. Occasionally, for older
children, the admission to care has been delayed due to a lack of suitable local foster
placements. When children are placed in an emergency, foster carers report that
they are not always provided with sufficient information to meet their needs. A small
but significant number of children have remained overnight in police custody or in
unsuitable environments as a result of the lack of placements. However, overall,
most children live in good-quality foster placements that meet their needs. Care
plans support effective permanency planning, and contact arrangements are up to
date. Plans for children who return home from care are thorough, and they reduce
the likelihood of children returning into local authority care.
Work with children who have experienced or are at risk of sexual exploitation and/or
going missing is effective. Risk assessments and return home interviews carefully
consider all risks and are timely. The local authority and the police have significantly
strengthened their response to this area of work. As a consequence, children are
better supported and protected.
Services for children requiring adoption are good. The authority is achieving
permanence through adoption for children from a range of different ages and
backgrounds. Social workers prepare children well for their transition to their
adoptive families.
Care leavers receive a good service. Staff support them well to progress in
education, training and employment, and in preparation for independent living.
Young people speak highly of their personal advisers and the availability of the
pathway team. While pathway plans are up to date, they do not adequately record
young peoples aspirations.
The corporate parenting panel scrutinises performance and outcomes for children
looked after. It works closely with the Children in Care Council and scrutiny panel.
Leaders involve children effectively in a wide range of decisions about services. The
council offers apprenticeships to care leavers. However, elected members have not
exerted enough challenge in response to the insufficient provision of foster carers for
older children.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority does not operate any childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
November 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in November 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since October 2012.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult social care and housing, which together with
childrens social care comprise the People theme.
 The chief executive has been in post since June 2014.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since July 2016.
 The LSCB is shared with Bournemouth. Some working groups are also shared
with Dorset LSCB.
 Adoption services are delivered jointly with two neighbouring local authorities
through a regional adoption agency, Aspire, launched in July 2017
Children living in this area
 Approximately 30,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Poole. This is 20% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 16% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 12% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 7% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 7% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Other White, and White and Asian.

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 9% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 5% (the national average is 16%).
Child protection in this area
 At 12 September 2017, 929 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a decrease from
 At 12 September 2017, 106 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 35 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 80 (27
per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2017.
 At 31 August 2017, five children lived in a private fostering arrangement. This is
an increase from one at 31 March 2017.
 In the two years before inspection, one serious incident notification had been
submitted to Ofsted and one serious case review had been completed.
 There are no serious case reviews ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 12 September 2017, 200 children are being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 66 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 190 (64 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2017. Of this number,
authority area
 eight live with parents, of whom 38% live out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 16 adoptions
 nine children became the subject of special guardianship orders
returned to be looked after
independent living
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that there is sufficient capacity in the multi-agency safeguarding hub
for timely sharing of information to meet the needs of children.


Ensure that parental consent is recorded at the point of referral and that,
when overridden, the rationale to do so is clearly explained.


Improve contingency planning in child protection and child in need cases, so if
the plan is not effective it is clear what actions will follow.


When children step down from childrens social care to early help services,
take steps to ensure that the childs plan is clearly understood and recorded
prior to the point of transfer.


Ensure that there is sufficient capacity in the out-of-hours service to meet the
needs of children and provide effective oversight and challenge of the
management of this service.


Ensure that staff, including out-of-hours staff, receive regular good-quality
supervision with appropriate critical challenge and opportunities for reflection.


Increase the effectiveness of management oversight across the service,
ensuring that decisions and actions are clearly recorded, including from
meetings, within childrens case files.


Accelerate progress in increasing the numbers of foster carers who can meet
the needs of older children with more complex needs, particularly in an
emergency. Ensure that this is informed by a clear needs analysis.


Ensure that foster carers are provided with sufficient up-to-date information
about children placed with them to enable them to provide the support that
they need.


Ensure that identification of potential carers and viability assessments are
routinely considered at the earliest opportunity as part of the Public Law
Outline process.


Develop the skills of the workforce to ensure that childrens identity, culture
and ethnicity are actively considered in assessments, and inform planning.


Strengthen systems for oversight of the progression of childrens permanence
to ensure that they do not experience unnecessary drift and delay.


Summary for children and young people
 Not all services for children in Poole are good enough. There is still more work to
do to make sure that all children have the help and support that they need at the
right time, and to make sure that there are enough foster homes.
 There are plenty of different services in Poole that help children and families so
that small problems do not become big ones. Sometimes, however, it takes too
long for the help to start to make things better.
 When children are at risk of very serious harm, social workers act quickly to make
sure that they are as safe as possible.
 Social workers spend time with children and listen to them to find out what is
worrying them. However, they do not always talk to all of their family members
to help them to work out the best way of helping children.
 When children go missing from home or school, social workers and police officers
work hard together to find them and make sure that they are safe. Once children
have been found, someone independent talks to them to try to understand the
reasons why they went missing and to find ways to stop this happening again.
 For children who cannot live with their families, social workers find the right
families for them where they can feel happy and safe. For a few children, though,
this takes too long.
 When adoption is the best plan for children, social workers find the right family
for them quickly. Children are well prepared for their move to their forever
family and they receive bright, colourful life-story books to help them to
understand their life experiences.
 When young people leave care, they are well supported. They get on well with
their personal advisers, who keep in touch with them well into their adult lives.
 There is an active Children in Care Council in Poole. Senior leaders listen to
childrens views and act on them.
 Senior leaders understand their responsibility to make sure that children in care
are well looked after. They have high aspirations for them to succeed in later life.
 Senior leaders want to make sure that all children and families have good help
and support. They have some really good ideas about how they are going to
improve some services for children.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement
to be good

Summary
Children and families in Poole benefit from early help services that are well
targeted and coordinated effectively. Staff undertaking early help assessments
engage parents and children effectively, and families are signposted to appropriate
activities and groups.
The multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) is ensuring the prompt initial screening
of contacts and the prioritisation of the most urgent cases. For the majority of
children, multi-agency coordination is effective. However, information sharing is
not timely for all children and, as a result, delays can occur in progressing contacts
and referrals. Parental consent is not always routinely recorded.
The majority of strategy discussions and child protection investigations are timely.
However, a small number are delayed due to the lack of police availability. Child
protection conferences are appropriately convened, but they are not always well
attended by key professionals. Social workers see children regularly and alone.
They build trusting relationships with children and undertake creative, childcentred direct work, including the childs voice in their assessments.
Childrens views are well represented and inform subsequent child protection
plans. Although plans are timely and child focused, they do not always include
contingency plans in case childrens circumstances do not improve. When risks to
children have reduced and responsibility for helping them is stepped down to early
help services, plans are not always clear about what support will be provided.
The majority of assessments include appropriate historic and multi-agency
information, with clear analysis leading to appropriate decisions and actions.
However, in a small number of cases, birth fathers and other extended family
members are not spoken to. Consequently, their views and potential contribution
to improving childrens lives are not known or fully considered.
Decision-making and management oversight in the out-of-hours service are not
consistently effective. This weakens the councils response to childrens needs
when issues arise outside of office hours.
Children who go missing receive timely and supportive return home interviews.
Partners work together well, sharing intelligence to safeguard children who go
missing and reduce risks of exploitation or drug- and group-related criminal
activity. Staff ensure that regular risk management meetings take place. However,
these are not always well recorded.


Inspection findings

The local authority has strengthened its early help provision to try to ensure
that children and families receive the right interventions at the right time. As a
result, children and families benefit from a wide range of early support. For
example, the aligning of health visitors with childrens centres has led to 88%
of all children aged up to five years in Poole being registered with a childrens
centre, enabling early access for those who need speech and language
support and ensuring that children are better prepared for starting school.
However, a lack of performance information is limiting the ability of managers
to understand the impact of some of its targeted services on individual
childrens outcomes over time.


Early help assessments are comprehensive and mostly of good quality. Early
help plans are clear and regularly reviewed. Workers are tenacious in ensuring
that actions are progressed, with signposting and support for other activities
and groups. They are stepped up appropriately to social care if risks or
concerns escalate. This is making a positive difference to childrens lives, for
example in improving school attendance and educational outcomes.


When children are in need of help and protection, the recently developed
MASH is the central point of contact for members of the public and
professionals. Thresholds are generally well understood and applied by
partners. However, police notifications are not all of good quality, and not all
meet the threshold for childrens social care. As a result, social workers in the
MASH are placed under pressure through gathering unnecessary information.
The initial screening of contacts by the manager is prompt, and the most
urgent cases are prioritised. In the majority of childrens cases, the response
to referrals is effective, ensuring that risks are well managed. However,
parental consent is not routinely recorded, and the rationale for the overriding
of consent is not clearly evidenced. Where it appears that there are low levels
of need at the point of contact, there are delays in gathering information to
inform decisions on the next steps needed to support children and families.
(Recommendation)


Children who need help from the out-of-hours service do not consistently
receive a good enough response. Inspectors found shortfalls in the service,
including poor recording and management oversight. In a small number of
cases, unacceptable responses left children in vulnerable situations for too
long. While the pace of progress in response to concerns has been too slow,
during the inspection senior managers took action to review and strengthen
the service.


When children are at possible risk of harm, the vast majority receive a timely
response, and risks and protective factors are identified effectively. However,
inspectors saw delays in a small number of strategy discussions and child
protection enquiries due to the lack of police availability. All child protection
investigations are discussed with the manager of the child protection


conference chairs team to consider whether the threshold for an initial
conference is met. Timely initial child protection conferences are held, and the
vast majority appropriately lead to child protection plans as the most effective
means to ensure that children are safeguarded and their needs responded to.

Social workers see children regularly, and they see them alone when
appropriate. They build trusting relationships with children and undertake
creative, child-centred direct work to include their views and experiences in
assessments. Inspectors saw some good examples of sensitive engagement
with disabled children that is ensuring that their voice, opinions and feelings
are heard. Workers engage with families to ensure that appropriate support
and intervention are in place to reduce risk and improve outcomes for
children.


Most assessments, including pre-birth assessments, consider appropriate
historic and multi-agency information. They have clear analyses and lead to
appropriate decisions and actions. However, in a small number of cases, birth
fathers and other extended family members are not spoken to. As a result,
their views and potential contribution to improving childrens outcomes are not
known or considered.


Childrens identity and culture are not sufficiently considered in assessments.
For example, in large groups of brothers and sisters, individual childrens
needs are not always clearly differentiated. Children are often only seen once,
and do not routinely receive feedback on the outcome of their assessments.


Young people aged 16 to 17 who present as homeless are jointly assessed by
social work and housing support colleagues. Appropriate efforts are made to
support children to remain in their extended families. A wide range of
supported accommodation is available. However, assessments of a small
number of children are not sufficiently rigorous, and they remain without
suitable accommodation for too long.


The majority of child protection plans are timely and child focused, supporting
change for children. Conferences and core groups are largely effective in
progressing plans, though attendance by relevant health colleagues is not
consistently good. This means that information regarding some childrens
health needs and progress is not always available. This issue has been
escalated to the Local Safeguarding Children Board, yet it has not been
resolved at the time of the inspection. An advocacy service supports children
effectively to present their views at child protection conferences, which
informs child protection plans.


Contingency plans in child protection and child in need cases are not always
specific about what will happen if a plan is not successful. For example, in the
event of circumstances changing, the only contingency recorded is to seek
legal advice. (Recommendation)



When concerns reduce and children transfer from social care to early help,
their records do not show clearly enough how their needs will be met and
what services they will receive. This makes it difficult to assess whether
children are receiving the right step-down service. (Recommendation)


Disabled children benefit from comprehensive plans. Transition planning for
disabled children is appropriately and thoroughly considered at an early stage.
They are well protected when safeguarding concerns are identified. Effective
management oversight and good use of letters of expectations with parents
ensure that risks are clearly understood and addressed.


However, the quality of management oversight and supervision is not yet
consistently good across childrens social care as a whole. For some children,
this means that actions to progress plans and improve childrens
circumstances are not taken quickly enough. In a small number of childrens
cases, there is drift and delay in responding to increasing risks or limited
progress.


Children living in families where domestic abuse is a feature are appropriately
referred to effective and well-attended multi-agency risk assessment
conferences (MARAC). These arrangements are well coordinated and partner
agencies appropriately share information to consider risk. A wide range of
commissioned services are available to help children, victims and perpetrators,
and reduce risk. Co-locating a specialist domestic abuse worker in childrens
social care, alongside adult mental health and substance addiction
practitioners, ensures that the right knowledge and skills are available to
manage risks to children and address identified needs.


When children return, having gone missing, a dedicated worker coordinates
return home interviews. Most children are seen promptly, with appropriate
information gathered about the reasons why they have gone missing. A
rationale is recorded for each child not receiving an interview within 72 hours
of their return. Effective systems are in place to ensure that all missing
notifications of children are tracked to completion, including children looked
after. Intelligence is appropriately shared with the police child sexual
exploitation and missing team.


Effective partnership working reduces risks to children from sexual
exploitation. Six-weekly meetings share intelligence about the most vulnerable
children. They focus on hotspots and the planning of disruption activities,
leading to a number of prosecutions in the last year. Thorough, good-quality
risk assessments are routinely undertaken by social workers, resulting in
safety plans to reduce risk. Regular meetings take place to discuss high-risk
cases. However, recording of these meetings is poor, therefore it is hard to
evidence the difference that multi-agency arrangements are making to reduce
risk for children in a timely way.



The local authority is meeting its responsibilities with respect to private
fostering. A dedicated private fostering social worker takes responsibility for
the assessment of all carers. However, despite the majority of private
fostering arrangements in Poole relating to overseas students attending
language schools, issues of diversity and identity are not well recorded in
assessments. Assessments and plans are not routinely shared with children
and birth families.


Responses to allegations against professionals are well managed by the
designated officer. Allegations are taken seriously, resulting in proportionate
and robust plans. Briefings and training sessions are provided to ensure that a
wide range of employers are kept up to date. A dedicated designated officer
supports all education establishments, making relevant staff and school
governors aware of their roles and responsibilities.


Good arrangements are in place to monitor children who are electively home
educated and those who go missing from education. Home visits are carried
out to assess arrangements to protect and safeguard children and ensure that
they are receiving a good education. There is swift follow-up where there is
non-compliance.


Arrangements are in place to identify and respond to children at risk of
radicalisation. The Prevent lead provides effective oversight and coordination.
There is clear guidance in place for local professionals, and regular training is
provided across the partnership, both face to face and via e-learning.
However, there have been no training events planned or delivered to
supportive lodgings providers. This is a missed opportunity.


The council and its partners have delivered multi-agency training to ensure
that professionals are aware of risks and reporting requirements in relation to
female genital mutilation and forced marriage. There has been only one
female genital mutilation referral in the last six months. Agreed procedures
provide clear guidance, including a flowchart to help staff to understand what
needs to happen, including the need for strategy discussions and who should
be involved.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement
to be good

Summary
Outcomes for children looked after in Poole are not yet good, because services are
not consistently meeting the needs of all children. When children are unable to live
with their families and need to be looked after, the majority benefit from timely
decision-making and entry to care. However, the local authority is not providing
suitable accommodation for all children quickly enough. As a result, a small but
significant number of older children have remained in police custody overnight
when they should have been in the care of the local authority.
A small minority of children have been looked after for too long because of delays
in progressing permanence plans, and this has impacted on their emotional health
and behaviour. The majority of children looked after live close to home and benefit
from good-quality, stable and safe placements. However, there are not enough
local placements for children needing to be placed in an emergency or children
who have complex needs. Foster carers are not always provided with detailed
information about the children whom they are caring for in an emergency.
Most assessments of childrens needs are of sufficient quality to inform placement
choice and support care planning well. However, many do not consider childrens
ethnic, cultural and identity needs carefully enough. Children benefit from regular
reviews, and independent reviewing officers increasingly challenge and escalate
concerns. However, they do not consistently identify drift early enough.
When children go missing from care or are at risk of sexual exploitation, timely
appropriate action is taken to monitor, review and reduce risks. Up-to-date health
assessments are in place for most children. However, the provision of mental
health support is insufficient to meet the needs of the looked-after population.
Children have meaningful relationships with social workers, who know them well.
Effective direct work undertaken with children is helping them to understand their
histories. Children looked after are making appropriate progress in their level of
development, as well as improving their personal and social skills. Attendance at
school is improving steadily. While most receive prompt health assessments, this is
not happening consistently for those living at distance from Poole.
Adoption services are good, and permanence through adoption is achieved for
children from a range of different backgrounds and ages.
Staff support care leavers well, helping to sustain them in education, training and
employment. This includes creating individualised apprenticeships for them within
the councils services.


Inspection findings

The majority of children in Poole become looked after when it is in their best
interests to become so. However, for a small number of children, earlier
planning and identification of risk would have prevented the need for
emergency admission into care. There are not enough emergency placements
available. Due to an insufficient number of local placements, seven of 15
children arrested in the last six months have been held in police custody
overnight when they should have been transferred to the care of the local
authority. This can be a confusing and traumatic experience for children. A
minority of children who become looked after, particularly on an emergency
basis, do not always benefit from robust multi-agency assessments and
experience a number of early placement moves, compounding the emotional
distress that they are experiencing.


Decisions about childrens long-term futures are taken early enough in most
cases. The local authority works to reunite children with their parents where
possible, and actively considers special guardianship orders with relatives
where this cannot be achieved safely. However, for a small number of
children, permanence decisions have not been considered or progressed with
sufficient urgency. At the time of this inspection, a number of children who
were settled and thriving in their foster homes had not been matched to their
current long-term carers, whether as foster carers or adopters. Managers are
aware that this affects childrens emotional health and behaviour.


Most children are placed with foster carers within 20 miles of their home, and
long-term placement stability is good. Robust commissioning arrangements
mean that children, including unaccompanied asylum-seeking children, are in
supportive, stable and safe placements. However, the local authority does not
provide or commission enough suitable local foster homes or emergency
placements for older children who have more complex needs. As a result,
children are sometimes placed at some distance from their homes. This
adversely affects their family contact, relationships and travel time. While
senior managers identified this shortfall in 2016, their action plan to increase
capacity in this area has not yet had the impact needed. (Recommendation)


The local authority does not provide a specific edge of care service to reduce
the need for children to become looked after. However, there is early planning
to return children home. This is strengthened by clear support plans and good
direct work undertaken by social workers and family support workers.
Effective intervention services ensure that reunification is successful in the
majority of cases. When it is appropriate for children to remain at home while
they are looked after, the local authority provides a good range of
interventions to ensure that they are safe, and cared for.


Thresholds for care proceedings are appropriate and they progress in a timely
manner, with the majority of childrens cases being completed within 27
weeks, on average. Court reports and assessments of family members are of


good quality and undertaken by well-supported and experienced social
workers. The local authority has developed the skills of social workers to
undertake specialist parental assessments, limiting the need for independent
experts. However, it does not have a systematic approach to pre-proceedings,
and this hampers effective oversight of cases and increases the potential for
drift and delay. In a small number of childrens cases, late identification of
potential carers has impacted on the timely progression of care proceedings.
(Recommendation)

Children have meaningful and consistent relationships with social workers,
who know them well. Visiting is regular and purposeful. Most children
understand the reasons that they are in care and the future plans for them. A
stable workforce is ensuring that children do not experience unnecessary
changes of social worker. Inspectors saw good examples of life-story and
direct work helping children to understand their histories and make sense of
their experiences.


Assessment of foster carers, including connected carers, is a strength.
Appropriate training and support equip carers with the skills that they need to
care for the vast majority of children. Children have access to a range of
appropriate leisure and social activities. Carers are able to make decisions
about childrens day-to-day care arrangements. However, they report that
they are not consistently provided with full information about children who are
placed with them in an emergency, or those with complex needs. As a result,
a minority of children are not always well matched. For some, this has led to a
number of early placement changes and delays in their needs being met.
(Recommendation)


The majority of children have an up-to-date assessment of need. They benefit
from detailed and timely care planning. Contact with family and friends is
routinely considered within assessments, reflecting childrens needs and
permanency plans. However, the use of chronologies is limited, therefore
significant events in the childs experience and journey are not always
recorded. Consideration of childrens cultural, ethnic and identity needs is not
consistently given or used to inform planning. (Recommendation)


The independent reviewing service is an experienced and stable staff group.
Although caseloads are at the upper end of the range recommended in
national guidance, reviews are undertaken in a timely manner. Independent
reviewing officers (IROs) are increasingly raising challenges or escalating
cases, aided by a formal alert system. However, capacity issues have limited
the opportunities for IROs to check the progress of childrens plans between
their reviews. As a result, drift and delay in progressing permanence plans or
service provision are not always identified at an early stage.
(Recommendation)


Children actively participate in their reviews, and their wishes and experiences
are listened to, reflected in records and inform planning. Advocacy is actively


promoted and children and young people are increasingly benefiting from
access to independent visitors.

The school attendance of children looked after up to the age of 16 has
improved over the last year, but is not yet meeting the local authority target.
There were no permanent exclusions in 2016/17. Effective arrangements are
in place for the small number of children looked after who are missing
education to receive suitable education and improve their attendance and
achievement.


There is appropriate monitoring and oversight of the pupil premium. The
virtual school headteacher ensures that schools use pupil premium funding
carefully to improve the educational, personal and social development of
children looked after.


Childrens personal education plans (PEPs) are monitored and reviewed
regularly by the virtual school headteacher. There is good liaison with all
schools to ensure that PEPs reflect and anticipate childrens needs to improve
their achievement and attainment. While schools receive clear feedback, the
virtual school headteacher does not produce a summary of good practice from
the findings from the individual reviews.


Children looked after are making appropriate progress in their level of
development at the different key stages. The difference in achievement
between children looked after in Poole and those nationally is reducing.


Following a significant dip in performance in 201617, children placed in Poole
and in neighbouring authorities benefit from increasingly timely health
assessments that identify their needs. These are informed by strengths and
difficulties questionnaires. Regular reviews of plans are undertaken by the
health team to ensure timely progression of actions. However, a small number
of children who are placed at a distance from Poole experience considerable
delays before their initial health assessments and when specific health services
are required to address their needs.


Health professionals co-located with the children in care social work team are
available to provide direct interventions with children, as well as consultation
for carers to support children in their placement. However, not all children
looked after and care leavers who need specialist mental health support have
timely access to relevant services. For a minority of children, this has affected
the stability of their placements, their emotional well-being or their
educational achievement. The small number of young people with substance
misuse issues or who are involved in the criminal justice system are known,
and receive timely and effective multi-agency interventions to address needs
and concerns. Effective services are in place across agencies to ensure that
professionals are aware of and able to support children who are experiencing
bullying or discrimination.



The Children in Care Council is a well-established, strong and visible group,
and members are actively promoting the voice and experiences of children
looked after. They are involved in staff recruitment, have contributed to the
development of the Pledge for children looked after and meet with the DCS
on a regular basis, as well as attending the corporate parenting board.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

The local authority considers adoption for all children who require permanence
at the earliest opportunity. In the last year, the local authority has been
successful in achieving adoption for an increasing number of children. This
includes older children, brothers and sisters together, children from minority
ethnic backgrounds and placements for children with complex needs. It takes
longer to find the right families for these children, and this has had some
impact on the local authoritys overall performance in relation to the timeliness
of adoption. Nevertheless, children in Poole still move to live with their
adoptive families more quickly than children in many other parts of the
country.


Positively, a number of older children have achieved legal and emotional
permanence through adoption by their long-term foster carers. However, for a
very small minority of these children, there has been some delay in having this
arrangement ratified by the court. While the impact of this is minimised by
children not having to experience a change of carer, they have found the need
to remain in care frustrating.


Family finding is thorough and sensitive to the needs of each child. Social
workers and managers rigorously track all children with a potential adoption
plan from a very early stage. Having a family-finding social worker allocated to
children early in care proceedings means that, by the time that the court has
confirmed an adoption plan, social workers know children well and understand
what they need. Social workers share information about children and
prospective adopters promptly across the regional adoption agency and the
south west consortium. This, as well as the good use of national links and the
use of adoption exchange and activity days, helps to ensure that permanence
is achieved quickly. All but a small minority of the 12 children currently waiting
have potential links to adopters.


The local authority actively promotes fostering to adopt arrangements. At the
time of the inspection, seven children were benefiting from these
arrangements. A foster to adopt carer spoken to during the inspection
commented: Its the best thing we have ever done. We weighed up the risk
and it is the right thing for the child.



Assessments of potential adopters are timely and thorough. They explore the
prospective adopters motivation and capacity to adopt, as well as their
practical and emotional circumstances. This enables the adoption panel and
agency decision maker (ADM) to make informed recommendations and
decisions about approval. Adopters from a range of backgrounds are
approved, reflecting the composition of the local area.


The majority of child permanence reports are of a good quality. They provide
a clear understanding of the childs lived experiences. Matching reports
demonstrate the efforts of social workers to find the right match for children.
However, matching reports could be further strengthened by carefully
considering childrens identity needs when they become adopted.


Overall, matching is effective. Prior to placement, every adopter has the
opportunity to meet with the medical adviser and a clinical psychologist to
discuss the childs physical, emotional and psychological needs. This, as well
as the life appreciation days held before placement, provides adopters with indepth information about their children. There have been no adoption
disruptions in the past two years, demonstrating the effectiveness of the local
authoritys matching processes and support services.


A diverse panel, supported by an experienced independent chair, makes
effective decisions regarding adoption decisions. Panel and ADM minutes
demonstrate robust scrutiny and appropriate challenge when considering
approvals and matches. Quality assurance systems are well established. The
panel provides feedback to social workers in every case considered and seeks
feedback from prospective adopters about their experiences during their
adoption journey. The senior manager of the agency knows the service well
and is committed to continually improving the quality of the service.


Social workers and family support workers use effective tools to help children
to prepare for their transition into their adoptive family. Colourful,
individualised moving calendars, similar to advent calendars, help children to
understand their transition. Beautifully presented life-story books, written in
child-friendly language with plenty of photographs, bring childrens histories to
life. These books, combined with informative later-life letters, help children
throughout their childhoods and into adulthood to understand their life
experiences in a meaningful way.


Adopted children benefit from sensitively assessed, meaningful contact with
birth family members. Staff in the adoption and special guardianship support
team facilitate letterbox contact and, where appropriate, direct contact
between children and members of their birth family. As a result, children
benefit from maintaining relationships and receiving letters that will add value
to their lives in terms of their identity.


Adopters and their children have access to a range of post-adoption support.
This includes support groups, activities, celebrations, parenting programmes,


training opportunities and access to clinical psychologists. Well-trained social
workers undertake direct work with children and their adoptive parents. The
agency is in the process of increasing capacity and skill within the adoption
support team to meet an increasing need for support. Good use is made of
the adoption support fund when more specialist support is required. This has
helped children and their parents to deal with specific difficulties and to
maintain stability in their families. Birth parents also have access to
appropriate counselling and support, and are routinely signposted to them.
The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care
leavers is that it is good

The pathways team provides effective support to 125 care leavers. Of these,
unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.


Children looked after receive a smooth and effective transition to the
pathways team. Their involvement starts at 15 years and three months, when
personal advisers come to know them while they are still supported by their
social workers. These children benefit from this arrangement until they are 18.
They speak highly of the support that they receive and the frequency of
contact. At the time of inspection, personal advisers were in touch with all
care leavers, improving on the previous year when they were in touch with all
but four care leavers.


Care leavers feel safe and are aware of risks, such as misuse of alcohol and
drugs. They know where they can obtain help when they need it. For
example, the close support of personal advisers enables care leavers to
overcome substance misuse and the challenges of family contact. Personal
advisers make sure that care leavers have suitable plans in place when they
are being released from custody. They are vigilant about risks to vulnerable
young people from exploitation, particularly for young unaccompanied asylum
seekers.


Constructive involvement of care leavers through the pathway planning
process helps them to review their progress and plans. Plans are regularly
updated, comprehensive and cover areas of importance such as health,
finance and accommodation. Through the process, care leavers express their
views clearly. Although only a few do so with enthusiasm and they consider
pathway plans to be too long, they value and act on the suggestions, helping
them to make choices about work or training and education or to cope with
changes in their personal circumstances.


In recording the views of care leavers, pathway plans do not bring out
sufficiently their feelings about themselves and their aspirations. Timescales
and contingency arrangements in the plans are not precise enough.



Pathway plans include comprehensive information on the health of care
leavers. They receive health passports that record the essential information in
one place, which they find helpful. They have support from the children in
care nursing team, and some emotional well-being services are available for
them. However, inspectors found that some young people who need clinical
mental health services face long waits before accessing the specialist help
needed. Their personal advisers make sure that their dental and other medical
health needs are met in a timely way.


Care leavers receive good support from their personal advisers on their
journey towards being independent, including helping them to look after their
finances sensibly. The pathways team makes sure that care leavers use the
grants for which they are eligible prudently, and that they learn how to
budget. Care leavers learn about living independently through short-term use
of a training flat. The service is now acquiring another such training flat for
older care leavers.


Accommodation for care leavers is well planned and they live in safe, stable
and suitable accommodation. At the time of inspection, 14 young people had
stayed put with their foster carers. Personal advisers or social workers always
visit and assess accommodation risk and, in most cases, prepare care leavers
well in pre-placement meetings. They are firm in rejecting unsuitable
accommodation in areas of high anti-social behaviour, where the young
people would be vulnerable. The pathways team works closely with the
housing manager in the housing bidding system so that care leavers gain
preferential status.


Care leavers receive good support to enable them to remain in education,
employment or training. The partnership with the local college is very effective
and a high proportion of care leavers undertake appropriate courses. They
receive appropriate advice and guidance before making their decisions. A wellresourced drop-in centre in the town is also a good source of information and
support for them.


A dedicated employment and education adviser works closely with care
leavers and schools to make sure that the young people have the right
information to help them to make their choices. Several young people have
benefited from a good placement scheme through which they gained work
experience or employment at different settings, such as at a leisure centre, in
charity shops and Poole culture and community services. Currently, the
pathways team is supporting six care leavers in higher education.


The local authority has made good progress in reducing the numbers of care
leavers who are not in education, employment or training. At the time of
inspection, four care leavers were not in education, employment or training,
although their whereabouts were known to the pathways team.



The pathways team and virtual school staff provide prompt feedback to
schools for immediate follow-up action, and they regularly track the progress
of care leavers. They identify by wards the places where young people are not
in education, employment or training, and involve councillors to take action.
Several care leavers have entered apprenticeships that the local authority has
specifically created for their group. Care leavers with special educational
needs have the opportunity to undertake supported internships.


Care leavers enjoy annual events that celebrate their achievements. They take
a very active role in planning the occasion and other events, which include
performances and music provided by a band of their peers who are in care.
They also undertake activities such as singing lessons, music tuition, horse
riding, language lessons and swimming. However, they are not aware of the
leisure card that is available to them.


Care leavers, as part of the Children in Care Council, attend the corporate
parenting panel. They take part in interviewing social workers and have their
say on changes in policies, including contributing to making the language in
the care leavers Pledge leaflet simpler for them.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement
to be good

Summary
A cohesive group of senior and political leaders share a vision to continually
improve services for children in Poole. They have sustained good services for
children who require adoption and for care leavers since the last inspection in
oversight and supervision are not consistently effective across childrens social care
as a whole. The overall quality of help, protection and care for children has not
been sustained, and these now require improvement to be good.
A childrens service improvement board has ensured oversight, but it has not been
fully effective in addressing key weaknesses in some notable areas. These include
children left in the custody of police overnight, delays in progressing childrens
cases in the multi-agency safeguarding hub, and poor management oversight and
decision-making by the out-of-hours service. Managers are not rigorous enough in
responding to weaknesses. The authority is not yet providing a good enough
service for all children in Poole.
Governance arrangements are effective, with clear lines of reporting and
accountability. Outward-looking leaders ensure shared ownership of the strengths
and weaknesses of the service. Corporate commitment to childrens services is
evident, including financial support to deliver and strengthen services. Partnership
working is mainly effective, but there is more to do to ensure that key professionals
attend and contribute to child protection conferences and core groups.
A well-developed strategic needs assessment informs commissioning plans.
Rigorous monitoring of arrangements ensures a sound understanding of service
effectiveness, informed by the views of parents and children. Despite work to
increase placement availability, there remains a lack of foster carers, particularly
for older children with complex emotional and behavioural needs.
Quality assurance and performance management arrangements are improving and
beginning to strengthen practice, with follow-on action plans addressing areas of
weakness. A renewed focus on performance information has resulted in an
increased understanding of service effectiveness. However, there is further work to
do to develop performance information for early help and ensure that this is
analysed effectively to inform service provision.
The workforce is stable, and caseloads are manageable in most teams. Social
workers enjoy working in childrens services in Poole. They appreciate the training
they receive, as well as the availability and support of senior managers, whom
they describe as visible and approachable.


Inspection findings

Senior managers and leaders are both challenging and ambitious in their
aspirations for vulnerable children in Poole. They have been successful in
strengthening some areas, including the development of the multi-agency
safeguarding hub (MASH) and the transfer to a regional adoption agency.
They have sustained good adoption and care-leaving services since the last
inspection. However, they have not done enough to tackle the inconsistent
quality in the broader scope of services for children in need of help and
protection and those looked after. These services now require improvement to
be good.


Reflective, outward-looking leaders proactively seek to learn from other
organisations. Good use has been made of findings from a local government
association safeguarding diagnostic in 2016 which identified that the threshold
for services was too low. This has resulted in the implementation of a
relaunched thresholds document, strengthened early help provision and the
development of the MASH. There is some evidence of the impact of services
and the difference that early help services are making to childrens outcomes,
but there is further work to do to systematically evaluate the effectiveness of
services provided.


The local authoritys self-assessment is sufficiently self-critical and provides a
sound evaluation of the service. Although shortfalls are identified, managers
are not consistently effective in responding to these, therefore some notable
weaknesses remain. These include the lack of foster carers for older children
with complex needs, which has resulted in children being left in the care of
police overnight, delays in progressing childrens cases in the MASH, and poor
management oversight and decision-making by the out-of-hours service.
(Recommendation)


Management oversight, including by independent reviewing officers and child
protection chairs, while improving, is not yet consistently good. While
examples of effective management oversight were seen, too many lacked a
clear focus on childrens progress against plans. (Recommendation)


The director of childrens services (DCS) and her senior management team
provide stable and visible leadership. They have established strong working
relationships and share ownership of the strengths and weaknesses of the
service. Together with the chief executive, they have a collective vision to
continually improve and deliver good services for children in Poole. They have
responded effectively to the vast majority of the recommendations from the
last inspection (2011). However, contingency planning and the effective use of
chronologies remain work in progress.


The childrens services improvement board, chaired by the lead member, has
overseen progress against the local authoritys improvement plan since its


introduction in 2016. However, the board has not responded rigorously
enough to poor practice and weak management oversight in the out-of-hours
service or to the lack of foster carers for older children with complex needs.

Governance arrangements are effective, with clear lines of reporting and
accountability. The chief executive and elected members provide scrutiny,
challenge and oversight of activity. For example, the councils cabinet
commissioned a working group to carry out a review of child sexual
exploitation in Poole, leading to an effective action plan to respond to areas
for development. Links between senior leaders and the Local Safeguarding
Children Board (LSCB) are strong. The lead member is well informed, chairs
the Childrens Trust, attends LSCB meetings, and provides regular briefings to
elected members.


Childrens services are one of the four corporate priorities set out in the
councils corporate plan. The childrens plan (201720) sets out the key
priorities for children. It is aligned with the joint strategic needs assessment
and the Health and Wellbeing strategy, and is overseen by the Childrens
Trust. Childrens services performance indicators are regularly received by
senior managers, elected members, the Childrens Trust and the LSCB. The
lead member regularly attends meetings with senior managers to review
performance and to improve the understanding of the service.


Members of the corporate parenting group demonstrate a sound
understanding of issues facing children looked after. The group has a diverse
membership, including elected members, key partners, children and foster
carers. Children are involved in decisions about services through active
engagement. For example, meetings are held at venues of their choice, which
enables them to feel comfortable to raise issues that are important to them.
Issues considered include pocket money and contact venues, both of which
have resulted in changes to practice and policy. However, members need to
exert more challenge to officers around the lack of foster carers for older
children.


The local authority has strengthened its commissioning function over the past
year, and a clear needs analysis drives commissioning plans. Commissioners
make good use of joint budgets and commission a broad range of services
which respond to identified needs effectively. These include a range of
domestic abuse services and independent visitor and advocacy services.
Robust monitoring of arrangements includes visits to providers and regular
performance oversight. Parents and children are fully involved in
commissioning processes, which adds an extra layer of oversight.


The sufficiency strategy (201417) is clear and coherent, with appropriate
priorities linked to present and future need. Senior managers recognise that
they have had insufficient foster carers for older children. They have revisited
their recruitment strategy and strengthened provision for unaccompanied
asylum-seeking children who occasionally arrive through the international ferry


port. External independent resource has been utilised to support recruitment
activity, which has led to an increase in the number of in-house foster carers.
However, shortfalls in the number of carers for older children with more
complex needs have persisted so that services are not always responsive to
their needs. This is most notable for a small but significant number of children
who have remained in police custody overnight because there are insufficient
placements available. (Recommendation)

A comprehensive quality assurance framework is beginning to give the local
authority a rich picture of the standard of social work practice. Managers at all
levels are involved in auditing, including the DCS. The strategic safeguarding
and quality manager recognises that some audits are not always sufficiently
self-critical and that quarterly reports on audit activity lack analysis. Both
these factors have the potential to dilute the effectiveness of quality assurance
activity. Nevertheless, quality assurance activity is not yet embedded across
the service, and there are some key gaps. For example, there is no clear
systematic quality assurance approach to inform the development of early
help services. Moreover, quality assurance had not picked up the weaknesses
in the out-of-hours service or the number of children remaining in the care of
police due to the shortage of emergency foster placements.


Recently improved performance information enables senior managers and
leaders to identify emerging issues and leads to remedial action at the earliest
opportunity. For example, a recent increase in children subject to repeat child
protection plans led to a thematic audit to understand the reasons. Managers
use weekly performance information effectively in their service areas. This has
led to some areas of improvement in the timeliness of statutory visiting and
children looked after reviews. Nevertheless, performance information relating
to early help, step up/step down and initial health assessments is
underdeveloped. This means that senior managers and elected members
cannot be confident about the effectiveness of the services provided.


The majority of staff access regular supervision, but are not consistently
afforded the opportunity to reflect on their practice. Case supervision records
seen by inspectors were, in the majority of cases, appropriately regular and of
an adequate standard. Inspectors saw some good examples of analytical
supervision. However, supervision is not yet of a consistently good quality, as
demonstrated in a minority of childrens cases brought to the attention of the
DCS during the inspection, as managers had not progressed plans effectively
or fully recognised risk. (Recommendation)


The arrangements for children missing and children at risk of sexual
exploitation are effective, with strong partner engagement. Partners, including
schools, early years, health, police and licensed providers, are appropriately
engaged. Training and awareness raising have taken place and continue to
have a strong focus across the partnership. In Poole, safeguarding training is
mandatory for taxi drivers as part of their licence. The local authority has
rigorously reviewed all children aged 12 and over who are receiving statutory


services in order to ensure identification of children at risk of sexual
exploitation. Well-attended six-weekly risk management meetings provide an
effective arena to share information and respond to children who go missing
from home/care or those vulnerable to sexual exploitation. However, records
from these meetings are poorly recorded and not routinely available in
childrens case records. Consequently, social workers and managers do not
have a formal record of what actions have been agreed to inform planning
and intervention. (Recommendation)

The appointment of a missing coordinator in the MASH has ensured a more
focused service for missing children and led to recent improvements in the
quality and timeliness of return home interviews. The use of missing
passports containing up-to-date information is proving helpful to the police in
locating children.


The stable and committed workforce in Poole is a real strength and provides
firm foundations to sustain and build on service improvement. The use of
agency workers is low. Caseloads for social workers are manageable and
closely monitored by senior managers. The local authority has invested in its
workforce, has an established career structure and provides regular reflective
practice learning sessions to promote social work and improve practice. The
training programme is well regarded by staff and covers training needs arising
from, for example, themes in case audits and serious case reviews. Social
workers are consistently able to articulate lessons learned from a recent
serious case review. For example, one social worker said, I have better
awareness of disguised compliance and the need to take a whole-family
approach in assessments.


Appropriate arrangements are in place to respond to complaints, with the DCS
taking a direct interest in ensuring that learning from childrens complaints
informs practice development. A designated complaints manager is proactive
in seeking to resolve complaints at an early stage. Learning from complaints is
incorporated into training. The number of complaints has reduced
substantially in the past year. The local authoritys commitment to ensuring
that the voice and views of children and families influence service
development effectively is strong. A participation worker ensures that children
are consulted through a number of forums. There are many examples of
effective consultation to inform specific projects.


The local authority is an active, responsive participant in the work of the local
family justice board, and its relationship with Cafcass is positive, helping to
reduce and minimise the risk of delay for children in care proceedings.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
The Local Safeguarding Children Board in Poole is good. It is a dual board,
covering both Bournemouth and Poole. Partners are committed to the efficient and
effective operation of the board. Members of the board hold strategic roles within
their organisation and on other key local boards, influencing the safeguarding
function across a range of organisations.
The independent chair provides strong leadership for the work of the board, and
has secured commitment to the boards priorities from all partners. She is
supported by an effective business manager, who helps to provide direction.
Partners are held to account by the chair through their attendance at board
meetings and through individual accountability reviews. She has created a culture
of challenge, enabling partners to constructively explore and expand their
organisational responsibilities and improve the delivery of safeguarding services.
A comprehensive multi-agency dataset informs the business plan. The business
delivery plan accurately reflects the boards priorities and progress. Strategic
training, learning and development, and quality assurance arrangements are
shared. Effective pan-Dorset neglect and child sexual exploitation/missing subgroups are helping to drive improvement in services offered to children, and have
increased prosecution and disruption activity.
The board has successfully implemented a multi-agency programme of audits,
including section 11 audits. This has strengthened the line of sight on frontline
practice.
Frontline professionals have access to a range of training which enhances their
skills, knowledge and confidence. Training takes account of the findings of audits
and both local and national serious case reviews. Recognising that the evaluation
of training is underdeveloped, an action plan is in place and due to be
implemented to better assess the effectiveness of training courses.
There is effective challenge by the board, which it tracks. However, challenges are
not reinforced by clear identification of risks and detailed in a risk register.
The boards latest annual report does not fully capture the work being undertaken
on female genital mutilation and Prevent. There is insufficient analysis of the
effectiveness of services in this area or their impact on outcomes for children.
The board listens to children and makes improvements to services as a result of
their suggestions.


Recommendations

Ensure that the boards proposed training needs analysis informs the
development of the multi-agency programme of training and strengthens the
evaluation of training to demonstrate its impact on practice and outcomes.


Ensure that the annual report captures action to protect children from female
genital mutilation and from radicalisation, reporting on the effectiveness of
practice and services.


Ensure that the challenge log is informed by clearly identified risks and is
supported by a risk register.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The joint Bournemouth and Poole board arrangements are appropriately
constituted. The function of the board and its sub-groups is delivered well
across the partnership. The board benefits from the involvement of two lay
members, both of whom bring a strong focus on children. They are using their
knowledge of local communities to increase the boards understanding of
cultural issues impacting on children. The board has developed joint-working
arrangements on a pan-Dorset basis. This approach benefits children and
those working with them in key areas such as child sexual exploitation, quality
assurance and the work of the child death overview panel (CDOP).


Governance arrangements between the board, elected members, the chief
executives of the respective authorities and other key strategic partners are
well developed and clearly set out within protocols, constitution and compact
agreements. Pathways to the Health and Wellbeing Board, the Childrens Trust
Board and other childrens partnerships are clear. They maximise the ability of
the board to influence strategic planning and to ensure that its priorities are
understood by all.


Local scrutiny functions ensure that there is a good interface and engagement
between the board and elected members. Elected members are kept informed
of issues relating to both safeguarding of children in the local area and the
work of the board.


The independent chair took over responsibility for the board in July 2016. She
has re-energised the board by providing greater clarity on partners respective
safeguarding responsibilities. The independent chair is also the chair of a
neighbouring safeguarding board. She has taken the opportunity to realign
priorities and sub-groups across both boards, sharing learning and practice.


The chair holds the partners to account well. The engagement and
commitment of partners to the board are strong, reflected in good attendance
and effective sub-groups. The operational work of the board is well supported.


A review of the boards sub-groups identified the additional support needed to
ensure sustainability and the capacity to undertake key areas of work. For
example, the child sexual assault sub-group has now secured a significant
injection of funds to support its important work.

The chair challenges partners effectively. For example, she has appropriately
challenged the lack of oversight and weak practice in the out-of-hours service
for children, and the associated issue of children being held at police stations
overnight. The pace of resolving the difficulties fully has been slow, although it
is now progressing. Challenges are appropriately tracked through a challenge
log, but this is not underpinned by a risk register. Risks are not clearly
evidenced in the challenge log to inform the delivery of the work, for example
the out-of-hours service.


Listening to childrens experience is one of the boards key improvement
objectives and is high on the boards agenda. The board has invited young
people, including care leavers and parents, to share their experiences with
them. As a result, therapeutic services have been commissioned to support
children and young people who have experienced sexual assault. The boards
sub-groups also benefit from childrens support. Currently, the child sexual
abuse sub-group is commissioning children to design a poster for a call to
action to schools. The project is being funded by a local college and
demonstrates partners contribution and commitment to the safety and
protection of children.


The business plan, audits and performance monitoring all focus sharply on the
boards three priorities of child sexual exploitation/going missing, child sexual
abuse and early neglect. There is a clear thread supported by the sub-groups,
linking the selection of areas to audit, the focus of the training, actions in the
business plan and the agenda items tabled for the board.


The boards annual report 2016/17 delivers an accurate assessment of the
boards performance. It identifies areas of good practice, areas for
development, and learning from audits and serious case reviews (SCRs).
However, it does not yet fully report on its work around female genital
mutilation or Prevent, despite good work taking place in these areas.
Additionally, the report does not sufficiently assess the effectiveness of the
impact of these services on childrens outcomes.


Working closely with the Childrens Trust Board, the LSCB has oversight of
early help arrangements and has refreshed the threshold guidance, providing
clarity about levels of need to better support referral to services. This was
underpinned by a local government review in 2016 which found that the
threshold for services was too low.


The arrangements for going missing and child sexual exploitation are
effective, with strong partner engagement, including with licensed providers.
A multi-agency strategy includes actions to identify and disrupt child sexual


exploitation. Data collected built a picture of local hotspots. Police successfully
disrupted perpetrators and secured convictions as a result.

An extensive action plan provides clear service pathways to other related
vulnerabilities, such as children going missing, gang affiliation and neglect.
Partners are appropriately engaged.


Training, briefings and awareness raising continue to be a strong focus across
the partnership. Effective and comprehensive support is provided to children
through a range of sources, including Barnardos, outreach workers in schools,
and the integrated missing person and child sexual exploitation team
(IMPACT). The board monitors the progress and the effectiveness of
responses to children, with oversight from the pan-Dorset child sexual
exploitation sub-group.


The board monitors and evaluates practice effectively via a comprehensive
performance dataset, which includes clear analysis. The board appropriately
scrutinises and challenges data. It takes steps to understand the factors
behind the data, for example in relation to an increase in repeat child
protection plans. However, the data does not fully capture the performance of
child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) for children and young
people. The board is aware of this and is taking the necessary action to rectify
this issue.


The CDOP operates effectively across three authorities, reviewing all child
deaths and appropriately recommending changes to reduce risks and improve
services. The CDOP annual report informs the board on the themes that it
identifies, including concerns about co-sleeping and unsafe sleeping
arrangements for babies, maternal smoking during pregnancy, and the mental
health and well-being needs of young people.


SCRs are appropriately instigated. There have been four SCRs in 2016/17, one
of which relates to Poole and which has been published. There is prompt
action to disseminate lessons and improve practice through specific multiagency events and training, including practice learning workshops. This
happens following both SCRs and reviews into cases that do not meet the SCR
threshold.


Section 11 work carried out by the board is strong. Effective systems are place
for reviewing and checking partners ongoing compliance. The board
introduced peer moderation to the 201720 audit process. The completed
audit identifies areas for development, including areas directed by the board.


There is good oversight of education safeguarding, with S175/157 returns
completed. The education safeguarding sub-group prioritises strong links with
schools/academies, supported by the education safeguarding adviser. The
boards quality assurance sub-group monitors multi-agency safeguarding
effectively across the areas.



A varied programme of multi-agency audits, systematically undertaken on
behalf of the board, promotes learning and improves practice, for example
child sexual exploitation and child sexual abuse audits. The audit topics are
identified from reviewing quality assurance and performance data. Further
evaluation needs to be undertaken to enable the board to know whether
practice has changed or improved.


Training is responsive to emerging issues. The training programme is
comprehensive and includes statutory safeguarding training. However, the
board is not in a position to assure itself that the training offered fully meets
all training needs. In recognition of this shortfall, improved evaluation systems
are being implemented.


Good arrangements are in place to review and update safeguarding policies,
procedures and guidance. There are good links with sub-groups, facilitated by
the business manager, to ensure that updates from activities feed into the
reviewing arrangements. For example, the child sexual exploitation and
missing from home and care procedures are up to date and include reference
to recently published guidance on definitions of child sexual exploitation and
safeguarding children in education.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Joy Howick HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Linda Steele HMI
Team inspectors: Nicola Bennett HMI, John Roughton HMI, Lolly Rascagneres AI,
Peter Green HMI, Rachel Griffiths HMI.
Senior data analyst: Tania Corbin
Quality assurance manager: John Mitchell Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


