Portsmouth City Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 25 June 2014  16 July 2014
Report published: 1 September 2014
The overall judgement is that childrens services require
improvement
The authority is not yet delivering good protection, help or care for children, young
people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.2
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires
Improvement

permanence

Good


Good


Requires
Improvement


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


The LSCBs strengths


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Portsmouth require improvement
because:

Although there have been real improvements made in some service areas,
there remain key issues to be addressed in relation to services for children who
need help and protection and also services and outcomes for care leavers.


Thresholds between early help and social work services are not sufficiently
understood by all professionals, so some children and families do not get the
right level of service as their needs increase.


The lack of defined timescales for the completion of actions within the Joint
Action Team means that some children and families do not receive help in a
timely manner.


Access to early help services for older children when they first need support is
not sufficiently comprehensive.


The local authoritys response to children who are living in private fostering
arrangements is not sufficiently robust to ensure that these children are given
the level of protection and support they need.


Data about children missing from home, including feedback from return
interviews, is not being systematically analysed or used to ensure that children
are being appropriately safeguarded.


Elected members are not sufficiently skilled and knowledgeable to offer
effective challenge and scrutiny of the work of childrens social care, and to act
as champions for looked after children.


Work with care leavers is too variable. Pathway plans are not sufficiently clear
and too many care leavers are not engaged in education, employment or
training (NEET).


Too many looked after children enter the criminal justice system.

their peers is widening.
with other agencies.
number of care leavers and children missing from education because of
contradictory management information.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

The right level of support
Team (JAT) so that children and families receive early help in a timely and wellco-ordinated way.
help to social work services when their needs warrant more intensive
intervention.

Parental consent
information is shared unless the risks to the child make it necessary to dispense
with consent.

Governance and Corporate Parenting
and relevant information by officers. This will allow them to appropriately
scrutinise and challenge the work of childrens social care and act as effective
champions for children who are looked after.
Areas for improvement

Early help
of Common Assessment Framework (CAF) and Team around the Child (TAC)
processes.

Quality and continuity of care and support
looked after so that they have continuity in the care that they receive.
after children, and take appropriate action to address this.

Missing children
return interviews, are being systematically used to help safeguard children.


Post-adoption support
focused and linked to the childs permanence report and potential adopters
report.

Support for care leavers
for care leavers, and that every care leaver has a copy of their health histories
in a format that is accessible to them.

Race and ethnicity
local community and of children for whom adoption is the best outcome.


The local authoritys strengths
continuous improvement and are taking concerted action to raise standards and
improve outcomes for children and young people.
partnership working and effective joint commissioning arrangements.
These are generally used effectively to identify and address shortfalls in the
quality of practice or delivery of services.
receiving effective help and support, resulting in a reduction in the number of
families requiring statutory social work intervention.
social work practice and outcomes for children and young people; the
recruitment and retention of social workers is good.
communities they come from, more often than not with their brothers and
sisters.
parents and carers contributed to them.
children are achieving permanence in a timely way either through adoption or a
special guardianship order.
past twelve months.
children. This ensures that their experiences inform improvements in the
development and delivery of service.


Progress since the last inspection
(Safeguarding and looked after children services). The judgement for
safeguarding services was adequate and the judgement for services for looked
after children was good. The recommendations inspectors made in 2011 have
been acted on, with some important improvements being made.
when they first need it, with services being better organised so that in most
cases families get support at the right time. This has been possible because
different agencies have worked together well and have helped each other to
improve local services.
recording, planning and management oversight of cases. As a result, children,
young people and their families receive a range of services that meet their
needs
childrens social care was trying to help too many families, and that some of
these families could be supported by someone else. There are now fewer
referrals to childrens social care and, as a result, social workers have more
time to work with the children and young people who most need their help and
support.
increase these are properly recognised and assessments by social work services
are commenced.


Summary for children and young people
 Most of the children and young people who are being looked after by
the local authority are being well cared for. Inspectors were pleased
to see that most of these children and young people are living close
to their families and friends, and that those who are living further
from home are being looked after well.
 Social workers care about the children they are helping, and most
children are visited often. Social workers are working hard to make
sure that children understand why they are looked after and what the
plan for their future care will be. Childrens and parents views are
listened to and written down, and this is helping social workers,
managers and other professionals to make good decisions.
 Inspectors found that the adoption team are doing everything they
can to find permanent families for children who cannot live with their
own families, and that when children are adopted they are well
supported and are happy with their new families.
 The local authority needs to make sure that looked after children and
care leavers have fewer changes of social worker because these
relationships are very important. Improvements also need to be made
so that children and young people can get hold of their social workers
when they need to speak to them.
 The local authority needs to make sure that all care leavers are
helped to attend school, college or university or to get a job or
apprenticeship, because at the moment there are far too many care
leavers who are not doing any of these things. This will help these
young people to achieve more and be happier both now and in the
future.
 Councillors in Portsmouth need to take more of an interest in services
for children and families. These adults have important responsibilities
in making sure that services are of good quality and that local
children, young people and families get the right help and support
when they need it.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area
 Approximately 42,800 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Portsmouth. This is 20.6% of the total population in the area.4
 Approximately 24.4% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty (the
England average is 20.1%).5
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary and nursery schools is 21.3% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 20.1% (the national average is 15.7%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 20.1% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.6% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Mixed Ethnic Group: White and Asian (3.5%), Asian/Asian British: Bangladeshi
(3.5%) and White: Other White (2.9%). After English, Bengali and Polish are the
most common languages spoken in Portsmouth schools.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 15.1% (the national average is 18.7%)
 in secondary schools is 12% (the national average is 14.3%).
 Portsmouth has a relatively high proportion of Armed Forces personnel resident in
the city, with 2.3% of the adult population compared to the England average of
level, with rates ranging from 6.3% to 48.1%.
Child protection in this area
 At 31st March 2014, 1,339 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 31st March 2014, 234 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 183 at 31st March 2013.
 At 31st March 2014, 8 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from 2 at 31st March 2013.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.
Source: 2013 Mid-year population estimates (ONS)
All children. Source: Children in low-income families local measure, August 2011 (HMRC)


Children looked after in this area
 At 31st March 2014, 318 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 74.8 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 306 (72.0 per
live more than 20 miles from home
authority area
authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 27 adoptions
returned to be looked after. Of the 163 children who started to be looked
after in 201314, 2.5% had a prior 'returned home' LAC episode ending
less than 12 months ago
on to independent living
now living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two childrens homes. One was judged to be good or
outstanding in its most recent Ofsted inspection. Until June 2014, the local
authority operated three children's homes, two were judged to be good at their
most recent Ofsted inspection and the third was judged as adequate. The local
authority also operates a short-term break unit judged good at the full inspection
in September 2013, and judged to be making satisfactory progress at the interim
inspection in January 2014
 The previous inspection of Portsmouths safeguarding arrangements was in May


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


 The previous inspection of Portsmouths services for looked after children was in
May 2011. The local authority was judged to be good (Grade 2).
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since September 2009.
 The Chair of the LSCB has been in post since December 2013.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Agencies work well together to offer support to families when help is first needed.
They offer a range of good quality support to help improve the lives of children and
their families. Although there are clear thresholds between early help and statutory
children protection work, these are not always interpreted effectively. As a result,
some children and families, when their needs become more complex or risks in their
lives increase, do not get a service from a social worker soon enough.
Where children are at immediate risk of harm, social workers make sure that they
are safe and that their families are helped to reduce risk in their childrens lives.
Social workers have manageable caseloads which allow them time to work directly
with children and their families and to build up good relationships with them.
However, information about why children go missing is not used well enough to help
understand the reasons for their behaviour and services to children who are privately
fostered are not sufficiently well developed.
leading to a significant decrease in the number of children requiring specialist
social care services. A high proportion of vulnerable two-year-olds are taking up
their entitlement to good quality child care, with 5 of the 7 childrens centres
that have been inspected being judged as good or better. Evidence-based
parenting programmes are delivered through childrens centres and schools are
helping parents to engage more effectively with their children. Targeted
services, including Multi-Systemic Therapy and an enhanced Family Nurse
Partnership, are having a beneficial impact. Parents and carers feedback
reflect the positive difference that these initiatives are making. The percentage
of re-referrals have fallen to 20%, significantly below the statistical neighbour
average, which indicates that a higher percentage of children and families are
having their needs met at an earlier stage.
offering early help. School exclusion and absence rates remain above national
averages. Older children, particularly those between 11 and 16 years of age,
are less likely to be supported through a Common Assessment Framework
(CAF) or a Team around the Child (TAC). While the Intensive Targeted Youth
Support Service has had some success supporting young people into education,
employment and training (EET), 8.1% of young people in Portsmouth are not in
education, employment or training (NEET). That is above the national average
of 7.6%.


services, which are clearly set out in the joint Childrens Trust and Portsmouth
Safeguarding Children Board protocol. There has been a significant reduction in
inappropriate referrals to childrens social care. A qualified social work manager
screens all contacts and referrals taken by a team of administrators, and swiftly
determines whether they meet the criteria for social care intervention or
whether children and families would be better served by an early help package
of support. The way in which those decisions are recorded does not always
make it easy to understand the rationale. It is also not always evident  in
either telephone responses to referrals, electronic referral records or other
recorded decision-making  that staff have assured themselves that parental
consent to share information has been sought when necessary.
alongside the social care Information and Assessment Team. Workers are
allocated tasks to mobilise support for children and families through
establishing lead professionals to support the completion of CAFs and
establishing Team around the Child processes to support these plans. Although
data collected by the authority show that most of these tasks are completed
within twenty working days, the lack of clear timescales and quality assurance
within the JAT means that some cases were not properly prioritised, resulting in
some children not receiving timely support. Although thresholds are clear, the
interpretation of the thresholds is not applied consistently between managers.
Step up arrangements to social care are not sufficiently robust, and inspectors
saw examples of children and families who are being supported through a CAF
who would be better served by an earlier escalation to childrens social care.
Professionals who spoke to inspectors confirmed that the process for stepping
up cases was not clear.
supported. However, the quality of CAF assessments and plans is still too
variable. The CAF wheel, designed to evidence impact and outcomes of early
help in a parent-friendly way, is not yet sufficiently embedded.
which is commissioned through a neighbouring authority, and day time
services. There is a good and timely response to the needs of children and
families in most cases. However, inspectors identified a situation when the lack
of availability of a qualified social worker resulted in the police carrying out a
child protection investigation, out of office hours, without any social work
involvement.


by inspectors, including those prepared for child protection conferences, were
written in an accessible style, showed good use of history, a strong child focus
and a balanced analysis leading to clear identification of the changes needed.
However, a small number of assessments lacked a clear analysis of risks and
protective factors or the likely impact on children, particularly in relation to the
cumulative impact of chronic patterns of neglect.
actions, accountabilities and timescales. Social workers know the children they
are working with well and are able to articulate their needs, wishes and
feelings. Case recording is up to date and the voice of the child is clear in most
cases. This is supported by a case recording template with a strong child focus
and by some good direct work with children and young people. With average
caseloads of between 15 and 18, social workers have the time to see children
regularly, including on their own when this is appropriate.
TAC. Social workers are expected to ensure that families continue to receive the
help and support that they need, albeit at a less intensive level, and inspectors
saw examples of social workers helping to write the CAF and/or attending the
first TAC meeting.
with good management oversight. Most child protection strategy meetings are
well attended and well recorded. The majority of strategy discussions involve
only the police and childrens social care, making it possible for action to be
taken without the fullest possible picture of the childs circumstances. The
recording of these discussions does not give enough information to show the
plans for progressing the case. The local authority had recognised this as an
area for improvement.
from 62% in 201213 that were held within 15 working days to 82% in May
place to address their needs. Independent advocates support and promote
childrens engagement with the child protection conference process. The
number of children with a multi-agency child protection plan has increased in
the last 12 months, and is now closer to the statistical neighbour average,
protection plans to ensure quality and consistency. Core groups, share
information appropriately, are well attended by a good range of professionals
and are effective in monitoring and progressing child protection plans.


on children, and have access to a range of specialist advice and services. Direct
observation of the multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC)
suggested that this is an effective forum for planning and information sharing
between agencies. MARAC minutes are scanned into the relevant childs case
notes to ensure a good join up with child protection and child in need plans.
Assessments and plans seen by inspectors showed that social workers are
aware of the negative impact on children of parental drug and alcohol abuse
and mental ill health. A specialist worker embedded in the Information and
Assessment Team is responsible for extending the Think Family approach to
adult mental health services.
shared is not yet sufficiently robust. The local authority has only recently
started routinely forwarding copies of all notifications from the police about
children missing from home to the Barnardos Miss-U service for them to
conduct return interviews. Data, and information from return interviews, are
not being systematically analysed, nor is it clear how return interviews are
being used to inform decision-making and planning for individual children or to
inform service developments and actions.
children who are electively home educated and 166 children who are on
reduced timetables. All these groups of children are effectively tracked.
arrangements is not yet sufficiently robust. More work needs to be done to
raise the profile of private fostering, and to ensure that children are given the
level of protection and support they need. While the local authority is aware of
this and is putting in place a range of actions to improve the situation, there is
as yet no impact.
addressing allegations against professionals who work with children but also in
raising awareness in schools and other settings of the need for safer working
practices.
concerns, effective joint working arrangements with specialist teams ensure
that their needs are met. Disabled children have access to a good range of
support services, including short breaks, a sitting service, after school clubs and
holiday schemes. In cases seen by inspectors, the transition from children to
adult services was managed effectively.
race, culture and disability. This includes the use of interpreters, liaison with
specialist services such as Barnardos U-Turn trafficking service, and
consideration of gender in the allocation of workers.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Good

Summary
Thresholds for children becoming looked after by the local authority are clear and
action is only taken when it is in the childs best interest.
Children live in high quality placements that fit their needs and, where appropriate,
they live with their brothers and sisters. They have good relationships with their
social workers who see them regularly and listen to them especially when making
plans for the future. Independent Reviewing Officers take an active interest in
making sure that children get all the help that they need.
Most children who are looked after find permanent homes in a timely way. The
number of children who are being adopted or placed under Special Guardianship
Orders is rising, and these are well planned and undertaken in a timely way.
Support for families post adoption is increasing to help placements to succeed.
Looked after children are helped to stay healthy and are encouraged to become
involved in a range of hobbies and other activities. Although they get good support
at school to help them to do well, they do not achieve as well as other pupils, and
too many are not in school full time. When children leave care, they have a good
range of accommodation available and services to support them, but too many care
leavers are not in education, training and employment.
young people are not received into care unnecessarily. Over the last three years
the number of looked after children has remained stable at just over 300.
range of services. The Multi Systemic Therapy Team provides effective and
intensive family support in response to the specific and complex needs of
children and young people, including substance misuse, children who go
missing, those at risk of CSE and those experiencing domestic violence. Good,
purposeful work with children and families is supporting children to return
home safely. Only four children who entered the care system in 201314 had
been in care during the previous 12 months.


assessed and planned way. The quality of core assessments to support social
work decisions is good; they are sharply focused on risk and protective factors
and the childs voice is clearly heard. Only a small number of children enter the
care system through emergency powers. The Public Law Outline (PLO) is used
effectively to engage families and achieve permanence early for children, with
good quality pre-court proceedings letters and effective use of family group
conferences and parallel planning. The quality of social work court reports is
good, and is contributing to improved timescales for care proceedings and a
reduction from an average of 48 weeks in 201213 to 39 weeks in 201314.
Performance is now close to the national average of 37 weeks.
Social workers have manageable caseloads, enabling them to spend time with
children. They demonstrate good understanding of their needs, wishes and
feelings. This is helping to shape good quality assessments and plans and to
improve outcomes for children. Social work practice is sensitive to the specific
needs of children, including those with special needs, so that children know and
understand what has happened to them. Life story work is completed
sensitively and at the childs own pace. However, some looked after children
have experienced several changes of social workers in a year; a concern which
they have raised through the Children in Care Council (CICC).
families. 26 young people lived in residential provision which met their personal
needs and circumstances. Many children experience a good level of choice
about placements, ensuring that their needs are closely matched. The large
majority of them experience a good or better quality of service; nearly all
children are placed in services judged good or better through inspection.
for them to access specialist therapeutic or educational provision or keep in
touch with family and friends. Only 38 children and young people are placed
more than 20 miles from their home.
together. Of the 36 sibling groups for whom there is a plan for them to live
together, only two are not placed with the same family. The stability of shortterm placements, particularly for young people aged 16 to 17, has not been
good. The local authority is tackling this issue through better targeting of
services and more training for foster carers in dealing with challenging
behaviour by young people.


that their needs are met. The quality of care plans is improving with many now
highlighting a clear, realistic and achievable permanence plan. However, where
children are placed away from Portsmouth, their care plans are not always
shared with the childrens homes in a timely way. The use of independent
visitors, who are able to advise, befriend and support children, is low. Currently,
only 13 young people have access to an independent visitor, but the position is
slowly improving.
understand their rights and legal entitlements. The Pledge made by the local
authority is well embedded and represents a public promise to children in care
to keep them safe, prepare them for adult life and listen to what they have to
say. Feedback from children and young people to a survey organised by the
local authority confirms that the Pledge is working well and helping to ensure
that children are safe and feel safe in the places where they live. Children and
young people are protected, or helped to keep themselves safe from bullying;
but the absence of any reports on looked after children who, despite that, do
experience bullying or racist incidents, needs to be addressed. The Pledge,
which directly refers to CSE, also needs to include reference to the support
available for children who go missing from care.
complaints effectively. The vast majority of complaints are resolved at an early
stage. Data from childrens surveys show that there is a high level of
satisfaction expressed by looked after children regarding the quality of the
service they receive (94% in 2014).
who have offended has increased from 8% in 2012 to 12.7% in 2013. To date
the authority has not undertaken any work to fully understand this trend and,
as a result, there is no strategy in place to deal with it.
children who go missing from care. Independent return interviews are available
to support this group of young people. There is good intelligence sharing
between agencies and through the police. Robust action is taken to track young
people who go missing from care, both nationally and internationally. Only one
young person is missing at the time of the inspection and there was positive
activity by partners to establish their whereabouts and safety.


dental health assessments on time; 96% have completed a full course of
immunisations; 90% had their health assessments within the appropriate
timescale; and 100% of under-5s have had their developmental checks. In
every case these figures are significantly higher than national averages. Health
assessments are good quality and use language which is easily accessible to
children and young people. The dedicated CAMHS Looked After Children Team
ensures that children and young people have ready access to good quality
support, including those placed outside the city.
new posts, one of whom is leading on early years and another on post-16
provision. An improvement in the proportion of children with an up-to-date
Personal Education Plan (PEP) is good and has increased to 92%.
Representatives from the virtual school attend all initial PEP meetings, which is
good. An effective sampling and auditing process is having a positive impact on
the quality of plans, leading to a sharper focus on educational achievement.
Pupils in schools outside the city receive the same level of support from the
virtual school as children attending schools in Portsmouth. Virtual school staff
make strenuous efforts to ensure that for the small number (8) of children
receiving less than 25 hours of education per week, the alternative provision is
meeting their needs.
looked after is variable. The number of children in each cohort is very small,
which means that percentages can vary greatly year-on-year, making
identification of trends difficult. The proportion of children who are looked after
is lower than that found in statistical neighbours, and around two-thirds (69%)
of Portsmouth looked after children have a special educational need (SEN).
Scrutiny by inspectors of individual childrens cases shows that many of the
children who sat their GCSEs in 2013 entered care late and had already missed
large amounts of schooling. Attainment in reading, writing and mathematics at
Key Stage 2 for looked after children in 2013 was 46%, slightly above the
national average. Not enough young people made the expected progress
between Key Stage 2 and Key Stage 4 in English or mathematics, and between
has widened. The local authoritys provisional data on progress suggests an
improvement in 2014 and 2015. Five 16 year-olds achieved five good GCSEs
including English and mathematics which, at 17%, is in line with national
averages and above statistical neighbours for looked after children. One third
achieved five good GCSEs excluding English and mathematics, which is slightly
below the national average but above statistical neighbours.


supported through the use of the Pupil Premium, such as one-to-one tuition.
The Pupil Premium is also being used to support authority-wide schemes such
as an increase in dedicated educational psychologist support and the Letterbox
scheme which delivers books and resources to looked after children to
encourage learning at home. Looked after children are only ever placed in good
or better schools. If a child is attending a school that is not yet good, when
they enter care, their education is not unnecessarily disrupted if they are
settled and making good progress. However, inspectors also saw examples of
appropriate school changes being made if provision was not meeting childrens
needs. Currently 75% of children are attending schools that are good or better.
pupils in order to be able to continue to track and support their progress. The
local authoritys data shows that as of 31 March 2014, the proportion of looked
after children in education, employment and training is 77%, which is an
improvement on the figure of 72% in March 2013 and above the most recently
published figure for England as a whole.
individual needs are well supported by schools and through the use of library
memberships and leisure cards. Children are engaged in a wide range of
activities, such as rugby and football clubs, martial arts, horse riding, swimming
and dance, and there are examples of disabled children participating in sport at
a national level.
support workers. They have good access to high quality training. Retention of
foster carers is good. The local authoritys sufficiency strategy places
considerable emphasis on supporting the placement of children in families close
to their own communities. However, with 14% of looked after children from an
ethnic minority background, more effort needs to be made to recruit foster
carers who reflect the diversity of the local population.
medication, but a comprehensive scheme of delegated responsibility has yet to
be formalised in writing. The absence of clear written guidance is causing
uncertainty for some carers.
assessments and second opinion social work reports. The foster carer approval
process is rigorous and decisions are timely. Retention of foster carers is good.
The 27 carers who responded to the Fostering Panel Survey in 201314
overwhelmingly report a high level of satisfaction with the assessment process
and the support they receive. Exemptions to the normal foster care placement
regulations are rarely used, and in the last year only four decisions have been
made for carers to have more than three children, which demonstrates good
commitment to the quality of care provided.


families and are effective in challenging poor practice. Decisions made at
reviews are progressed in a timely fashion. If there is evidence of repeated
delay, IROs are quick to escalate the issue using the well-established conflict
resolution process. Children and young people experience timely reviews of
their care arrangements; in 2014 93.5% of child care reviews were completed
on time. Mid-term reviews, which go beyond the minimum statutory
requirement, are a strong feature of the IRO service and further ensure good
tracking of childrens progress. In 2014 90% of looked after children
participated in their statutory reviews and 75% of parents and carers
contributed to them. Children and young people have good access to support
so that their views are known and understood. For example, 14 of the 56
children who had a review in May 2014 had an advocate to support them.
However, IROs do not routinely meet foster carers before childrens reviews,
which means that on occasions awkward questions, for example about plans for
special guardianship orders (SGOs), are asked in the presence of children. This
can create unnecessary tension in the relationships between carers and
children. IRO caseloads have been consistently high, averaging 70 plus across
the team, higher than the average of 50 to 60 referred to in the IRO handbook.
Although this is not impacting directly on the quality of the service, IROs are
working long hours which may not be sustainable in the long term.
share and explore the views of children and young people, and is helping to
influence the shape of service provision in key areas, for example by speeding
up the process for looked after children to get their holiday allowance.
Representation on the CICC reflects the wider looked after population, and the
work of this group of children and young people is supported by good and wellestablished relationships with senior managers. Senior managers know the
children well and are effective in championing the needs of looked after
children.

The graded judgment for adoption performance is that it is good
family, either because it would be not be safe or because it would not be in
their best interests to do so. The permanency panel is effective in ensuring that
assessments and plans are progressed in a timely fashion. Parallel planning and
good case tracking help to ensure that children experience minimum delay.


weeks in 201213 to 39 weeks in 201314, which is now much closer to the
national average of 37 weeks. Adoption social workers are proactive in
researching potential matches before court authority has been received, to
reduce the length of time children have to wait once the placement order has
been granted.
three year period between 2010 and 2013, children in Portsmouth waited on
average 856 days between entering care and being placed for adoption,
significantly longer than the national average of 647 days and statistical
neighbour average of 595 days. In 201314 the average length of time
between children entering care and being placed for adoption had fallen to 583
days. Past performance needs to be set in the context of a local authority which
is determined to put children first by persisting with adoption plans for children
who, because of their age and/or the complexity of their health needs, are not
easy to place.
adoption or by way of a special guardianship order, has increased from 29 in
percentage of children who leave care through adoption is lower than in other
authorities, a higher proportion of children leave care to live permanently with a
family under a special guardianship arrangement (27 in 20132014).
includes the proactive use of the Adoption Register, activity days, targeted
advertising and discussion in local consortium meetings. Adoption files
examined by inspectors demonstrate that social workers have a good
understanding of childrens backgrounds, personalities and needs, particularly
where complex health and behavioural needs are likely to affect the search for
a permanent home.
children to prepare them for adoption, with evidence of good and effective life
story work.
its responsiveness and the level of support provided. Increased marketing and
recruitment activity, involving local advertising in newspapers and on buses and
interviews on local radio, has led to a steady increase in enquiries. The
adoption team know both the adopters and their children well.


marketing, recruitment and assessment of, and to increase support to,
adopters. It is also being used to significantly increase the capacity of the
special guardianship service. In 2014, 37 new adopters were recruited against a
target of 35. The preparation, assessment and training of adopters is good.
While they are being assessed, adopters are befriended by carefully selected
and well-matched buddies who are experienced adopters. For example, same
sex couples are matched with experienced couples from a similar background.
always quorate. Additional panels are convened when urgent decisions are
needed in order to progress plans for children. However, the membership of the
adoption panel does not reflect the diversity of the local community and there
has been an under-investment in training.
good, although arrangements for adopters to meet the medical advisor as part
of the matching process could and should have been introduced sooner. The
ethnic profile of adopters does not match the diversity of the local community.
recommendations made by the adoption panel. However, the way in which
decisions are recorded does not always include a detailed explanation of the
rationale on which the decision was based. In two cases seen by inspectors
there was a short delay in reaching and then confirming the decision, resulting
in anxiety for the adopters.
are effectively maintained through newsletters, which include invitations to
social events and training. Adoption support is provided via a small but
expanding team, which benefits from having access to ring-fenced educational
psychology time as well as a spot-purchasing arrangement with an independent
therapist. Families receive bespoke packages of support which are not
dependent on where they live. The adoption support team is currently involved
with 52 families, including ten where a child is subject to a special guardianship
arrangement. There have been no adoption disruptions in the past twelve
months.
the description of needs, outcomes and actions was too generalised. This is a
missed opportunity to ensure that there is a clear and appropriately
individualised record of the kind of support these families might need in future.
A new pro forma, introduced to improve the quality of adoption support plans,
is beginning to have an impact; inspectors saw evidence of better plans using
the new template.


authority recognises the need to review the way in which post adoption support
is planned and delivered in order to be able to keep pace with demand. This
will involve working closely with the Clinical Commissioning Group in order to
strengthen the provision of child and adolescent mental health services for
adoptive and special guardianship families.
exchange information between birth and adoptive families, is well-embedded
and effectively coordinated. Arrangements are sensitive to the needs and
wishes of birth parents, adopters and children, and are responsive to the latest
developments in the use of information technology and social media. The vast
majority of later life letters seen by inspectors are good.
access their birth records. There is no waiting list and adults are routinely
offered an appointment within six weeks.

The graded judgment about the experience and progress of care leavers is
that it requires improvement
(YPST) lacks consistency. According to care leavers, the level and quality of the
service received very much depends on the individual worker. Care leavers told
inspectors about having too many changes of social workers and complained
that they often find it difficult to get hold of them. One third of all complaints
received by childrens social care in 20132014 were about the Young Peoples
Support Team.
quality varies considerably. Some are comprehensive and well-considered whilst
others are not sufficiently outcome focused and do not provide enough detail
about who will do what, and by when. Senior managers are actively addressing
shortfalls in the management of the YPST, not least in terms of the frequency
and quality of staff supervision, but the pace of change is too slow.
service, a service aimed at helping them to plan and prepare for independence.
Using an interactive pack, care leavers are helped to identify the skills they
need to be independent, and agree an appropriate package of support. Care
leavers talked with great affection about the BOOST workers, who they say are
very supportive and helpful.


in a setting that is familiar to young people, and with which they feel
comfortable, the service offers financial advice, counselling, support with drug
and alcohol issues, sexual health support and careers guidance. Care leavers
are able to access these services directly.
children health nurse ensures that every young person receives copies of their
health reviews. The final review, completed before the care leavers 18th
birthday, is comprehensive. However, none of the care leavers spoken to by
inspectors was aware of having had a copy of their health history.
beyond the age of 18. Young people told inspectors that the carers who
support them actively encourage them to further their education and/or find
suitable employment, but they do not always say the same about their social
workers.
care leavers, and is responsible for raising awareness of their religious, cultural
and other needs, as well as their legal rights. Inspectors saw examples of these
young people doing well in their placements, achieving at college and being
helped to understand their histories.
which represents a significant barrier to them achieving their potential and has
implications for their long-term prospects. The adjusted NEET figure for care
leavers in Portsmouth is 48.1%, significantly above the national average of
determined to improve care leavers access to further education. Involvement in
the New Belongings project led by the Care Leavers Foundation is providing
both a framework and a sharper focus for this activity. Four new
apprenticeships within the council have been specifically ring-fenced to care
leavers, and agreement has been reached to create a further 14
apprenticeships over the next 12 months. However, few care leavers move on
to higher education, with just three young people attending university at the
time of the inspection.
multi-agency housing panel, which includes representatives from the youth
offending and drug and alcohol service as well as housing providers, is effective
in matching young people to housing options. There were no care leavers in
bed and breakfast accommodation at the time of this inspection


to choose from a good range of housing options and that their current
accommodation meets their needs. Housing providers told inspectors that the
information they receive about young people prior to them moving in is
comprehensive. Evictions of care leavers from supported housing are rare.
had been accommodated under section 20 of the Children Act 1989 in the
preceding 6 months. They are being well supported by the Young Peoples
Support Team. However, local housing providers told inspectors report that
some 16 and 17 year-olds who have been assessed as not needing a service
from childrens social care are too vulnerable to be living independently without
support, and that this is having a negative impact on their outcomes.
entitlements, including the leaving care grant. A group of care leavers told
inspectors that this had left them feeling angry and frustrated. Senior managers
have responded by producing a comprehensive leaflet for care leavers which
sets out their rights and entitlements.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
The authority understands the needs of its communities well. This is reflected in
coherent and ambitious plans and the way in which services are designed and
implemented to provide effective support. Senior managers provide strong leadership
and effective management to provide some high quality and sustainable services to
children in Portsmouth. They take decisive and appropriate action to address service
shortfalls when required. However, some services are not yet good and require
greater focus. Elected members are not sufficiently knowledgeable and skilled in
understanding their responsibility to properly challenge the work of childrens social
care and to act as champions for all looked after children.
sound partnership working. The seven key priorities set out by the Childrens
Trust are rooted in the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment and are closely
aligned to the work of the Portsmouth Health and Wellbeing Board. With clear
plans and good multi-agency collaboration, progress against each of the
priorities is monitored effectively, resulting in the development of services
which are having a positive impact. For example, as a result of the monitoring
of the successful work undertaken by the Family Nurse Partnership to support
vulnerable parents and their babies and young children, this service has been
enhanced through additional funding from the authority. There is a shared
strategic commitment by the council and partner agencies to provide early
intervention in order to ensure that children and young people receive the right
help at the right time. The establishment of the JAT and the increased use of
the CAF have been instrumental in making early help a reality, although the
understanding of thresholds with social work services needs to be clarified.
Having robustly risk assessed the combined role; the authority reviews the
arrangement annually to make sure that it is effective. The Director is a
member of the LSCB and has a close working relationship with the Chief
Executive of the council, which helps to ensure that the needs of children are
properly prioritised.
Childrens Trust and the Corporate Parenting Board and is an observer on the
LSCB. Although a childrens service scrutiny committee is in place, it has
insufficient focus on the work of childrens social care. At the time of the
inspection, the work plan for this committee for the year 201415 did not
include any areas from childrens social care or associated activity.


of their duties as corporate parents, is not sufficiently rigorous. Although there
is cross-party membership of the Corporate Parenting Board, the importance of
the role of the elected members in acting as a champion as part of their
responsibilities for looked after children is not properly developed. Formal
training is available for new members, but there is no update or refresher
training available to ensure that members are kept up to date with changes in
their role. Where political differences occur between elected members, the best
interests of looked after children as a group are sometimes compromised.
Overall, the knowledge and understanding of elected members is not
sufficiently developed to ensure that they can give high quality critical challenge
and scrutiny of the work of childrens social care or act as effective corporate
parents.
improvement and are taking concerted action to raise standards and improve
outcomes for children and young people. The authority is outward-looking and
is good at inviting external scrutiny to ensure that the services are effective, for
example by commissioning a voluntary agency to explore the potential for
closer collaboration with neighbouring adoption services.
shortfalls have been identified. Prior to the inspection, and having recognised
deficits in their services to care leavers, the authority chose to become part of
the government-led New Belongings initiative in order to improve services to
these young people by providing increased focus and challenge to their work.
Following a review of care services, the local authority is in the process of
addressing the gap in provision between high intensive support in residential
homes and low level support for young people in shared accommodation. The
adoption of the Social Work Matters programme is having a positive impact on
improving practice and outcomes for children and young people. A Principal
Social Worker has been in post for a year and this role is beginning to show an
impact on improving practice and increasing the stability of the workforce.
within social work services carry out regular monthly case file audits around
themes determined by senior managers including, for example, the timeliness
of strategy discussions/S47 enquiries, the quality of assessment work, children
missing or at risk of sexual exploitation and children/young people who attend
alternative education or who are on a part-time timetable. In 20132104, 198
audits were completed and findings used to improve practice. For example, the
quality of reports to child protection conferences has improved in response to
concerns identified through the audit process.


social care are not subject to the same quality assurance process and, as a
result, the quality of this work is less well understood. Management oversight at
an operational level is evident on case files, and workers feel that they receive
effective direction from managers. However, as the authority itself recognises,
this is not always well recorded nor sufficiently focused on ensuring improved
outcomes for children and young people.
the timeliness of work and regularity of staff supervision, are used effectively at
both a strategic and operational level to monitor activity and address areas of
underperformance. All assessments, for example, that exceed internal
completion times are subject to exception reporting processes so that the
reasons for delay are properly understood.
of the inspection process, inspectors had difficulty in gaining accurate
information about the number of care leavers and children missing from
education.
enhanced by the creation of a jointly funded integrated commissioning unit.
Commissioning activity is clearly aligned to the strategic planning process and
overseen by chief officers to ensure effectiveness. Where necessary,
commissioners work with other authorities to achieve economies of scale or a
wider choice of provider, for example collaborating with an adjacent authority
to provide services to children at risk of sexual exploitation. Feedback from
service users is used well to inform the design and development of new
services. Regular forums have been established with members of the voluntary
sector to encourage them to participate in the commissioning process and
extend the choice of services available.
of the Social Work Matters initiative, caseloads have been reduced so that most
workers have between 15 and 18 cases. This has been achieved through an
increase in social work posts and by moving some less operational posts to
frontline services. Additionally, the number of administrative posts has been
increased to enable social workers to spend more time working directly with
children and families. There has been a reduction in the turnover of staff. At
the time of the inspection, out of an establishment of 142 qualified social
workers, just one post was unfilled. Agency staff are only used to cover short
term vacancies.


social work offer to staff and strengthen retention. Discussions with
Portsmouth University are leading to the development of a social work academy
in the authority. It will open in autumn 2014 and provide enhanced learning
opportunities for social workers at the beginning of their careers. A range of
training and development is available both internally and through the LSCB.
Social workers were able to demonstrate to inspectors the impact of the recent
introduction of reflective supervision on their work. However, there is no
training plan for the JAT or sufficient monitoring of the training undertaken by
workers to ensure that they have the core skills to undertake their roles
effectively.
corporate parenting strategy is based on feedback from children and young
people. It is written in an accessible style and makes clear commitments to
improving their life chances. The corporate parenting board has a diverse
membership including the Chief Executive, elected members, young people,
carers and key partners. It provides both a forum to challenge officers and one
to improve services.
place to ensure that their experiences inform improvements in the development
and delivery of service. Surveys are used to elicit regular feedback and there is
a strong parent and carer board.
from complaints is cascaded to managers and has resulted in changes in
practice, for example, through providing better information for children coming
into care. Learning from serious case reviews is disseminated effectively.
Reflective incident reviews are increasingly used as a tool to understand critical
incidents and improve practice.
processes and take forward national initiatives. The work of the board is
properly disseminated within the local authority so that workers understand and
can prepare for changes in practice. Working relationships with Cafcass and the
family courts are strong, and have resulted in a significant reduction in the time
taken to complete care proceedings.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
good.

Summary of findings
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good because:
responsibilities with membership at the appropriate seniority.
Business Plan demonstrates how those priorities will be met.
the process is good.
and evaluate frontline performance.
detailed procedure, and all actions arising from recommendations of the most
recent serious case review are complete.
sub-committee, chaired by the police, leads strategic developments.
analysis of data, inform and influence the focus of improvement activity.
disseminated. Child protection policies and procedures are good and regularly
reviewed.
with low rates of non-attendance.
underpinned by the thorough scrutiny and challenge of annual reports from key
agencies such as CDOP, MARAC and the Health and Wellbeing Board.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
Areas for improvement
collection and collation of comprehensive data about missing children. Further,
ensure that partners work together to improve practice with children missing
and fully understand the local situation.
multi-agency data set so that there is a shared understanding within the
partnership about trends in performance.
practice to ensure that it meets the desired outcomes.
activity to ensure that findings are better used to influence practice
improvements.

The LSCBs strengths
full responsibility for the contribution and role of their individual agencies.
contribution to the work of the Board.
practice, and to this end every Board member observes one child protection
case conference annually.
purpose, a more coherent approach and better communication between the
sub-committees.
implemented in order to raise practitioner and manager confidence in
challenging and negotiating areas of disagreement.


routine part of the quarterly dataset.
audits, for instance to better prepare professionals to contribute to case
conferences.
Faith schools is successful in increasing their understanding of and engagement
with the safeguarding agenda.
that awareness amongst children in the city is high.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
new independent Chair, in conjunction with the business manager, has
significantly accelerated progress. Membership is at the appropriate seniority to
enable the PSCB to drive forward its key priorities and the wider safeguarding
agenda. Partners value the strong leadership of the Board, which enables them
to take full responsibility for the contribution and role of their individual
agencies. The recruitment of three young adults as lay members represents a
positive addition to the Board. The Chair is committed to ensuring that
members understand front line practice, and to this end every Board member
observes one child protection case conference annually.
ensuring that the Board meets its statutory responsibilities. Regular meetings
take place between the PSCB chair, the DCS and Chief Executive. Within the
Board there is a healthy culture of challenge and being challenged. After
partners questioned the style and content of the CDOP annual report, the Board
now receives pertinent data presented more clearly.
resulted in four appropriate priorities that are in alignment with those of the
Childrens Trust and the Health and Wellbeing Board. The Boards Business Plan
demonstrates how priorities will be met within a refocused and sharper style of
planning. Significant actions in respect of neglect and early help are included to
ensure continued improvements in front line practice.
reconfigure the sub-structure of the Board. This had led to greater clarity of
purpose, a more coherent approach and better communication between the
sub-committees. A wide range of partners chair sub-committees, ensuring that
ownership of the wider safeguarding agenda is shared.


agencies submit a completed return. Quality assurance of the process is good.
For example, moderation visits are carried out where a self-assessment is
exceptionally positive or where concerns are identified. Whilst data collected is
extensive, there is no accompanying narrative or analysis, and the Board
acknowledges the need to develop one to maximise learning and engagement
across partners.
to routinely scrutinise and evaluate frontline performance. Measures reported
on are appropriate and include information about CAF and early help. Partners
acknowledge that the Boards analytical commentary requires further
development to be fully useful. Scrutiny and awareness of children placed
outside the local authority forms a routine part of the quarterly dataset. A good
and thorough multi-agency audit of 19 cases that went to child protection
conference demonstrated the Boards commitment to follow through and review
the effectiveness of changes to practice. The PSCB and Childrens Trust
threshold document is clear and widely disseminated but more needs to be
done to ensure that all agencies fully understand the thresholds for services.
Child protection policies and procedures are good and regularly reviewed. Most
are shared with the 4LSCB, an alliance of local safeguarding children boards.
detailed procedure that has been agreed by Board members. No notifications of
serious incidents have been made to Ofsted in 20132014. The most recent
serious case review was published in September 2013 and all actions arising
from recommendations are complete. The use of learning is good and
evidenced by the commissioning of experts in the field to lead a conference on
neglect for all front line practitioners. In addition, a Protocol for Resolving
Professional Differences has been developed and implemented in order to raise
practitioner and manager confidence in challenging and negotiating areas of
disagreement.
implementation of a good child sexual exploitation strategy, with associated
assessment and intervention tools. The Board receives regular information
about young people at risk, and the CSE sub-committee, chaired by the police,
leads strategic developments. Frontline services are now more accurately
identifying those most at risk and intelligence pathways are working well.
Partners acknowledge that work must continue to ensure that all practitioners
across the city are appropriately trained and made aware of the issues.


and care. An operational group involving representatives from childrens social
care and the police routinely shares intelligence about, and co-ordinates
protective action in response to, children and young people at risk of CSE.
However, the collection and analysis of data collected by the police and
childrens social care is not centrally held, collated or tracked. This means that
the Board is not receiving sufficiently comprehensive information to assure
themselves that issues are fully understood and that appropriate action is being
taken to minimise risks to young people.
that awareness amongst children in the city is high. Beware of Lurking Trolls is
a very good and imaginative initiative borne out of research commissioned by
the Board in conjunction with the youth parliament and University of
Portsmouth. The project targets a wide range of children, engaging them
through the use of a professionally published book and a rolling programme of
workshops. Schools are fully engaged and to date over 3,000 children have
taken part in a Trolls workshop.
underpinned by the thorough scrutiny and challenge of annual reports from key
agencies such as CDOP, MARAC and the Health and Wellbeing Board. Routine
and bespoke commissioned multi-agency audits, along with analysis of data,
inform and influence the focus of improvement activity. A well-established
forward planner schedules multi-agency audits and deep dive reviews.
However, one deep dive, which looked at children subject to second and
subsequent CP plans, made overly generalised recommendations and it is not
clear how any changes to practice will be accurately evaluated. The PSCB has
commissioned qualitative independent research into childrens and families
experience of the child protection system. Recommendations have been acted
on, for example parents are now supported by the provision of child care and
transport to conferences if required.
with low rates of non-attendance. Both core and specialist training courses are
offered and each is geared toward particular workforce groups. Training
courses are planned in such a way as to take forward learning from audits, for
instance to better prepare professionals to contribute to case conferences.
Specific work, including training, with volunteers and staff from Madrasahs and
Faith schools is successful in increasing their understanding of and engagement
with the safeguarding agenda. However, systematic evaluation to assess the
impact of training is not yet in place.
September 2014. The 201213 annual report sets out the Boards assessment
of its strengths and areas for improvement but is not sufficiently rigorous.
Neither the style nor content of the 20122013 report reflect the improved
approach to planning demonstrated in the most recent business plan.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Nigel Parkes
Deputy Lead inspector: Karen McKeown
Team inspectors: Penny Fisher, Gary Lamb, Stephanie Murray, Dominic PorterMoore, Lynn Radley, Dominic Stevens


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


