Rochdale Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and protection,
children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 30 September 2014  22 October 2014
Report published: 5 December 2014
The overall judgement is that childrens services require
improvement
The authority is not yet delivering good protection and help and care for children,
young people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires
Improvement

permanence

Requires
Improvement


Requires
Improvement


Inadequate


Requires
Improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local authority
functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the report of the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local Safeguarding Children
Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Rochdale require improvement because:
Effectiveness of corporate parenting
 The local authority is not in contact with seven care leavers over the age of 19
years and therefore cannot be sure that these young people are safe.
 Timescales for adoption have not improved significantly, and permanency is
achieved too slowly for some looked after children.
 The local authority does not demonstrate sufficient ambition for the children in its
care or care leavers and does not afford them the opportunities to achieve their
full potential.
 The educational progress of looked after children in secondary schools is
unsatisfactory and too many looked after children in secondary and special
schools are subject to temporary exclusions, disrupting their education.

Missing children
 Not all children who go missing have an opportunity to speak to an independent
person on their return and information from return interviews is not used well
enough to analyse patterns and trends.

Quality of intervention
 Partners apply thresholds for early help inconsistently. Too many children do not
receive the early help they should from the agencies involved with them and too
many are referred inappropriately to childrens social care.
 Frequent changes of social worker have impeded some children and parents from
building relationships with workers, which has delayed the progress of plans.
 Case recording of contact with children in need of help and protection is often too
brief, insufficiently analytical and unclear.
 Assessments, plans and reviews do not strongly reflect what life is like for
children, their wishes or feelings. Most assessments are not routinely updated
and planning is not informed by a holistic analysis of childrens needs.
 Plans for children do not prioritise key areas of risk and actions are not clearly
linked to outcomes, making it difficult to measure progress.


Management oversight
 Some performance information is not consistently accurate or accessible. This
leads to an incomplete understanding of the quality of practice.
 Managerial oversight does not focus on the difference that interventions make to
children.
 Supervision for some social workers does not take place regularly and does not
support the development of reflective practice.

What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Corporate parenting

Re-establish contact with the high proportion of 20- and 21-year-olds not in
contact with the service to ensure that they are not at risk.


Improve the quality and choice of accommodation for care leavers, and enable
more young people to remain with their foster carers beyond the age of 18.


Ensure that all children and young people looked after and care leavers are aware
of, and receive, their full entitlements.


Ensure that the improvement plans for the Care Leaver services and Rochdales
Care Leaver offer are sharply focused on making care leavers' lives better.


Ensure that the Corporate Parenting Board robustly and regularly monitors the
actions taken to improve practice for care leavers.


Improve timescales for achieving permanency for children.

Missing children

Ensure that all children who go missing from home and care have a return
interview, and that information is collated and analysed to identify patterns and
trends so that children get the support they need.

Performance management, scrutiny and challenge

Improve the quality of performance data collection and analysis so that trends can
be accurately assessed and information used to improve services.


Ensure that all staff have regular and properly documented supervision and
performance reviews to guide their professional development.


Early help and thresholds
that children receive help when their needs are first identified.
order to reduce the number of inappropriate referrals.

Quality of intervention
assessments of their needs to reflect their changing circumstances.
Areas for improvement

Care leavers
children and care leavers so that appropriate support can be offered to tackle the
underlying causes.
partnerships between senior officers in local authority departments, partner
agencies and the private sector.

Education of looked after children
access to data about the progress, attendance and temporary exclusions of all
cared for children and so challenges, supports and intervenes as soon as
concerns arise.
temporary exclusions of cared for children.
they have specific measurable actions linked to educational targets.


Looked after children in Rochdale are known locally as cared for children, following a consultation with
them. Where possible, we have used that term in this report.


Timeliness of intervention
drift and delay, and that authoritative action is taken when parents fail to engage
with plans.
uncertainty for children and young people.

Quality of practice
intended outcomes and timescales are clear, and that parents, carers and children
understand what needs to change to improve childrens well-being and safety.
assessments and that assessments are sharply focused on the analysis of risk and
need.
services.

Scrutiny and challenge
consistency of care planning and review and in challenging wider corporate
parenting issues.
remains one of the permanence options for children and that it is supported
beyond financial payments.

Voice of the child
and throughout the care planning process.
child protection meetings.


The local authoritys strengths
for external scrutiny and challenge through the commissioning of independent
audits and peer reviews. It uses the knowledge gained to improve services.
working through the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB), has driven
improvements across childrens services from a very low starting point.
child sexual exploitation (CSE) and this is resulting in increased awareness of and
earlier identification and intervention for young people at risk. The Sunrise team
completes robust and sensitive assessments of children at risk of CSE and offers a
wide range of effective support to young people and their families.
the Sunrise team, is resulting in timely decision-making to reduce risks for
children, including those at risk of CSE.
leads to effective strategy meetings which contribute to reducing risk.
adoption support has been good.
and Supported Year in Employment (ASYE) programme has been successful in
retaining newly qualified social workers within the authority.
children in primary schools and all Rochdale pupils.


Progress since the last inspection
judged the services to be adequate. Ofsteds last inspection of the arrangements
for the protection of children was in November 2012, when they were judged to
be inadequate. This followed findings from a learning lessons review which
detailed widespread failings in the local authoritys response to young people who
had been sexually exploited. The Secretary of State issued an Improvement Notice
in April 2013, which also included a requirement to improve adoption
performance.
identified by the local authoritys self-assessment and a Local Government
Association peer review completed in September 2013. The peer review, while
noting some progress made by the interim senior management team, highlighted
further significant failings in the infrastructure to support social workers. The lack
of a permanent stable workforce was a key risk to the pace and sustainability of
improvement.
Director of Childrens Services (DCS) and a permanent Assistant Director for
Childrens Social Care in the autumn of 2013. With the support of an effective
Improvement Board, the local authority has made significant progress.
sexual exploitation. They have implemented a whole-system approach that
includes awareness raising, prevention and early identification through outreach
work, combined with effective disruption and prosecution initiatives. Effective
arrangements within the multi-agency screening service (MASS) are resulting in
timely information sharing on contacts and referrals. Informed decision-making
contributes to children being kept safe and their needs being met. The co-location
of the Sunrise team with the MASS supports the early identification of risk in
respect of child sexual exploitation.
workers. Caseloads are now reported to be more manageable, and standards of
accommodation for and administrative support to social workers are good.
comprehensive programme of case audit and review, is helping to drive up
practice standards.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children who need help and protection in Rochdale were found to be
inadequate in November 2012. Since that time, council leaders and managers
have worked hard to improve services and have made a lot of progress, but
services are not yet good.
 Improvements to the way that staff in the council respond when people report a
serious concern about a child now mean that children and young people are
helped more quickly to be safe.
 The Sunrise team, which works to help young people at risk of sexual
exploitation, has improved over the last year and is successful in helping to
support children at risk. Young people, parents and teachers have been involved
in training to make sure everyone knows what to do if they have concerns.
 The Council knows that much more needs to be done before services are good,
especially improvements in services for cared for children and care leavers.
Although some of the care leavers who spoke to inspectors were happy with
some of the support they receive, overall inspectors found the service to care
leavers to be poor. The local authority is not in touch with enough older care
leavers who might still need help and not enough care leavers are able to remain
with their foster carers after the age of 18 if they wish to. There are far too few
opportunities for these young people to take up an apprenticeship.
 Social workers work hard to find adoptive families for children who need them,
and sometimes it takes too long.
 Not enough services across Rochdale are working together well to help families
when they are just beginning to have difficulties. This means that problems get
worse, and then too many children have to be referred to childrens services.
 Social workers spoken to by inspectors knew the children they were working with
very well and spent a lot of time trying to make their lives better. Plans for
children and care leavers do not always show this. Too often they are just a list
of actions that do not explain well enough what needs to change.
 Managers in childrens services do not always check that the things staff are
doing are making a difference to the lives of the children they are working with.
 Cared for children do well at primary school and attend regularly. The ones in
secondary schools do not all do as well as other pupils in Rochdale, and too many
of them are temporarily excluded from school.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area
 Approximately 50,800 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Rochdale. This is 24% of the total population in the area. Approximately 27%
of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 22% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 25% (the national average is 15%)
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 29% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the Rochdale
area are the Asian and mixed groups.
 The proportion of children and young people speaking English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 27% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 23% (the national average is 14%).
 Rochdale has a very ethnically diverse population. The 2011 census identified
over 150 different ethnicities in the borough. The percentage of the all-age
population that comes from minority ethnic groups is 21.4%, with the Asian/Asian
British/Pakistani group (10.5%) being the largest. In total, groups of South Asian
origin account for 13.1% of the boroughs population. Rochdale also has the
second largest Kashmiri population (1,658) in England and Wales.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 2,216 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
the subject of a child protection plan. This is an increase from 230 at 31 March
placement. This is an increase from two at 31 March 2013.
 Since the last inspection, three serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and two serious case reviews have been completed or were on-going at
the time of the inspection.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local un-validated data where this was available.


Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 533 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 105 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 507 (100 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2013. Of this number:
placed over 20 miles away
authority area
 two live in residential special schools, and both live out of the authority
area
 There are no unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 28 adoptions
returned to be looked after
on to independent living
now living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates four childrens homes. Ofsted judged three of them
to be good or outstanding in their most recent inspection. The previous
inspection of Rochdales arrangements for the protection of children was in 2012.
The local authority was judged to be inadequate. The previous inspection of
Rochdales services for looked after children was in August 2010. The local
authority was judged to be adequate.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since October 2013.
 The Chair of the LSCB has been in post since January 2013.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement
The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Judgement grade
Requires improvement

Summary
Early help is not yet sufficiently well coordinated in Rochdale. Not all agencies are
fully engaged in providing early help, which means that some childrens needs are
not being met soon enough.
High levels of inappropriate contacts and referrals are made to childrens social care.
More work is required to improve the quality of referral information and to ensure
that agencies understand and apply appropriate thresholds for referral.
Not all assessments include a focused analysis of risk or fully represent the views of
the child.
Planning is too variable, and too many plans lack clear outcomes to help parents and
carers understand what needs to change and why. Reviews of plans are regular, but
do not consistently identify and ensure action to address drift and delay.
Services available for children who witness domestic abuse are insufficient.
Not all children who go missing from home receive a return interview, and steps
taken to consider potential links between missing from home, care and education are
very recent.
The newly established MASS is resulting in effective information sharing and
decision-making. Strategy meetings and child protection enquiries are mostly well
managed and result in safer outcomes for children.
Responses to CSE are strong. Awareness of this complex area of work is good.
Preventative work with childrens agencies and the wider community is leading to
increased recognition and earlier referral of children who may need help. Skilled,
direct work with young people and their families is reducing risk.
Children and Young Peoples Partnership. Progress has been slow. An
evaluation of the effectiveness of services is not complete and the locality
teams are not yet operational. Early help services are not sufficiently well
targeted to meet need. Together with the lack of full engagement by all partner
agencies, this means that children do not always get the right help and support
at the right time.


are in need of early help, including help out of hours and targeted youth
services. Some older children and families receive good support from Stronger
Families (Troubled Families). The most recent data provided by the local
authority show that, out of a cohort of 675 families, 78% had shown
improvement in outcomes.
programmes and family support. Feedback from parents and carers using these
services has been positive. Many schools are making a positive contribution to
providing effective early help. A primary headteacher has been seconded very
recently to work with schools that have been less engaged, but it is too early to
evaluate the outcome of this.
significantly from 212 in 201213 to 933 recorded in September 2014.
Childrens centres and schools complete 90% of the early help assessments.
without the benefit of an earlier assessment of their needs, or the provision of
early help support.
generally effectively managed. However, sometimes communication between
social workers and early help managers is poor and this weakens the
effectiveness of transition for children and families.
access to electronic recording systems for the youth service and adult services,
is resulting in timely information-sharing on contacts and referrals in the newly
established MASS.
needed. The co-location of the Sunrise team with the MASS ensures early
identification of risk in respect of Child Sexual Exploitation (CSE), and good
information sharing. When CSE is identified, it is clearly treated as a child
protection issue. The Sunrise team is currently working with 50 young people at
risk of CSE. Effective information sharing supports decision-making. It is timely
and well informed to ensure that children are safe and their needs are met.
manager and are appropriately recorded. Records are clear, specific, based on
analysis of risk and include directions for social workers. In the majority of
cases seen, management decision-making was appropriate.


to childrens social care, which have decreased by 32% since the MASS was
established in February 2014. However, contacts remain high compared to
statistical neighbours and national averages. The quality of referral information
is too variable: some referrals do not include relevant information such as
details of the family and address, or clearly outline the areas of concern. More
work is required to improve the quality of referral information and ensure that
agencies understand and apply appropriate thresholds. This high level of
contacts and referrals is resulting in additional and, in some cases, unnecessary
work for the MASS.
hours or earlier if required. Cases are allocated promptly and, at the time of the
inspection, no cases were unallocated.
range of partner agencies. Strategy meetings are recorded by a dedicated
minute taker. Minutes seen by inspectors were very detailed, with evidence that
relevant information is shared and analysed to inform decision-making about
appropriate action to ensure that children are safe and their needs are met.
level of child protection activity is partly due to a legacy of poor practice and
previous lack of recognition of risk to some children. Appropriate action is now
being taken to address identified risks and need, and targeted work has been
undertaken to address neglect. This is resulting in a high volume of work, which
is putting pressure on frontline services.
social workers. Findings about significant harm are clear and appropriate action
is taken to safeguard children. Management oversight of child protection
enquiries is mostly clear and directive.
variable. Assessments that require improvement are too long and lack clear
focus. Some assessments are too descriptive and do not analyse information
sufficiently and draw together key themes and risks to children. Poorer
assessments do not focus on the roles of fathers or significant males.
Assessments involve partner agencies, and an overview of history to inform the
analysis of risk. Only a small number of assessments have used research to
inform decision-making.
peoples identity is sensitive, and analysis of the range of risks and
vulnerabilities they experience is effective in informing planning. Assessments
within this team are resulting in a direct offer of a wide range of services to
meet the specific needs of children. In many cases, the team is successful in
engaging children and their families to work towards reducing risk.


been seen and spoken to alone where appropriate, but the childs voice is not
always sufficiently well recorded. Childrens views, wishes and feelings are not
recorded in many case records and assessments across all teams. However,
assessments that are more recent represent the voice of the child more
effectively. In some cases, frequent changes of social worker have affected
their ability to build relationships with children and parents. In a small number
of cases, this has hindered the progress of plans.
although there is limited evidence of social workers undertaking direct work
with children to inform assessments and influence decisions about next steps.
timescales and clear outcomes. This does not support parents to understand
risks and concerns fully. Better plans have timescales, clear actions for parents
and agencies, and clarity as to what needs to change and why. Childrens
individual needs are not always represented in plans. Child in need plans do not
always translate the findings from assessment into actions and clear intended
outcomes.
a child protection plan. This includes family support, drug and alcohol services
for parents and the Early Breaks project (drug and alcohol services for young
people), as well as a range of parenting programmes and group work for
women experiencing domestic abuse. The graded care profile, a tool for
assessing the quality of care children receive, is used to support the
assessment of the impact of neglect on children.
domestic abuse, drug or alcohol use or mental health is a feature. Currently,
to inform service provision. For example, few services are available for children
who have experienced domestic abuse. This is a significant shortfall, given the
high number of children who have a child protection plan for this reason.
of cases, however, children were not seen alone.
attendance at case conferences and core groups is good, including by adult
services, such as drug and alcohol agencies, and probation. This helps to
ensure that appropriate information is shared to support decisions.


completed and there is evidence of effective authoritative action when change
is not secured and risks to children remain or intensify. However, in a small
number of cases, parents have not engaged with plans and this had not been
challenged by child protection chairs and core groups; this had led to drift and
delay in childrens needs being met. In all cases, this has recently been
recognised and addressed.
their ability to track and monitor cases between reviews. Cases that give most
concern are tracked. A system to monitor the escalation of cases where
concerns are identified has recently been implemented. This is leading to a
more robust response so that childrens needs are met, and drift and delay are
prevented.
to child in need, and from child in need to child protection has been evident.
There is evidence of good outcomes in some cases because of thresholds being
applied and cases stepped up.
in the MASS, together with a daily multi-agency screening meeting, ensures
timely information-sharing and effective responses in cases where children have
witnessed domestic abuse. A large proportion (40%) of domestic abuse
referrals result in no further action for childrens social care, and data on the
outcome of closed referrals are not currently available to assess how many
children receive an alternative service, including early help. The local authority
and police are aware that more needs to be done to meet the needs of children
who are in families where domestic abuse is assessed as low risk, and a new
post of domestic abuse advisor has recently been established to promote this
work.
womens refuge, drug and alcohol services, Independent Domestic Violence
Advisor, victim support, midwifery and education are fully engaged with MultiAgency Risk Assessment Conferences. Risks to victims and children are
appropriately assessed, and this informs decisions about actions needed to
ensure their safety.


alongside detailed regular tracking systems, have improved the identification of
children missing from education. The number of children on the missing from
education register has reduced by 36 percentage points between September
have been clear improvements in determining where young people are when
they go missing due to effective partnership working with police and other
agencies. The names of children missing from education remain on the register
until they are located or they reach statutory school age ensuring their
circumstances continue to be considered. However, three children have been
on the missing children register for one year and three for two years.
monitored by visits at least twice yearly.
their placement; all of them returned and received return interviews. Twelve
children who were subject to children in need and child protection plans had
been missing in September 2014; all returned home. All missing children are
reported to the MASS and Sunrise teams. A recently established weekly missing
panel, attended by a range of agencies, including education and the Sunrise
team, reviews all police reports of children missing, including those missing for
a few hours. This panel shares timely information on children missing from
home, care and education and informs decision-making. This is good practice.
their missing episode with an independent person. Those who are cared for
receive a return visit from an independent person, but children subject to
children in need and child protection planning will receive a visit from their
social worker. The recording of these visits is not consistent, so findings from
return interviews cannot be collated and analysed to identify patterns and
trends. The local authority and partner agencies accept that more needs to be
done to build a fully effective system for gathering intelligence about children
missing from home and education. Inspectors did not see any examples of
young people going missing who were being left at immediate risk.
present as homeless to housing services or the MASS result in these young
people being offered the support they need. In cases sampled, all young people
were given the option of becoming looked after and offered appropriate
placements based on their level of need, including foster care and supported
accommodation.


has not led to a significant increase in the number of notifications, which
continues to be low. This raises concerns that there are more children whose
circumstances are not known, and therefore potentially vulnerable. For those
who are known, assessments and visiting are in accordance with statutory
guidance.
Authority Designated Officer (LADO) have improved since April 2014. However,
quarterly data do not include detailed information in relation to the source of
the allegation or the timeliness of completed investigations. In quarter one
referrals to strategy meetings, although children were not left at risk of harm.
the individual needs of parents and children, including out of hours. Effective
communication between daytime and out of hours services ensures continuity
of response.
considering young peoples identity and individual needs. In meetings observed,
interpreters and support for parents and carers were used effectively, so that
they were able to fully participate. There was also sensitive management and
consideration of the impact of disability on children, leading to better outcomes.
The diversity of individual children, young people and families is not always well
recognised or reflected in plans or in recording assessments.
conferences is collated periodically. Feedback from parents is mostly very
positive. An advocacy service is available for children attending conferences,
but take-up of this service is low.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children looked
after and achieving permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
The outcomes for cared for children are not yet good and the service needs to
improve further to address a legacy of poor practice, insufficient managerial
oversight and a lack of strategic priority for corporate parenting.
Re-modelling of the Cared for Children teams, revised strategies and strengthened
management arrangements are new and have yet to demonstrate consistent and
sustained impact for all children.
The Independent Reviewing Officer service is not yet fully addressing all aspects of
quality in care planning, and care plans for cared for children are not sufficiently
detailed and individual. The childs voice, ethnicity and individual needs are not
explicit or consistent through care planning and reviews.
Children and young people looked after long-term do not have their needs assessed
and updated to reflect their changing situations.
Not enough has been done to ensure that cared for students in secondary schools
achieve well in their education. The gap between their achievement and other
students in Rochdale is too wide. Too many of them in secondary and special
schools are subject to temporary exclusions. Primary-aged pupils attend school
regularly and make expected progress.
The Public Law Outline is used effectively, resulting in some parents making the
positive changes needed. Where risks escalate and children cannot remain at home,
decisive action is taken. The time children wait for the outcome of care proceedings
has steadily reduced over the last year and is better than the national average.
Placement stability for children is good, enabling them to form consistent
relationships with their carers and within the local community.
Children benefit from timely life-story work which helps them to understand their
experiences and their family background.
Children who are placed out of area receive the same level of support for their
health and education as cared for children who live nearby.
Cared for children who are at risk of sexual exploitation receive the same good level
of support as children who live at home.
The local authority works with private providers to raise awareness of and reduce
risk for all cared for children, including those placed in Rochdale by other local
authorities.
Children who need permanence wait too long. Performance against the adoption
scorecard is not improving quickly enough. Special guardianship applications in the
local authority have fallen. However, adoption support is strong, resulting in no
adoption breakdowns in the last 12 months, with 31 children being placed for


adoption since April 2014  more than the number placed in the whole of the
previous year.
Care leavers are not well informed about what they are entitled to as they prepare
for independence and not enough of them are able to stay with their foster carers
after the age of 18 if they wish. Seven care leavers aged 19-21 are no longer in
touch with their corporate parent.
The proportion of care leavers able to take up apprenticeships is too low but the
number of care leavers attending university has recently increased from one to
nine.
The proportion of care leavers in custody is too high, going against the trend of an
overall reduction in custodial sentences for young people in Rochdale. The local
authority has not analysed the underlying reasons, and has therefore missed an
opportunity to inform preventative work with cared for children at risk of offending.
children. This has risen from 448 as of 31 March 2012 to 533 as of 31 March
appropriately senior level. Inspectors saw no cases where children had entered
care inappropriately. The local authority has completed diagnostic reports of
cared for childrens services and the adoption service, with subsequent wellthought-through actions to address the legacy of poor care planning,
monitoring and management oversight. This is beginning to have a positive
impact across the service.
of the group sit on the corporate parenting board which is improving the
influence cared for children have on decision-making. The local authority
acknowledges more needs to be done to ensure information from Listen Up is
consistently shared with all young people and membership of the group is not
limited to those young people referred by their allocated worker.
made for children. Parents are suitably engaged through the effective use of a
contract of expectations and regular reviews, resulting in some parents making
the required changes. One parent told inspectors, I knew I was going to lose
my child if I didnt change. It was a real wake-up call. Regular Legal Gateway
meetings monitor progress to prevent drift. When legal action is necessary, the
timeliness of court proceedings is improving, having reduced from 49 weeks in
confirm that further improvement was achieved, with a reported average
duration of 28 weeks; nationally, the average was 31 weeks. This does not
meet the national requirement of 26 weeks, but is an improving picture.


adoption to ensure, if this is the care plan, that there are no unnecessary
delays. Improvements in the quality of evidence and plans before the court are
helping to reduce delay, and the majority of assessments include thorough
analysis to support the conclusions. The use of family group conferences has
increased in the last year and there are examples of positive engagement by
the wider family to discuss the support they can offer. Where family members,
potentially, can care for children, appropriate viability assessments consider
these options, which mean that those children return to their families in a
timely way.
special guardianship orders s considered for children at the point of becoming
cared for. Currently, 89 children are cared for under special guardianship
orders, although the number of new applications has declined. In two cases
seen, there had been extensive delays in providing appropriate levels of
support to progress the applications; these remained unresolved at the time of
the inspection. Work undertaken recently has not yet increased the number of
children in long-term fostering whose permanence is secured through special
guardianship with their carers.
when children need accommodation. The authority makes good use of
independent fostering agency (IFA) placements to ensure that brothers and
sisters are placed together. Although 37% live out of area, a high proportion of
children remain within 20 miles of their community. This means they are able to
access local services and maintain family relationships. Twelve per cent of
children are placed further away, which is in line with national figures. Such
placements seen were based on meeting childrens needs effectively and, in
one case, were providing the child with their most stable period of public care.
Senior managers routinely monitor these placements to ensure arrangements
are suitable and continue to meet needs.
these children have been placed at home for a number of years without
consideration of whether a formal order was still required. This reflects historic
poor planning and a lack of purposeful review. Targeted work to review the
situations for these children is ongoing, but has yet to result in any applications
for the discharge of an order.
final care plan are monitored closely to ensure that the placement continues to
meet the childs needs and that they do not remain subject to statutory orders
unnecessarily. In these cases, good multi-agency support helps their parents to
maintain and build on progress. Overall, a low proportion (10%) of children
who return home after becoming cared for require further care. This indicates
that the majority of children who return home receive sufficient support to
prevent their re-entry to care.


more than three moves in 12 months in 201314. This compares well with the
latest national figure for 201213 of 11%. Stability for children in the same
placement for more than two years is currently 73.5%, which compares
favourably with the latest published England average of 67% in 201213. The
number of children in residential care has reduced from 45 to 34 in 201213 as
a result of reviewing childrens needs across the service.
children. This minimises disruptions to childrens placements. The child and
adolescent mental health service (CAMHS) provides a range of direct and
indirect interventions to support cared for children. This increases the strategies
their foster carers and residential workers can use to support emotional
resilience and to help children understand their family history.
of the revised management structure. The quality of the visits has improved
and records over the last six months show a clear representation of childrens
views and record how their welfare is being monitored.
identity and their family history, both for now and later in life.
childrens specific needs or identify the intended outcomes clearly. Childrens
views are reflected in recent plans, but there is still work to do to reflect
childrens voices strongly in all aspects of care planning. Childrens ethnicity and
diversity are represented in plans, but the depth and quality of analysis vary.
local area. Not enough young people have the option of staying with their
foster carers beyond the age of 18. Very few children are able to live with
foster carers who are recruited to become adoptive parents if this becomes
their plan. A defined strategy is targeting these specific areas but is not yet
having an impact.
starting point and has contributed to the improvement of practice compliance
and recording within social care. The current timeliness of reviews is 91%, and
those not held are adjourned to improve the quality of information available to
the review. Inspectors saw some good examples of reviews, with IROs
providing effective challenge and driving improvement. In a small number, the
recommendations were not child-focused and insufficient progress was made
between reviews. The challenge from IROs has raised practice compliance.
However, their role in improving quality and consistency in care planning and
advocating stronger corporate parenting requires further development. Children
and young people cared for long term do not have their needs assessed to
reflect their changing circumstances; in one case seen, the childs assessment
had not been updated since 2011.


timely health assessments (84%), dental checks (86%) and immunisations
(96%); however, this is not consistently good enough for all cared for children
and young people. The quality of health assessments for children placed out of
area are reviewed by the looked after health professional to ensure that other
authorities are meeting the needs of these children.
informal group work and weekly support to foster carers and residential
workers. This support is valued. CAMHS provides intervention at times of need,
although the waiting time for individual assessments is three to four weeks and
for direct work 10 to 12 weeks. Currently, the cases of 89 cared for children are
open CAMHS cases. Some of these are for direct CAMHS work; others are for
work conducted under consultation by the social worker or foster carer.
Currently, 18 cared for children are being treated for substance misuse, which
is 3% of all cared for children.
staff, the virtual headteacher, designated teachers and school leaders is helping
to ensure that primary-aged cared for children attend school regularly and
make good progress against expected targets. Cared for childrens attainment
at the ages of 7 and 11 has been above that found nationally for similar pupils
over the past three years and the gap between all Rochdale pupils and cared
for pupils is narrower than that found nationally for similar groups.
good enough. Although 2013 saw strong improvement and the proportion of
pupils (32%) achieving five good GCSEs including English and mathematics was
well above that of similar pupils nationally; provisional results indicate this
improvement has not been sustained in 2014, with only 16% achieving five
good GSCEs including English and mathematics. The gap between cared for
childrens achievement and that of other pupils in Rochdale widened, even
though results fell for all Rochdale pupils, as they did nationally.
exclusions over the past year which is good. The local authority accepts that
too many cared for children in secondary and special schools receive temporary
exclusions. The most recently published information in the Annual Report on
Educational Outcomes for Cared for Children indicates that 9.48% of cared for
children overall have been subject to temporary exclusions in the past year
compared to 4.37% for all children in Rochdale. This is too high. Three cared
for children (0.67%) have been permanently excluded over the same period;
this is above the rate found nationally and above that for all children in
Rochdale (0.11%). The three excluded cared for children all attend full-time
provision in a Pupil Referral Unit that was judged to be good at its most recent
inspection. Reducing exclusions of cared for children is a current priority of the
virtual headteacher.


checking of schools unregistered alternative provision and the whereabouts of
cared for children in those schools has ensured that all are currently attending
their education placements and none is in unregistered provision.
access timely data on pupils progress and exclusions. This limits the ability to
intervene, challenge or support schools early when issues start to emerge.
Action to ensure that cared for children attend good or better schools is good.
Currently, around 84% of these children are in such provision. This is above
that found for all children in Rochdale (83%), and above the national average
(81%). Risk assessments are completed on any provision where a recent
inspection has judged it to be less than good. Designated teachers report that
every effort is made to maintain continuity of school placement when home
circumstances change. Young people placed out of the borough are able to
access similar support to that of their peers in Rochdale. The virtual
headteacher attends all reviews of personal education plans for children whose
progress is of concern.
require improvement to be good. The local authority has identified this as an
area for improvement and a new plan has been developed alongside both Early
Years and Post-16 Plans. These changes have yet to be rolled out fully to all
schools.
the review meeting through the All About Me questionnaire, although not
enough use is made of the array of information in their responses to inform
their personal targets. Academic targets were often not specific about what
children needed to do to achieve the next level. None of the plans reviewed
provided evidence that the additional government funding for cared for pupils
had been well used or described the impact of that funding on pupils
achievement. In relation to the plans seen, all young people had been present
at the reviews.
sports arts and cultural activities are under-developed. Personal education plans
often capture information about a range of additional leisure, cultural, arts or
sporting activities that cared for children take part in, but this is not considered
at a strategic level to ensure equality of opportunity for all.
analysed the reasons for that increase or the return to previous levels.
refreshed strategies for cared for children. This is beginning to show impact, for
example in the improved completion of health assessments for this year.


The graded judgment for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
quickly enough. The adoption scorecard reports 709 days as the time taken
from the point at which children in Rochdale come into care until they are
placed for adoption; this is 101 days away from the threshold for 2010 to 2013,
which are the most recent published data.
children do not achieve permanency in a timescale that meets their needs.
Performance measured against the scorecard for 2010 to 2013 shows that the
average time taken to find families is increasing. The local authoritys
unvalidated data and contextual information show extensive historical drift and
delay for a very small number of children. This skews the average and has
contributed to the authoritys poor performance.
relation to children waiting to be adopted, including allocating an adoption
worker for children at the point of permanency. Thirty-one children have been
placed for adoption since April 2014, bringing the current total for 2014 to 44.
This demonstrates recent improved performance. Family finding meetings are
held fortnightly to track the progress of individual children and profiling now
begins before the final order is issued. Prospective adopters are now linked with
children much earlier. In two cases seen adopters were approved and matched
to children at the same panel. This resulted in those children being placed with
permanent carers in a timely way.
average. The scorecard average for 2010 to 2013 was 19%, compared with the
national average of 13%. However, it takes too long for the local authority to
match children with an adoptive family following authority from the court. The
scorecard reported Rochdales performance in 2010 to 2013 as 259 days, well
above the national threshold of 182 days.
live with their family and 12 remained with their foster carers, either as a result
of no suitable adoptive family being found or because the children had
developed a secure attachment to their foster carers and the change of plan
reflected their views.
double the national average of 7%, demonstrating the good focus on the needs
of this group.


two children currently being placed through this route. The authority
understands the reasons for these low numbers and continues to recruit for this
purpose. Prospective adopters who met inspectors described how they are
given good information about fostering to adopt and feel able to make an
informed decision about whether it is suitable for them.
ensure regular liaison between the family finding worker and the childs social
worker. Practice managers now attend weekly Legal Gateway and Legal Care
Planning Meetings.
child with a record of their journey to finding a permanent family; in the cases
sampled by inspectors, this work was timely.
activity days, the adoption register, exchange days and the childrens profiles
being sent out to the North West consortium, Adoption 22. Information
evenings are also held to share DVD profiles of children. This is reducing delay
in securing permanency for children and has contributed to a significant
increase in the number of children placed with adoptive families. The local
authority engages in a continuing programme of recruitment for adopters. This
work is undertaken in partnership with two other local authorities. There are
currently five approved adopters, 12 prospective adopters at stage one and 11
at stage two of the adoption process. Twenty-four children are waiting to be
adopted. The authority recognises that more work is needed to recruit adopters
for specific groups of children, including sibling groups, and adopters who live
in the local area.
advice and guidance they had received from the authority and about their
experience of applying to adopt. They spoke positively of the swift responses
they receive to their queries and concerns.
experienced and independent of the local authority. She told inspectors that, in
the last 12 months, the quality of reports going to panel had improved, which
was having an impact on the timeliness of approval for adopters and adoption
timescales for children. Child Permanence reports and Prospective Adopters
reports sampled by inspectors were all of good quality.
the work of the panel or report on the most up-to-date management
information. This means the panel does not have a full view of the impact it is
having on improving adoption performance.


breakdowns in the last 12 months. Adoption support plans viewed by inspectors
were of a good quality and ensured that children would receive appropriate
support. The virtual headteachers contribution to support plans ensures that
children who are placed outside the authority attend a school that is suited to
their needs. An adoption support worker attends the second cared for children
review to provide support to adopters at an early stage. Currently, 87 adopted
children and 34 adopted families are in receipt of financial support from the
authority.
adopted children in school Safe Base training, for adoptive parents to
understand and manage childrens behaviour resulting from past experiences;
access to a weekly CAMHS drop-in centre; and monthly support groups for
adopted children and adopters. This is providing adoptive families with timely
advice and is helping them to understand what their children may have
experienced in the past.
the authority or a commissioned service from Caritas. This means that adopted
adults who choose to view their adoption files or attempt to trace their birth
families do not have to wait for support and advice.
The graded judgment about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is inadequate
enough is being done to re-establish contact with this vulnerable group to
ensure that they are safe.
number, particularly when taking into account the reduction in custodial rates in
the general youth population in Rochdale. Little analysis has been undertaken
to understand this trend and to ensure that appropriate support is available to
address the behaviours that led to their offending.
did not understand that they are entitled to this information. The local authority
accepts that only four young people currently have their health passports. Work
is taking place with health partners to increase this proportion, but the pace of
change is too slow. Care leavers report positively about the support provided by
personal advisers and the designated nurse, and access to CAMHS in times of
great need. Some had only been allocated a personal adviser when they were
approaching 18 years of age; this is not in line with the local authoritys Care
Leaver Offer.


pathway plan proforma is cumbersome, with no facility to delete early or
redundant information. Information in the plans is too brief to provide a clear
understanding of the specific actions needed to improve outcomes. Young
people report that they know they have a pathway plan but are not sure of its
purpose. The local authority is developing a new plan, with training currently
being rolled out, but it is too soon to see the impact of any changes.
with their foster carers, and this is limiting their choices about when they are
ready to live independently. Case studies of the six young people now staying
put with their carers showed the positive impact this option can have on the
young peoples security, confidence and emotional well-being.
by 8 percentage points and is currently 86%, a reduction on previously good
performance. The range of accommodation options for young people is not
extensive enough and the local authority is exploring alternatives to improve
this. Two flats are available to help care leavers prepare for living
independently. A range of supported lodgings provides a stepping-stone into
independence but this commissioned service does not have provision within
Rochdale, so those who use it have to live outside their local communities.
Those in independent living arrangements felt the quality to be good. No young
people are placed in bed and breakfast accommodation.
the support they received to help them into the accommodation of their choice.
They felt safe where they lived and were informed about risks to their personal
safety, including online. Support from agencies such as Early Break, the drugs
and alcohol counselling service, are reported by care leavers to be timely and
accessible. The risk of CSE to care leavers is assessed and appropriately
addressed, with specialist support from the Sunrise team where necessary.
apprenticeship strategy has only very recently been amended to ensure that
care leavers are a specific target group. The proportion of 16- to 19-year-old
care leavers in education, training or employment was 66% in 201314.
Although this is slightly above that found nationally for similar young people,
current tracking shows the proportion has fallen further to 61%, which is not
good enough.
Universities, and work with personal assistants, foster carers and secondary
schools to raise aspirations and encourage more young people to go to
university, are beginning to make their mark. The number of young people
moving on to university has improved from one in 2013 to nine currently, which
is similar to care leavers nationally.


developed in January 2014 and closely aligned to the governments
expectations for care leavers. Young people spoken to had very limited
understanding about their legal entitlements. Information has not yet been
systematically shared with care leavers.
in September 2014 is too new to show impact and it is insufficiently outcomefocused. This makes it difficult for the Corporate Parenting Board and senior
officers to identify the extent to which actions have been successful in making a
positive difference to the achievements and life chances of care leavers.
Although the monitoring of services for care leavers is regular, it focuses too
much on what is being done and not enough on the difference that the actions
are making.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Although the authority has taken assertive action following the recognition of deficits
in the provision of services to vulnerable children in Rochdale in 2012, all services
require further improvement to be good and services for care leavers are
inadequate.
Corporate parenting is not sufficiently developed to understand and respond to the
needs of all the children in the care of the local authority.
The local authority struggled to give accurate and accessible performance
management data to inspectors during the inspection and not all performance data
were properly validated. This limits the extent to which managers and elected
members can analyse trends in what is otherwise a developing culture of
performance management.
While senior leaders in the local authority have robustly challenged partners lack of
involvement in early help, this has not yet led to improvements.
Formal supervision of staff is not consistently regular and does not offer enough
opportunity for reflection or a focus on personal development.
The new, permanent senior management team has increased the pace of change
from a very low baseline. The local authoritys strategic and operational work with
partners within the Sunrise team is a strength. The authority works actively with
private childrens homes to increase their awareness of risk to children who go
missing or who are subject to CSE. It successfully challenges planning applications
from providers who wish to open homes in unsuitable areas. As a result of this work,
the risk to all cared for children, including those placed by other local authorities, has
reduced.
The investment of the authority in increasing the number of social workers and the
training available, combined with restructuring of social work teams, have reduced
caseloads and greatly improved the infrastructure that supports staff. This is
beginning to show some positive impact, particularly in frontline child protection
services.

were inadequate and the findings of high-profile serious case reviews
highlighting deficits in services, the authority acted immediately to improve
services. An interim team of experienced senior managers was appointed to
implement an Improvement Notice from the Secretary of State for Education
with robust oversight from an independently chaired Improvement Board.


significantly increased the pace of improvement. Team members provide clear
visible leadership of and vision for the future of the service. They have the
confidence of the local authority, partners and staff. The discrete role of the
Director of Childrens Services within the authority effectively ensures that there
is proper focus on the considerable improvements that are still needed. The
restructuring of social work teams is being managed well but has resulted in
staff changes. These have led to disruption for some children. From a very low
baseline, services to vulnerable children and young people are beginning to
show some improvement in most areas. Although services for children are not
yet good, the progress made has been considerable.
with clear links between the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment for vulnerable
children and the Children and Young Peoples Strategic Plan. A number of plans
that underpin the strategies are new, such as the placement strategy for cared
for children, and some, including the Early Help Strategy, are not properly
embedded. As a result, strategic planning has yet to show a consistent impact
on improving outcomes for children.
commissioning unit by March 2015 is yet to result in commissioning that is
sufficiently coordinated to fully meet local need. The local authority and partner
agencies collect prevalence information which helps to inform commissioning
activity. This is not always sufficiently detailed or current enough to be fully
effective. For example, data are collected in relation to drugs and alcohol users
in treatment who are living with children, but these data do not show the ages
and numbers of these children or whether the children have caring
responsibilities. Some effective jointly commissioned services have already been
successfully created to meet local need, such as the establishment of the multiagency Sunrise team.
ensure that progress is monitored through regular reporting at all levels of the
local authority. The lead member for childrens services is knowledgeable in her
role and uses her knowledge effectively to promote the service and provide
appropriate challenge. Cross-party support has helped to implement
improvements in childrens services. For example, following a recognised
shortage, additional resources have been made available to increase the
number of social worker posts by 42, as well as an additional 12 frontline
managers.
Acting Chief Executive and the chair of the local safeguarding board have led to
significant improvements in some of the work of the local authority, for
example in taking an authority-wide approach to child sexual exploitation. The
Acting Chief Executive has challenged partner agencies where there have been
shortfalls in performance, such as in relation to early help. As yet, this has not
led to sufficient positive change.


number of panels, so that they are in direct contact with frontline staff, and
undertake regular audits of cases with social workers. As a result, they
understand the operational issues of the service. Staff who spoke to inspectors
understood the need to improve services. Most workers had caseloads in excess
of the authoritys target of 20 cases.
support workers to develop their practice. Staff reported that they were well
supported by their managers and received good quality and timely supervision.
However, in files seen by inspectors, the recording of supervision did not show
sufficient evidence that workers were being challenged and supported to do
their jobs effectively. In some cases, there were significant unexplained gaps in
the supervision history of staff and not all staff had current performance plans.
Training and development needs were not properly monitored.
well to focus on areas for improvement. Regular lunch and learn seminars
highlight new or changing areas of practice. Training from Rochdale Borough
Safeguarding Children Board (RBSCB) is well used.
strength and has been particularly successful in retaining social workers within
the authority. However, the authority recognises the need to attract and retain
more experienced social workers. A recently implemented professional
development framework sets out to provide a clear career path for social
workers so that they remain in the authority.
authority. Although this was an area for development in the Improvement
Notice, the authority is still not sufficiently ambitious for all the children in its
care. The Corporate Parenting Strategy 2013, for example, recognises the
importance of offering apprenticeships and training opportunities, but these are
still not embedded, and nor is sufficient consideration given as to whether the
proposed offer meets the specific needs of the cared for population.
elected members, and representatives of foster carers and young people in its
care. Although members are individually committed to improving services, and
are beginning to challenge both the authority and its partners, this commitment
has yet to show a significant outcome in improving services. The Board meets
infrequently and receives a limited dataset. While the Board focuses on key
performance areas, it does not consider the trends in performance outside this
dataset. For example, it did not review the significant increase in offending by
cared for young people in 2013 and the factors that may have led to this.


authority runs a monthly Private Providers Group which the lead member
attends. Relevant training to promote good practice in relation to missing
children and child sexual exploitation k is given. Vigorous opposition has been
evident in relation to planning applications from providers wishing to open
homes in areas of the town deemed unsafe. As a result risk is reduced to all
cared for children in private homes including those placed in the area by other
local authorities.
improved through the implementation of a new strategy. Managers at all levels
undertake regular audits and performance information is scrutinised to ensure
that children, young people and their families receive timely services. The
introduction of performance clinics each month, chaired by senior managers,
offers challenge and scrutiny to individual service areas. As a result, frontline
child protection services are beginning to show sustained improvement, but
progress has been slower in services to children who are cared for and care
leavers.
of the extent of deficits in the quality of services to care leavers. Although it
produces a wide range of performance information, inspectors found that not
all these data were properly validated. Scrutiny of data to understand trends is
limited. Recent improving trends in the number of young people who attend
university, for example, have not been analysed so that improvement can be
understood, sustained and built on.
opportunities to learn from external scrutiny of its services through peer audits.
It has commissioned reviews of specific areas, including one to consider the
effectiveness of the Health and Well-being Board.
are learnt. Children and young people seen by inspectors were able to tell them
that this had been used to improve practice.
care, allowing them to communicate the needs of young people directly to
senior officers and members. This has resulted in some changes in policy within
the authority, for example in improving the provision of laptops to cared for
children.
family justice system, and this has reduced delay in care proceedings.
Relationships with the health community are more mature and have contributed
to the development of the joint commissioning strategy.


children, the authority began a comprehensive and well-planned restructuring.
Workforce issues that arose from these changes have been managed
effectively, with support from elected members and other departments in the
authority. The recruitment of additional social work posts has been managed
well. Although the authoritys current use of agency workers is high at 35% (50
posts), they are experienced social workers and the majority of them work in
parts of the service where the work is more short-term, for example in the
MASS. There is a plan to phase out the use of agency staff as permanent staff
are appointed. Currently, 27 newly appointed social workers are waiting to start
work and a further 22 posts will be advertised in the near future.
Ofsted of three incidents in the last year. Decisions to undertake serious case
reviews are undertaken in a timely way. One review is currently in preparation
and a second is due for publication in the near future.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.

Summary of findings
The LSCB requires improvement because:
Scrutiny, assurance and challenge
 The oversight of allegations management has not yet resulted in effective or
timely involvement of all agencies in the process.
 The coordination of multi-agency arrangements for responding to children who
go missing from home is at an early stage and does not provide sufficient
assurance.
 The RBSCBs challenge to some partner agencies about their engagement with
early help has yet to have sufficient impact.
 The work of the RBSCB to improve understanding and application of thresholds
by partners is not yet reflected consistently enough within practice.

Awareness-raising, learning and engagement
 The work to identify and raise awareness of privately fostered children has not
been effective to date.
 The RBSCBs engagement with young people to drive improvement to
safeguarding practice and effectiveness is at an early stage.
 The RBSCB chair is not sufficiently engaged with the Health and Well-being Board
and is therefore not maximising opportunities to strengthen the coordination,
focus and impact of the RBSCB within the health and well-being agenda.
 The work of the Child Death Overview Panel in identifying modifiable factors in
respect of childhood death is not having sufficient impact on learning.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Management of allegations
people who work with children are sufficiently robust, including the full
engagement of partners with the Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO)
and the capacity to respond to concerns or allegations in a timely manner.

Thresholds
Framework and are applying the thresholds consistently in their practice.
applying the common assessment framework.
Areas for improvement

Scrutiny, assurance and challenge
missing from home or care, including the provision of independent return home
interviews and the collation of themes arising from these to inform service
planning.
access safeguarding policies and procedures and an up-to-date knowledge of
their content.
sufficient influence and impact and that the Health and Well-being Board is
focusing sufficiently on safeguarding children.

Awareness raising and engagement
from serious case reviews, lessons learnt reviews and themed audits.
are maximised to inform safeguarding practices.
and faith sectors, with a particular focus on raising awareness of private
fostering within communities.


Inspection judgement about the LSCB
from strong independent leadership, supported by effective business
management. The Board now has a sub-structure, which is fit for purpose and
effectively coordinated. Members are appropriately senior to enable the RBSCB
to drive forward its key priorities and the wider safeguarding agenda. This rate
of progress needs to continue.
been driven by the Children and Young Peoples Partnership. Fulfilling its
responsibilities to monitor the effectiveness of early help remains a challenge
for the RBSCB. Despite the launch of the strategy in April 2013, progress to
embed an integrated early help offer across all partner agencies has been
insufficient. The reluctance of some partners to initiate common assessments
means that some childrens needs deteriorate and then require statutory
intervention. The Boards role in assuring partners effectiveness, and
challenging them where necessary, has yet to make sufficient impact.
of the Multi-Agency Screening Service (MASS), including the screening of
domestic abuse incidents involving children living within households. However,
evidence indicates that partner agencies do not understand thresholds or apply
them consistently. The proportion of referrals made to the MASS, which are
accompanied by an appropriate assessment, is low. The combination of
inconsistent thresholds and the reluctance of some partners to fully engage
with the early help offer means that some children and families are not
receiving the help they need early enough. The RBSCB is in the process of
revising its threshold guidance to partners and there are plans for a series of
workshops to support the consistent application of thresholds. A deep dive
audit of thresholds is also underway, but these developments are yet to have
impact.
by the Board. For example, arrangements for managing allegations against
people who work with children indicate that some sectors are not making
sufficient referrals to the Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO), including
health, police and the voluntary sector. The LADO quarterly report is available
to the board but lacks detailed information on contacts made to the LADO. Data
produced by the LADO for the first quarter of 201415 indicate that 40% of
management strategy meetings about allegations took place outside the locally
agreed timescale.


prolonged period. At the time of the review, three children were privately
fostered a reduction of one since March 2014. The action plan has yet to be
effective in increasing the number of notifications to the local authority. The
RBSCB has not evaluated the impact of this work to ensure that awareness
raising is appropriately focused and targeted on communities where these
arrangements may be more prevalent.
suitably localised where the need for more tailored information for practitioners
is required, for example, about local arrangements concerning young people at
risk of sexual exploitation and the work of the Sunrise Team. However, a
survey conducted by the Board in July 2014 indicated practitioners low levels of
awareness and use of these policies and procedures. The Board has taken
action to promote awareness through its training programme and newsletters,
and has commissioned a further survey of practitioners, but the impact of this
has yet to be evaluated.
members all of whom are senior officers in their own agencies. Partners are
increasingly confident about holding one another to account, and the chair
maintains a record of challenge. These indicate an increasingly mature
partnership.
responsibilities. A protocol between the RBSCB, the Children and Young
Peoples Partnership (CYPP) and the Health and Well-being Board defines how
these partnerships will work together and hold one another to account. The
RBSCB chair is a member of the Children and Young Peoples Partnership and
the Improvement Board, and attends the Health and Well-being Board a
minimum of twice a year to present the RBSCBs annual report and a half-yearly
update report. These arrangements are not maximising opportunities to
strengthen the coordination, focus and impact of the RBSCBs influence within
the health and well-being agenda.
meetings with the Director of Childrens Services and Acting Chief Executive of
Rochdale Borough Council. There are also examples of strong collaboration
involving the Lead Member for Childrens Services to secure partner investment,
such as for developing the MASS and responding to child sexual exploitation.
This follows high-profile serious case reviews. The Board is developing
collaborative approaches with Rochdale Borough Safeguarding Adults Board
(RBSAB) and the Community Safety Partnership. For example, active
engagement with Greater Manchester Police is designed to strengthen
relationships with independent childrens homes within Rochdale; a joint
conference has taken place with the RBSAB to explore ways of working with
children and families where there are problems with parental mental health,
alcohol and substance misuse.


informs the priorities set out in the Boards business plan. It is helping the
RBSCB to improve its monitoring and evaluation of safeguarding practice. A
quarterly performance scorecard highlights indicators that are of concern in
terms of not meeting agreed targets, those that are changing significantly and
those that are noteworthy of celebration. There is evidence that the
Performance, Quality Assurance and Improvement sub-group is using data
effectively to analyse and evaluate specific areas of practice. While the dataset
has evolved to include some partner activity, further work is required to ensure
that it reflects the contribution that all partners make to safeguarding children,
for example, services for adult mental health and substance misuse.
enabling partners to identify good practice and areas for improvement. The
programme is supported by a dedicated quality assurance post, deployed
across both the children and adult safeguarding boards. The RBSCB has reaudited some areas of performance, for example around child protection plans
due to neglect, to test whether improvements identified have been achieved.
The re-audit demonstrated improvements in management oversight and
supervision, and information sharing between partner agencies. The audit
programme has also included sexual exploitation, missing from home, cared for
children, domestic abuse and early intervention. An overarching action plan
supports the Board to monitor the implementation of recommendations
effectively and the actions agreed by partners. The findings from audits are
widely disseminated across partner agencies to ensure a good understanding of
their relevance to improving practice. However, not all social workers spoken to
during the inspection could identify lessons learnt.
annual completion of an audit by all partners. The audit tool has been adapted
for schools to use for their Section 175 responsibilities, although the impact of
this has yet to be evaluated. In 201415, challenge panels have been piloted to
provide additional support and scrutiny. This has enabled the Board to track
progress in identified areas for improvement, and to test for assurance where
partners have assessed themselves positively against the standards. The
process provides an additional opportunity to seek assurance about agency
recommendations that have come from serious case reviews. Plans to
strengthen assurance through scrutinising key evidence to support selfassessment are appropriate.


for screening for serious case reviews (SCRs) and for disseminating learning
from SCRs and other case reviews. The learning from SCRs has significantly
contributed to a number of strategic developments in safeguarding, such as
inter-agency responses to child sexual exploitation, neglect and domestic
abuse. Actions arising from SCRs are monitored effectively by the SCR subgroup and, where there is slippage, agencies are held to account for this.
Learning is disseminated within multi-agency events. These include
opportunities for practitioners to hear directly from the independent authors of
the reports. Along with messages within the RBSCB newsletters, the Board
places strong emphasis on partner agencies disseminating key messages within
their organisations. The RBSCB does not currently collate evidence to assure
itself that this is undertaken consistently across all partners. The Learning and
Improvement Framework refers to learning from child death reviews; however,
the effectiveness of learning from the Child Death Overview Panel has not been
evaluated.
resulted in significant improvements to multi-agency responses to young people
at risk of child sexual exploitation. Innovative work has been undertaken to
raise awareness among young people and to engage with minority ethnic
communities. For example, World Cafs were established within communities
to engage members of community groups to share and develop ideas about
how to address child sexual exploitation in their localities. The Council of
Mosques now has a dedicated trained safeguarding lead; 1,600 taxi drivers
have completed training; work has been undertaken in respect of licensed
premises; 1,395 secondary school pupils have benefited from seeing the play,
Somebodys Sister, Somebodys Daughter; and over 16,000 people have
completed online CSE training. Face-to-face training has been delivered to 800
staff. Partners, including schools, are very positive about the impact of the work
that has been undertaken; for example, headteachers have described the work
in schools as highly regarded and powerful.
children who go missing from home are offered an independent return home
interview. This means that the Board does not currently have sufficient analysis
of the reasons why young people go missing and therefore cannot sufficiently
monitor the effectiveness of work to minimise or reduce such episodes. The
Board is alert to issues of radicalisation and has appropriate procedures.
benefiting from a large pool of committed trainers from various partner
agencies. Feedback from delegates is very positive, and the Board has secured
good evaluations of the impact of safeguarding training on practice, with 96%
of practitioners stating that they have changed or improved their practice
because of it. Learning from serious case reviews is well embedded within
safeguarding training. The take-up of training across the partners is mostly
good. Representation tends to be weaker where agencies cover other local
authority boundaries.


and families. For example, it has committed resources effectively to engage in
the Crucial Crew initiative, which has led to delivering online safety messages to
all Year 6 pupils in Rochdale. Parents and carers views have been included as
part of the thematic audit programme and young people have been directly
involved with the re-design of the Boards website. The RBSCB receives regular
information in respect of parents experience of child protection conferences.
However, the Boards engagement and participation strategy has yet to
demonstrate a consistent impact on improving safeguarding practice and
outcomes for children.
effectiveness and sets out a series of challenges for all partners. The Board has
agreed four strategic objectives. These define how business is managed within
meetings and provides an effective focus for partner agencies. A well-written
young persons version of the report is to be disseminated shortly.
another LSCB to undertake a follow-up peer review to the one undertaken in
improvement that the RBSCB has made, although it falls short of outlining
recommendations for further action. While the RBSCB is judged to be not yet
good, the Board has made significant progress in terms of its priorities and is
now well placed to continue to drive improvements in the coordination and
effectiveness of safeguarding arrangements for the children and young people
of Rochdale.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and one
associate inspector from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Shirley Bailey
Deputy lead inspector: Wendy Ghaffar
Team inspectors: Graham Tilby, Karen McKeown, Fiona Parker, Hilary Crossley and
Ty Yousaf
Quality assurance manager: John Gregg, Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


