Rutland County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 14 November 2016 to 7 December 2016
Report published: 13 February 2017

Childrens services in Rutland requires improvement to be good

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Rutland require improvement to be good. While no children
were found to be at immediate risk of harm and most have improving outcomes, the
quality of practice in assessment, planning and management oversight is too
variable. When immediate risks are identified, child protection enquiries are timely
and thorough. However, emerging risks and concerns are often not recognised or
addressed as swiftly as they could be, leaving some children vulnerable to further
harm.
The last inspection for children looked after in 2011 judged the local authority as
good, but this has not been sustained. Not all recommendations from the 2013 child
protection inspection, such as clearly recording managers decisions, have been
achieved. During the past year, there have been numerous changes of staff at
managerial and operational levels, which have led to fragmented service delivery.
The director of childrens services (DCS), backed by senior leaders and members, is
determined to get the right staff appointed, and recruitment and retention have
been appropriately prioritised. This investment is leading to a more stable,
permanent workforce with manageable caseloads and improved morale. The arrival
of permanent, senior members of staff is beginning to improve management grip
and quality of practice, but inconsistencies remain.
Governance arrangements between the Childrens Trust Board, the Health and
Wellbeing Board and the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) are well
developed and effective. Elected members are visible and active, but more needs to
be done to involve children looked after and care leavers with corporate parents so
that they can provide feedback and help to develop services.
The local authority cannot be assured that it has accurate information to assist in its
understanding of practice or to hold senior leaders to account. Performance
management and monitoring are under-developed, with a lack of target setting and
narrative to enable understanding of the local authoritys data, and some relevant
information is not recorded. The new electronic case management system is not yet
embedded and there were errors in data provided to inspectors.
Early help services are providing good levels of support to children and families, and
staff provide an effective range of services, often remaining helpfully involved when
a statutory service is also required.
The risks to children of sexual exploitation are well recognised, and effective steps
are taken to safeguard children. The information from return home interviews for
children who have been missing is not consistently used purposefully to understand
and reduce risk.
Decisions for children to become looked after are appropriate, but cumulative risks
are not always identified or acted upon quickly enough. When children become


looked after, not all permanence options are always considered, which results in
delays in securing permanence for some children.
The quality of assessments is too variable. Childrens voices are not always clearly
conveyed, fathers and significant males are not consistently involved, previous
history is not well considered and there is a lack of attention to diversity or reference
to research.
Plans across all statutory services lack specificity regarding the actions to be
progressed, by whom and in what timescale. This means that it is not clear for
parents what they need to do, or what the consequences will be if progress is not
made. Social workers know children well, but not all visits occur as frequently as they
should. Most direct work is undertaken by early help staff, which means that some
social work visits lack focus and do not drive forward plans. Some plans are not
sufficiently overseen, and there is a lack of challenge against progress by managers,
child protection chairs and independent reviewing officers (IROs).
Children looked after live in stable homes where their educational and health needs
are well met. There is good access to leisure pursuits and interests, and children are
helped to maintain contact with their families. The local authority lacks sufficient
numbers of foster carers to meet its needs, and its strategy to address this is
ineffectual. The lack of growth in the availability of local foster carers means that just
over half of Rutlands children looked after live over 20 miles from their home.
The local authority cannot be consistently assured that children are placed with
foster carers who have been robustly assessed. In a small number of cases seen,
foster carer assessments of connected persons, which were presented to the
fostering panel, were delayed and incomplete. The fostering panel has not shown
sufficient challenge in addressing this shortfall, and there is an absence of meetings
between panel members and the agency to address practice issues and concerns.
The local authority has strengthened its commissioning and contract management of
services. However, the service level agreement with a neighbouring authority, which
provides adoption services for Rutland, has not been reviewed, and some aspects of
the services provided, such as post-adoption support, are particularly under
developed.
Life-story work is not available for all children, and the variable quality of some
adoption paperwork, such as child permanence reports and later-life letters, means
that children are not assisted in understanding their histories.
Services for care leavers are good. Dedicated workers are in touch with all care
leavers, and high numbers live in suitable accommodation and are successfully
engaged in education, employment and training. However, more needs to be done to
increase numbers in staying-put arrangements.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspection
 The local authority operates no childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in January 2013. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for safeguarding and
children looked after services was in October 2011. The local authority was
judged to be adequate for safeguarding and good for children looked after.
Local leadership
 The chief executive has been in post since 2006.
 The DCS has been in post since September 2014.
 The DCS is also responsible for education and adult services and is also the
deputy chief executive officer.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since June 2011.
 The LSCB is shared with Leicestershire County Council.
 The local authority has commissioned its adoption services, including support and
matching, from a neighbouring local authority.
Children living in this area
 An estimated 7,716 children and young people under the age of 18 years live in
Rutland. This is 20% of the total population in the area.
 An estimated 7% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 6% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 5% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups:
 in primary schools is 9% (the national average is 31%)
 in secondary schools is 6% (the national average is 28%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 The largest minority ethnic group of children and young people in the area
attending state-funded primary and secondary schools in Rutland is White Other
(2%).
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 3.41% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 2.84% (the national average is 16%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 October 2016, 154 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 31 October 2016, 31 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 22 at 31 October 2015.
 At 31 October 2016, no children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is no change from 31 October 2015.
 Since the last inspection, no serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted, and no serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at the
time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 October 2016, 38 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 49.2 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 30 (38.9 per 10,000
children) at 31 October 2015. Of this number:
 Two live in residential special schools3, both of whom live out of the
authority area
 None lives with parents.
 In the last 12 months:
 there has been one adoption
 one child became subject of a special guardianship order
returned to be looked after


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


 one young person ceased to be looked after and moved on to
independent living
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that senior leaders have access to comprehensive, high-quality
performance management information in order to understand frontline
practice and fully hold senior managers to account.


Ensure that all staff receive regular good-quality supervision, with an
appropriate balance of critical challenge, case direction and opportunities for
reflection.


Ensure that assessments and plans actively consider all risks to children,
including emerging and new risks as circumstances for children change.
Improve social workers understanding of neglect and the impact on children.


Improve the quality of assessments and plans across the service by ensuring
that they are informed by childrens wishes and feelings, involve the views of
men and fathers, consider diversity and historical factors, which are specific to
individual childrens needs, and have explicit outcome-based actions.


Ensure that personal education plans are completed for all children looked
after, and that they include a thorough assessment of needs and set targets
for improvement.


Review and strengthen management and panel oversight of the fostering
service to ensure that there is effective challenge of the quality of practice. In
particular, ensure that foster carer assessments and investigations of
allegations and concerns are thorough and robust, contain all relevant
information and are completed in a timely way.


Ensure that the corporate parenting board is effective in driving improvements
and monitoring outcomes for children looked after and care leavers. Increase
opportunities for children looked after and care leavers to participate in
decision-making and service development and for their achievements to be
celebrated.


Improve social work practice by ensuring that social workers visit children
regularly, in line with the childrens plans or statutory guidance, and take
account of their feelings and wishes when making plans for the children. The
frequency and quality of visits should be monitored by managers.


Increase the effectiveness of management oversight across the service,
ensuring that the rationale for decisions and actions set is clear. Managers,
child protection chairs and IROs in core groups, reviews and key meetings
should actively challenge drift and delay, and support the progress of plans
and the reduction of risk.


When children go missing, ensure that social workers and managers fully
understand the risks and vulnerabilities of the young people and take


appropriate action. Ensure that the information gathered during return-home
interviews is used to reduce risk and inform individual planning and broader
service needs.

Develop and implement a robust sufficiency strategy, which informs the
provision of services and, in particular, the recruitment of foster carers, for
children looked after now and in the future.


Review the service level agreement with the neighbouring local authority,
which delivers adoption services on behalf of Rutland County Council. Ensure
that services are sufficient and of good quality to meet all needs of children,
families and adopters prior to and beyond the making of an adoption order.


Ensure that birth parents have access to support from someone independent
of their childs social worker when adoption is being considered.


Ensure that all options for achieving permanence for children are given proper
consideration, including, when appropriate, parallel planning and foster to
adopt.


Improve the quality of information which children have access to, both now
and in the future, such as child permanence reports and later-life letters.
Ensure that all children in permanent placements receive life-story work.


Ensure that children have timely access to health services, including specialist
provision.


Increase the extent to which workers consider the long-term arrangements
when placing children looked after with foster carers, so that more are able to
stay put when they become 18 years old.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for vulnerable children in Rutland need to improve, but the service for
care leavers is good.
 Managers and council leaders are determined to employ the right staff to
provide good services, and new social workers and managers are making
improvements.
 Staff act quickly to keep children safe when people tell them that they are
worried about a child.
 Social workers know about childrens lives but do not always visit them as often
as they should to find out what is going well for them and what they might be
worried about.
 When families are having difficulties, they receive the right help and the support
that they need.
 Social workers, teachers, police officers, foster carers and others work well
together to keep children safe if they are at risk of sexual exploitation. When
children go missing, social workers do not always show, from what they write,
that they are making sure that children are safe or that they use information to
prevent further harm occurring.
 The right decisions are made by social workers when children cannot live at
home, but sometimes these decisions are not made soon enough. Social workers
place children with people, who might be family members or friends, who can
look after them well and help them to do well in education and to enjoy hobbies.
 When children can no longer live at home, social workers work hard to find the
right families. Some children, however, do not have enough clearly written
information about their life stories to help them to understand why they no longer
live at home.
 Social workers and other professionals work well together to look at plans to help
to improve childrens lives, but they do not challenge each other enough when
improvements are taking too long.
 Young people leaving care receive a good service from staff who know them well.
Staff make sure that they keep in touch with people and support them to live
independently, stay in education or find a job. They also help them to keep
healthy and to find somewhere to live where they feel safe.
 Managers and leaders want to improve services, but need to do more to hear the
views of children and their families about the services that they receive and how
they could be improved.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires
improvement

Summary
Most steps taken to improve outcomes for children in need of help and protection
are recent developments and are not yet fully embedded into practice.
Early help services are effective. A wide range of evidence-based interventions
provided are successfully helping to improve circumstances for children and
families.
Effective systems are in place to ensure that appropriate and timely decisions are
made about contacts and referrals. Child protection enquiries are generally timely
and thorough. Immediate risk to children is recognised, and appropriate action is
taken to protect them. However, emerging risks and ongoing concerns are not as
well identified and, in these cases, it is not always clear that childrens views have
been carefully considered.
Recent assessments reflect improved timeliness and the use of a recognised social
work model, but the quality is variable. Fathers and significant males are not
consistently well considered in assessments or involved in childrens plans, and
diversity is not sufficiently explored. Some plans are effective and show
improvements in childrens lives, but others are not specific enough to individual
children. They are not clear about what parents need to do to change, actions to
be taken, timescales and what will happen if risks do not reduce.
There is evidence of good multi-agency working to support families in addressing
drug and alcohol misuse and mental health concerns.
Social workers do not always visit children as often as is agreed in the childrens
plans. Childrens views are not consistently recorded or evidenced in some cases,
and it is not clear how childrens views and feelings are being used to inform and
influence planning. Core groups and reviews are held regularly with a good range
of professionals, but written plans do not always show the progress made.
Social workers report manageable caseloads and feel valued and supported.
Inspectors noted improvements over recent months in management oversight,
although this remains inconsistent.
When children are identified as going missing, information from return-home
interviews is not being used in a purposeful way to understand and reduce risk.
When children are clearly at risk of child sexual exploitation, risk is recognised and
appropriate steps are taken to safeguard them.


Inspection findings

Recent actions taken to improve social work practice and outcomes for
children in need of help and protection are not yet embedded, and therefore
the positive impact for children is limited.


When children and families have emerging problems, early help services
provide a wide range of responsive interventions, which are preventing some
families from needing more formal, statutory involvement with childrens social
care. The early help service is using an evidenced-based model of intervention
effectively to support children and families. This model is reflected in
assessments and plans, and the quality of these is consistently good. This
model is also evident in case recordings and is used effectively in staff
supervision to identify progress made, current risks and needs and what
action needs to be taken.


Early help and social care teams work well together to provide support for
children and families when they need it. Children subject to child in need and
child protection plans benefit from the full range of early help services in
addition to statutory assessment and monitoring. Many cases show evidence
of improved outcomes for children, particularly in increasing play and learning
opportunities, addressing health needs and assisting parents in developing
parenting skills.


Effective management of contacts and referrals by the duty team ensures that
decisions about whether to progress cases for assessment are made on the
same day. In cases seen, the rationale for decisions made is clearly recorded.


Referrals are received from a range of agencies and are generally appropriate
and of a good quality. Permission from families is obtained, when necessary,
before sharing information about them. Recent decisions made by the duty
team are appropriate, but there have been missed opportunities in some
cases to intervene earlier. In particular, some children have been left too long
in cases when long-term neglect is a factor, without sufficient action being
taken to protect them. (Recommendation)


When children and young people are at immediate risk of harm, this is
recognised by workers, and responses in the majority of cases are swift and
appropriate. Child protection enquiries are undertaken by suitably qualified
social workers. They are timely and, in most cases, information gathered is
sufficient to make an informed decision. Investigations are informed by
decisions made in strategy discussions. However, the majority of these
discussions, viewed by inspectors, comprised of a series of individual
telephone calls, which means that the opportunity for a richer, multi-agency
discussion and the sharing and clarification of information is lost. Most
children are seen and spoken to on the same day as the strategy discussion,


but it is not always clear that their views inform planning and interventions.
When an investigation results in the need for an initial child protection
conference, these are held appropriately within 15 working days.

Immediate risks to children, such as an unexplained injury or self-harming, are
well recognised and responded to. However, the impact of ongoing and
emerging risk from long-standing issues, such as living in families where
domestic abuse or poor parental mental health is a concern, is less well
recognised. In these cases, it is not always clear that childrens wishes and
feelings have been considered or that social workers have gained a sense of
what life is like for individual children. (Recommendation)


Out-of-hours services are provided by a neighbouring authority. Workers have
until very recently been unable to directly record notes on childrens files,
although they are able to read them. This meant that information about
repeat contacts was not captured and used to build a picture of concern about
a child.


Management oversight to ensure that assessments are completed within the
childs timescales has significantly improved over recent months. A new 10day timescale has been introduced for all cases, to ensure that there is a more
individualised approach to assessment completion. Any assessments taking
over 35 days receive closer management scrutiny, including recording the
reason and rationale for any delay. Social work practice is beginning to reflect
the use of a nationally recognised model, and recent assessments reflect what
is working well and what needs to change.


Social work assessments are not leading to a consistently comprehensive
understanding of risks and needs. Recent chronologies seen are concise and
purposeful, but social workers are not routinely considering historical factors
to provide an overview of the most important events and decisions in
childrens lives. Fathers and significant males are not as well involved or
considered as in assessments and plans as mothers are. Their views and
comments are not well recorded and it is not clear that continued attempts
have been made to keep in touch with them, especially if they are reluctant to
engage. (Recommendation)


Some recent plans using a recognised social work model are more specific,
but the overall quality of written plans is variable. Social workers can describe
positive practice and actions in care planning for children better than is
reflected in case notes. Many child in need and child protection plans are not
specific enough to support effective measurement of progress and risk
reduction. They do not include measurable outcomes or set timescales for
actions. Some plans are not specific to individual children and too many
contain copied case notes from files of other children in the family. This
means that childrens case notes contain information not specifically relevant
to them, and plans are not made from their individual perspective.
Contingency planning is not clearly stated, so when circumstances do not


improve for children it is not clear what needs to happen next.
(Recommendation)

Childrens individual needs arising from diversity are not fully identified or
consistently well considered in their plans. Some cases address diversity well
from a wider perspective, including, for example, social isolation and living in
poverty. However, many cases do not address diversity issues of faith,
religious beliefs, gender and culture in any meaningful way.
(Recommendation)


Children are being seen regularly by early help workers or other agencies, but
inspectors saw a small number of cases in which social workers are not
visiting children as regularly as required in their child protection plans. This
means that social workers are missing opportunities to get to know children
and understand their experiences to inform future planning. Most direct work
is completed by early help staff and therefore some social work visits lack
purpose, do not inform planning and can result in drift and delay.
(Recommendation)


Evidence that research and theory are being routinely used to inform social
work planning and practice is not recorded in casework. This means that
social workers are not evidencing learning and development of their practice
in meeting childrens needs more effectively. In addition, feedback from
children and families is not systematically used or analysed to help to inform
and improve services. (Recommendation)


Early help services are effective in providing support and meeting the needs of
disabled children. The help provided is proportionate to risk and presenting
need. Disabled children are well supported through appropriate child in need
planning, when appropriate, and there are clear arrangements in place to
manage any safeguarding concerns effectively. Step-up and step-down
arrangements for all children, including those who are disabled, are
appropriate.


Child protection chairs are not consistently challenging poor-quality
assessments and plans or delays in improving outcomes for children. A small
number of cases were seen in which children were taken off plans too soon,
before changes and improvements were sustained. These children became
subject to repeat plans because of the same risks and concerns that had been
identified previously. The lack of contingency planning and consideration of
pre-proceedings work means that some children experience drift and delay in
securing improved outcomes. (Recommendation)


Management oversight is not routinely ensuring that there is sufficient support
and challenge to monitor the progress of casework, but inspectors noted an
improving picture over recent months. Some supervision records are thorough
and purposeful, but others are brief and lack reflection. Managers do not
routinely record their challenge of practice, which falls below the authoritys


practice standards. Decisions made about children are not always agreed and
signed off by managers. When decision-making is recorded, this is mostly
appropriate, but the rationale for decisions taken is not always clearly
recorded. (Recommendation)

There is effective shared strategic planning to tackle problems associated with
drugs and alcohol, adult mental health and domestic abuse. Refreshed
commissioning arrangements have strengthened responses to families when
drug and alcohol issues are a concern. Inspectors saw some effective practice
to support parents who have drug, alcohol and mental health problems. An
adult mental health practitioner is available for consultation to childrens social
workers, and adult and childrens duty teams are co-located, which assists in
sharing information and advice.


Multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARAC) have recently been
prioritised by childrens social care and are now attended by duty social
workers who complete actions in a timely way and provide feedback on their
work. The MARAC chair reported good information sharing and actions being
completed to ensure that risk is being recognised and acted on.


When children are at risk of sexual exploitation, risks are recognised and
appropriate action is taken to safeguard the child. Inspectors saw creative and
bespoke packages of support being provided to children by youth and early
help services to help to reduce risks.


When children go missing from home, they are usually offered a return-home
interview. However, not all risks to children who go missing are responded to
appropriately by staff, and some case recordings demonstrate a lack of
understanding of the issues and pressures faced by children and young
people. Information from return-home interviews is not being used to explore
and identify trends and patterns of missing episodes and, thereby, to reduce
risks. (Recommendation)


The local authority maintains an up-to-date register of children who are
missing from education and has appropriate processes in place by which to
find these children. All cases have been successfully resolved. Schools report
persistent absentees to the local authority every half term. When the school is
unable to secure improvements, the local authoritys legal team takes
appropriate action.


Pupils who are permanently excluded are supported to access other schools,
and the local authority has effective processes in place to find and support
children whose parents fail to register them with a school.


The local authority has appropriate procedures in place to check on the
welfare and education of children whose parents elect to educate them at
home. There are no children looked after or children who have disabilities who
are home educated. Parents of all currently home-educated children agree to


annual visits from local authority staff who check the appropriateness of the
curriculum.

There are currently no known cases of private fostering arrangements. There
has been some awareness raising across agencies, but managers are aware
that this work needs to continue to raise awareness through a targeted
campaign.


The designated officer role is currently undertaken by the head of childrens
social care. This does not provide a suitable level of independence when
allegations are received about professionals or carers within this service. The
local authority is aware of this, and a restructuring of the role is underway. In
a small number of recent cases involving foster carers, there have been
significant delays, which have impacted on the carers and hampered the
services ability to learn and to apply lessons from these cases.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
The right decisions are made to accommodate children, but, in some cases,
children should have become looked after earlier. Social workers and managers do
not recognise well or consistently the cumulative impact of risk, and therefore
there are missed opportunities to bring some children into care in a planned way.
The local authority does not sufficiently consider pre-proceedings and parallel
planning or use all pathways to permanence, which means that some children
experience delay. Management oversight is too variable, with decisions not always
well recorded. Managers and IROs do not provide sufficient challenge to delays in
securing permanence.
There are an insufficient number of foster carers in Rutland, and, therefore,
currently just over half of the children looked after live over 20 miles from home.
Not all children are visited in accordance with statutory guidance. Some childrens
needs are not fully identified or addressed, due to a lack of updated assessments,
and the subsequent plans are of poor quality.
The fostering service is not sufficiently robust. Inspectors saw a small number of
cases in which carer assessments or investigations were delayed or incomplete,
but such shortfalls in practice are not being addressed by the panel and the local
authority. In contrast, oversight of foster carer reviews and attention paid to
carers training and development are much better.
Despite the variations in practice, outcomes for children are mostly good. Children
benefit from stable homes, and many live with connected persons. Childrens
health needs are appropriately met, and they are supported to achieve well
throughout their education. Children are helped to maintain contact with their
families and pursue leisure interests. Young people at risk of sexual exploitation
are identified and assessed and receive effective interventions to keep them safe.
Good working relationships between the Children and Family Court Advisory and
Support Service (Cafcass) and the courts, along with good-quality court
paperwork, mean that care proceedings are completed without delay.
Adoption is considered as a permanence option for all children who cannot return
home, but it is not achieved as quickly as it could be. Post-adoption support is
poor. Life-story work is not undertaken consistently to enable children and young
people to understand their histories or experiences.
Rutland care leavers receive a good service and effective support during their
transition to adulthood, but more needs to be done regarding staying-put
arrangements.


Inspection findings

Correct decisions are made to accommodate children, and swift action is taken
to safeguard them when risks are clear. For a small number of children,
decisions to bring them into care are not timely. Chronic risks, such as
neglect, are not well identified, and the cumulative effects on children are not
fully considered. Consequently, risks for these children are not reduced at the
earliest opportunity. (Recommendation)


Some children experience delays in achieving permanence. Not all available
pathways to permanence are used by the local authority and pre-proceedings,
parallel planning and foster to adopt are not always considered. The local
authority has recognised this, and recently strengthened the At Risk of
Care/Looked After Children (ARC/LAC) panel, set up to monitor children who
are subject to longer-term child protection plans, and actively considers
permanence at an earlier stage. The local authority has developed tracking
systems to monitor pre-proceedings, court proceedings, permanence and
adoption, but some of these are very recent. Tracking systems are disjointed
and missing key information, such as dates of planning meetings or when
letters before proceedings are used. These do not, therefore, provide a
rigorous overview of childrens journeys to permanent homes or identify
delays effectively. (Recommendation)


The structure within childrens social care keeps the number of changes of
social workers that children experience to a minimum, with a single transfer
point following intervention from the duty team. This promotes the
development of consistent and positive relationships with social workers who
know the children well.


A lack of more specialist knowledge and the absence of a permanence policy
contribute to practice being inconsistent and delays in achieving permanence
for children. For example, there is a lack of urgency in matching carers with
children needing permanent placements with foster families. Inspectors saw
some children living in homes for long periods without formal matching taking
place. Consequently, this leaves uncertainty for children and their carers.
(Recommendation)


Good working relationships between Cafcass and the courts and good-quality
court paperwork mean that care proceedings are completed without delay.
The local authority is thorough and well prepared in presenting evidence in
court. Social workers benefit from the support of a highly regarded legal
service, which quality assures all social work reports. Recent stability in the
workforce has led to improvements in the quality and timeliness of court
applications, and most proceedings are concluded at 22 weeks. This is an
improvement from 27 weeks between 2012 and 2015 and is better than
comparators. Following changes in management, a review of childrens cases,


including the use of section 20, resulted in an appropriate increase in court
applications to ensure that childrens needs are met through a legal order.

A small number of children are not visited in line with statutory requirements,
leaving them without regular social work support. However, the small number
of children spoken to also reported some strong relationships with their social
workers. Social workers know their children well. However, recording on
childrens files does not always reflect this or the work completed. Gaps in
recording mean that childrens views and experiences are not clear. When
children are too young to verbalise views, practice is variable in describing
their presentation and responses. Advocacy services are available, yet the
local authority cannot assure itself that all children and young people are
aware of this provision, as no children have used this since the beginning of
the year. Independent visitor services are not available. The local authority is
currently considering this.


Assessments and written care planning for children are not consistently good,
which results in some delays in securing permanence. Assessments are not
routinely updated, and for some children it has been several years since their
last full assessment. Six-monthly reports, produced for children looked after
reviews, are used as the updated assessment. This process is unreliable, as
reports seen by inspectors did not provide a comprehensive analysis of
childrens experiences, and their histories are not used in order to understand
their current needs. Consequently, most plans seen by inspectors lack focus
on achieving permanence or considering how changing needs will be met.
Despite this, inspectors saw some good-quality work with young people, for
example, preparing them for contact with their family and working with
schools to rebuild key education foundations when significant neglect had
limited childrens progress. (Recommendation)


The management of the fostering service is an area of weakness, and, in a
small number of cases seen, prospective foster carer reports presented to
panel were out of timescales or missing key information. This has delayed
decision-making in some instances, and, in others, the fostering panel has
recommended approvals based on poor-quality reports or incomplete
information, which potentially places children at risk of harm. Complaints
against foster carers are not well managed, and lengthy investigations lead to
distress and uncertainty for carers. In addition, the panel does not fully
consider the specific skills of foster carers to indicate which children in the
nought to 18 age range they are best suited to work with. There are no formal
avenues for feedback between the panel and the agency decision-maker. This
is a missed opportunity to understand the quality of the work and to improve
practice. (Recommendation)


Foster carers have not received consistent support, due to significant staffing
changes, both within the fostering service and the childcare teams. They do,
however, have access to a wide range of training, which was acknowledged
by foster carers spoken with, along with the value of the child and adolescent


mental health services (CAMHS) support, which assists them in caring for
children. Foster carers also describe good support in assisting children to
return to family members or other permanent homes. Foster carers are aware
of delegated authority arrangements and their responsibilities to children
placed. The majority of foster carer annual reviews are within timescales, and
most carers have completed the Training, Support and Development (TSD)
standards. The attention paid to a wide range of training, completion of TSD
standards and up-to-date reviews ensures that foster carers are assisted in
their learning and development to meet a range of childrens needs.

The local authority recognises that too many children and young people live
too far away from immediate family and friends, and 55% reside over 20
miles from their home. This is as a result of insufficient carers being available
for teenagers and those who have more complex needs. The local authoritys
recruitment plan does not suitably address this shortfall. Rutland places high
importance on placing children with connected persons and in familiar
settings. Recent viability assessments of connected persons are thorough and
of good quality. At the time of the inspection, over a quarter of children lived
with connected carers, and some children and young people have secured
permanence with family members through special guardianship orders. This
has enabled children to live with people whom they know well and retain links
to their birth families and origins.


Placement stability is a strength. Children benefit from stable placements,
which enable them to develop strong relationships with their carers. At the
time of the inspection, 73% of children looked after had lived in the same
home for over two years. The commitment of foster carers ensures that
children are nurtured, encouraged and supported with their schoolwork and
that they develop social interests.


Management oversight and decision-making lack consistency. Inspectors
identified gaps in social workers supervision records and a lack of reflection.
When management oversight is recorded, there is a lack of rationale for
decisions taken. This means that when professionals or young people view
these records, they will have little understanding of why actions were taken.
(Recommendation)


The large majority of children looked after attend a good school. When they
do not, this is because they remain in the school they attended before
becoming looked after, and their needs continue to be met well. When a
placement move results in a school move, staff quickly find children looked
after places in schools that are able to meet their needs. School attendance is
high, and there have been very few fixed-term exclusions and no recent
permanent exclusions.


School staff and the virtual school headteacher know children well and take
appropriate actions to support their progress and attainment. Consequently,
the large majority of children looked after make good progress at all key


stages, including post-16. However, workers often fail to document this well in
personal education plans, which are characterised by cursory assessment of
the childs needs and a lack of corresponding actions, weak target setting,
poor reviews of targets and a lack of evaluation of pupil premium plus
spending. In a few cases, personal education plans are not completed at all.
(Recommendation)

The local authority engages in a number of activities to prevent bullying and
discrimination and to help young people to keep themselves safe online. This
includes work at youth groups to promote anti-bullying week, one-to-one
mentoring for victims of bullying, including homophobic bullying, and provision
of the Health for teens and Kooth counselling websites.


When health needs are identified, these are appropriately met. However, the
timeliness of initial health assessments and reviews for children who live
outside the local authority area continue to be an area requiring improvement
since the 2011 inspection. Initial and review health assessments for Rutland
children placed within the county or in Leicestershire are timely, but at the
time of inspection approximately 11 children living further afield had
assessments out of timescales. Strengths and difficulties questionnaire
information does not inform health assessments, which means that emotional
and mental well-being are not considered as part of childrens overall health
assessment. Therapy and counselling, for children and young people who
require additional support with their emotional and mental health needs, are
spot purchased. However, access is not always timely, and a lack of fast
tracking arrangements with health providers means that children looked after
do not always receive support when they need this. Inspectors saw a small
number of examples of children having waited too long for therapy, which had
contributed to a delay in securing permanence. (Recommendation)


Partnership working is a strength, and there is good attendance and
cooperation at meetings and reviews to improve the lives of children.
However, reviews of children looked after do not sufficiently focus on meeting
needs, and IROs do not challenge delays or the lack of progress against plans.
Although children and young people are encouraged to attend their reviews,
their views and wishes are not always considered, nor do they inform
decisions made about them. ( Recommendation)


Childrens contact with significant people in their lives is reviewed and detailed
in care plans. A dedicated and well-resourced contact service ensures that
good-quality supervised contact takes place between children and their
families. Families are appropriately supported to attend, and workers actively
encourage meaningful sessions through appropriate coaching and guidance.
However, inspectors saw a small number of children for whom social workers
have not actively pursued contact between the children and people important
to them, including brothers, sisters and grandparents. IROs do not challenge
this in review meetings.



During the past year, only one child looked after has been missing, on one
occasion, and there are currently none involved in offending behaviour.
Workers identify, assess and deliver effective interventions for young people
at risk of child sexual exploitation, including mentoring and group-work on
identifying grooming behaviour, e-safety and healthy relationships. However,
this work is not always well recorded in childrens case records, and
interventions delivered by early help professionals run parallel to, rather than
informing, care plans.


Children and young people are actively encouraged by their social workers and
their carers to participate in a wide range of leisure activities. Children are
supported to develop positive relationships with their peers to address broader
issues of diversity, such as social isolation. However, diversity is not
consistently considered to inform assessment or plans for children and young
people. In addition, a lack of life-story work means that children are not
always helped to understand their lives, sense of identity or experiences while
living away from their parents. (Recommendation)

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement


Adoption is considered for all children who cannot return home to their
families, including older children, those from minority ethnic communities, and
brothers and sisters. However, parallel planning is not well established, and
there has been no consideration of foster-to-adopt placements. That, coupled,
in some cases, with delays in initiating care proceedings, means that adoption
is not pursued with the urgency required for early permanence. Consequently,
children have not had the opportunity to benefit from being placed with an
adoptive family at the earliest opportunity. (Recommendation)


The local authority has a service level agreement with a neighbouring local
authority to undertake a significant part of its adoption work. This includes the
recruitment, preparation, assessment and approval of adopters; family finding
for children; and three years post-order support. Active family finding does
not take place, however, until the local authority has legal authority to place a
child, which means that plans are not progressed as swiftly as they could be.
The local authority does not have its own tracking systems to monitor the
progress of children waiting for an adoptive placement and is reliant on the
other local authority to progress the plans in a timely way. (Recommendation)


In the last 12 months, one child has been adopted and seven children have
had a decision made that they should be adopted. In one case, the adoption
decision has appropriately been changed. As this local authority places only


small numbers of children for adoption every year, year-on-year comparisons,
in terms of numbers of adoption plans, make drawing any meaningful
conclusions difficult. Currently, no children are waiting for an adoptive family.

The timeliness with which children are placed for adoption after becoming
looked after is improving. The average time in the three years 201316 is 496
days. While this does not meet the national threshold of 426 days, this
performance is better than the three-year average for 201215, which was
from when the court makes the order enabling the local authority to place a
child with adopters until the child is placed is consistently better than the
national threshold. The three-year average for 201316 in Rutland is 90 days.
This is an improvement on the three-year average for 201215, which was


A neighbouring local authority undertakes to recruit, prepare, assess and
approve prospective adopters on behalf of Rutland, as part of its service level
agreement. Prospective adopters are assessed in line with national
regulations, and, if there is delay, this is minor and for a good reason.
Adopters spoken to by inspectors were positive about the preparation and
assessment process, including the flexibility of social workers when
undertaking assessment visits. They value the preparation training, which
assists them to understand the needs of adopted children and the impact of
abuse and trauma. The quality of prospective adopter reports ranges from
adequate to good. They provide an assessment of the strengths and
vulnerabilities, but some would benefit from further analysis to provide a more
robust tool to inform the adopters approval and subsequent matching
considerations. The number of Rutland residents applying to adopt through
this arrangement has been very small.


Children are benefiting from secure, stable placements, which meet their
needs. The number of locally approved adoptive families, provided as part of
the service level agreement, is currently low. However, when suitable local
adopters are not identified, regional and national processes are used in a
timely way to identify families. This ensures that children do not wait for a
suitable placement. Matching is well considered and leads to placements
which last. Childrens social workers and family-finding social workers consider
the prospective adopter reports of families who seem most likely to meet the
needs of the child, shortlist and visit families to reach a recommendation
about the best match. This is then validated in a formal meeting before it is
placed before the adoption panel for its consideration. Children and their
adoptive parents are supported well up until an adoption order is granted, and
there have been no pre-order disruptions in the last year.


The evaluation of the extent and effectiveness of the adoption service
provided to Rutland by the neighbouring local authority is limited and prevents
robust managerial monitoring. There is a joint adoption panel with the
neighbouring local authority. The adoption panel produces a bi-annual report


about its work, but this is not presented to Rutland. There are currently no
formal arrangements for the agency decision-maker to meet with the agency
adviser and adoption panel chair to share information, concerns or themes.
This limits the development and improvement of the service.

The adoption panel functions effectively. The independent panel chair is
experienced and he is supported by panel members who have a wide range of
personal and professional experience of adoption. The minutes demonstrate
that panel members are well prepared, ask relevant and child-focused
questions and provide suitable challenge. This contributes to effective
consideration of the issues, to inform the agency decision-maker.


Introductions between children and adopters are well considered, and there
are opportunities for birth parents to have a one-off meeting with the
adopters. Adoptive families have regular visits from the childs social worker
and the adoption social worker to provide support and advice for any
emerging challenges. In contrast, birth parents do not receive support from a
worker independent of the childs social worker once adoption has been
identified as a plan. Consequently, they are not given effective help and
support in dealing with, and understanding, separation and loss. Additionally,
they may be less likely to engage with the local authority to provide
information to promote their childrens heritage. (Recommendation)


The quality of information available for children to access now and in the
future is variable. Child permanence reports tend to be written in a way most
suitable for the court arena, rather than as a tool that can be used for
effective matching and for the child to read in the future to understand their
history. Adoption placement reports do not always give a clear reason why
particular adopters are the best match for the child and how they will meet
their specific needs. Later-life letters are also variable in quality. They provide
limited information and are not always as clear as they could be about the
information that they provide. Consequently, a childs understanding of their
history and experience may not be enhanced by these records, should they
choose to access them in the future. Life-story books are better. They start
positively from where the child is now placed and then explain, using simple
language and good-quality photographs, the journey taken to reach their
adoptive family. Life-story books and later-life letters are provided to adopters
in a timely way. (Recommendation)


Post-adoption support is an area which requires development for adopted
children, birth families and adopters. It is not well planned, proactive or wide
ranging. Training is ad hoc, there are no support groups for adopters or
children and there are a limited number of social events. Adult service users
experience delay in accessing their records and receiving birth records
counselling. There are, however, robust and appropriate arrangements for
indirect contact to ensure that these are safe and secure and enable children
to maintain their heritage. These include arrangements post 18.
(Recommendation)


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good

Local authority staff make strenuous efforts to maintain frequent contact with
all of its care leavers, and have remained in touch with all of them for the last
two years. Care leavers are safe, and none is judged to be at risk of significant
harm from, for example, sexual exploitation or substance abuse.


All current care leavers reside in suitable and safe accommodation, either with
their former foster carers or independently in their own flats. Local authority
staff prioritise the accommodation needs of care leavers, and most are
accommodated, when appropriate, within three months of their making it
known that they desire to live independently. No care leavers live in houses of
multiple occupancy.


The rural nature of the county and the small number of care leavers limit the
ability of the local authority to provide transitional, semi-independent
accommodation. However, workers provide young people with bespoke
support that helps them to develop the skills that they need to live
independently. Workers tackle swiftly and well any emerging problems, such
as rent arrears or antisocial behaviour. As a result, care leavers successfully
make the transition to independent living, and there have been no tenancy
breakdowns for care leavers in the last two years.


Young people aged 16 or 17 are encouraged to remain looked after and,
consequently, all four of the current young people of this age live with their
foster carers. There are clear arrangements in place to support 16- and 17year-old young people who find themselves homeless, and there have been
no recent cases of homelessness for this age group or any use of bed and
breakfast accommodation.


Only three current care leavers aged over 18 have remained with their former
foster carers. Although plans for staying put are not considered early enough,
when placing children looked after, all moves to independent living take
account of the young persons needs and in many cases allow them to access
education provision. (Recommendation)


Workers have high aspirations for care leavers and place great emphasis on
the importance of their education. Additionally, the early intervention service
provides support to help young people to remain engaged in education and
training. Consequently, the proportion of care leavers who continue to
participate in education, training and employment is high, with 19 of 24 care
leavers (79%) currently undertaking full-time study or training, including a
small number at university. These young people make good progress, partly
because of the excellent relationships with local colleges and the
responsiveness of local authority staff to any concerns raised by providers.



Staff do not give enough consideration to apprenticeships as a possible route
into employment, and the local authority does not give care leavers priority
access to its own apprenticeships. However, the early intervention service
provides care leavers with access to work experience and additional support
that helps them to secure employment. A high proportion of young people
who have left the care leavers service in the last two years remain in
employment.


Care leavers feel positive about themselves. A key reason for this is the care
and attention given to them by the leaving care worker, who attends their
parents evenings and award ceremonies. These young people feel that the
interest and care demonstrated helps them to aspire to future success.


The leaving care worker and other local authority staff understand the needs
of individual care leavers and take appropriate actions to support them.
However, they do not record this well. Pathway plans are often not completed
in a timely manner and do not document clearly the needs of care leavers.
Few have clear, specific actions that can be used effectively to support their
welfare and development. Professionals cannot, therefore, use pathway plans
to share information, and the effectiveness of support for care leavers
depends on the skills and knowledge of particular individuals, leaving the
quality of service vulnerable. (Recommendation)


Planning is thorough for those care leavers who need the support of adult
services beyond their 18th birthdays. Staff maintain a register of those young
people who may need ongoing support, starting when they enter Year 8 at
school, and continuing until they are 25 years old. There are frequent reviews
of each young persons progress, and this helps to ensure a seamless
transition to adult services.


When young people leave care, staff supply them with documents about their
own and their familys health histories. However, staff do not prepare a clear
summary of this information that is comprehensible to the young people.
Workers do not generally discuss this information with them during pathway
plan reviews and, consequently, young people do not have the information
they need to make informed choices about their health.


When young people leave care, workers provide them with other documents
that they are likely to need in their transition to adulthood, such as their birth
certificate, passport and national insurance number. They also explain their
financial entitlements, and the leaving care worker provides further
information as appropriate. However, there is no care leavers pledge, leaflet
or web resource that signposts their entitlements, and care leavers are not
always able to recall specific details. They do know how to access their
personal records, but, when they request such access, this meets with a swift
response.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Children in Rutland are not yet receiving a consistently good service. Senior
managers and leaders have taken action to address workforce stability and
competence. They have made considerable progress in developing the
infrastructure and putting in place the systems and processes necessary for
Rutland to be able to deliver against its full range of statutory responsibilities, but
there is still some way to go.
The local authority has a clear vision and sense of purpose. Elected members are
visible and active. Reporting arrangements between the Childrens Trust Board, the
Health and Wellbeing Board and the LSCB are well developed. The scrutiny panel
provides robust critical challenge.
The local authority has strengthened its capacity to commission and contract
manage services and is making judicious use of regional partnerships to achieve
efficiencies of scale while ensuring that services are responsive to the needs of
Rutlands residents. Engagement with children and young people, including the
youth council, is good.
However, the local authoritys sufficiency strategy is not fit for purpose. The high
proportion of children who are being looked after out of area is largely a product of
the local authoritys inability to recruit and retain foster carers who have the right
level of skills, knowledge and experience. Additionally, the service level agreement
that the local authority has with a neighbouring authority to deliver adoption
services on behalf of Rutland County Council, has received very little management
oversight.
While the quality assurance framework is starting to deliver better outcomes for
children and young people, and the workforce development strategy is having an
impact on workforce quality and stability, the progress made in childrens social
care services has not kept pace with the progress made in early help.
The quality of performance management information is not sufficiently robust. A
failure by some frontline managers and IROs to provide effective management
oversight has had a demonstrable impact on the quality and consistency of
practice in childrens social care.
The corporate parenting board is not as effective as it needs to be in driving
improvements and monitoring outcomes for children looked after and care leavers.


Inspection findings

With clear lines of accountability and governance, senior managers and
leaders share a common commitment to modernising and improving services
in order to ensure that the people of Rutland, including children and young
people, are well served. The chief executive exercises an appropriate level of
influence and control. Elected members are visible and active. The people
(children) scrutiny panel challenges senior managers appropriately. For
example, they have recently questioned the timeliness of assessments,
whether bed and breakfast is ever used for children and the number and
nature of referrals to early help. As well as investing in a new electronic case
management system, elected members have sanctioned the creation of a new
business intelligence manager post.


However, the quarterly performance management reports, which are available
to senior managers and leaders, include very few examples of targets and no
comparator information against which to measure progress. The reports have
little in the way of commentary or analysis and no data on, for example, the
no-further-action rates of contacts, referrals or assessments, the number of
cases stepped down from childrens social care to early help and children
missing from home or care and/or at risk of child sexual exploitation. Thus,
the reports do not provide a comprehensive picture of the childs journey or
how well children and young people are being helped, cared for and
protected. (Recommendation)


Reporting arrangements between the Childrens Trust Board, the Health and
Wellbeing Board and the LSCB are well developed. The Childrens Trust Board
has been influential in gaining support for, and harnessing multi-agency
commitment to, the development of an effective range of early help services.
With its focus on prevention and integration, the Health and Wellbeing Board
has been a driving force behind the councils decision to move its existing
childrens centre to a central location, alongside the library in Oakham, in
order to extend its reach and impact.


Refreshed as an electronic repository of information about the needs and
characteristics of the local population, the joint strategic needs assessment
(JSNA) has evolved from being a single document to a series of rolling
assessments, which are responsive to changing circumstances. An
arrangement, whereby the director of public health for Leicestershire and
Rutland is seconded to Rutland one day a week, ensures that the JSNA takes
fully into account the distinctive needs and demographics of Rutlands
population. As a result, children and families are being supported effectively
by a wide range of services.


Although the local authoritys sufficiency statement describes the needs of the
current children looked after population and the level of existing provision to
meet those needs, it fails to offer an analysis of the mismatch between supply
and demand or explain how this is going to be addressed. Aside from general


statements about the need for more placements for teenagers and the
importance of succession planning, given the ageing profile of its in-house
foster carers, there are no recruitment targets. In the last three years, the
local authority has only managed to recruit four foster carers: two in 2014,
two in 2015 and none in 2016. This is contributing to the high proportion of
children looked after who are living out of area. (Recommendation)

The local authority has strengthened its capacity to commission and contract
manage services, and there is a much greater focus on outcomes. The design,
development, commissioning and procurement of services are increasingly
responsive to the needs of Rutlands residents. However, until recently, the
service level agreement that the local authority has with a neighbouring
authority to deliver adoption services on behalf of Rutland County Council, has
received very little time or attention. Action to address shortfalls identified in
this inspection has yet to be taken. (Recommendation)


The lead member is not afraid to question or challenge, and has made a
significant difference, both in the lives of individual children looked after and
through his work with the youth council to enhance the emotional well-being
and mental health support available to school-aged children and young
people. For example, he has helped to organise extra tuition for some children
and ensured that a mental health nurse is available in schools for one day
each week for children to access. However, progress in extending the reach
and influence of the corporate parenting board has been slow. Although there
is a process for making their views known, and the lead member attends
every third meeting of the Children in Care Council (CiCC), children looked
after and care leavers do not have any direct involvement with the board. The
pledge, which is in the process of being revised and updated, has yet to be
signed off and re-launched. Discussions about how best to acknowledge and
celebrate the achievements of children looked after, other than their academic
achievements, have yet to reach a conclusion. (Recommendation)


The chair of the LSCB regularly attends the Childrens Trust. The chief
executive also meets with the chair of the LSCB at periodic intervals,
sometimes with and sometimes without the DCS, and is in close contact with
her counterpart in Leicestershire with whom she monitors the work and
progress of the LSCB. A lack of consistent representation in the LSCB subgroup, which is responsible for scrutinising performance in key areas of
safeguarding, has now been addressed.


Senior managers and leaders have been slow in developing effective
performance management in some important areas. A performance
management culture is starting to grow, which is making effective use of
business intelligence in order to drive continuous improvement and deliver
better outcomes for children. The local authority has invested heavily in a new
electronic case management system and appointed a business intelligence
manager. However, work to realise the full functionality of the new case
management system, which went live in June 2016, is ongoing. Although the


early help scorecard is well developed, the performance scorecard for
childrens social care is still a work in progress. Currently, the local authority is
heavily reliant on a number of different tracker tools, and on the manual
generation of data, to populate reports.

During the course of this inspection, it became apparent that there were a
number of inaccuracies in the local authoritys child-level data, including, for
example, the number of assessments that had been completed without
children being seen and the number of children who were subject to a second
or subsequent child protection plan. Additionally, the way in which data is
being entered on the spreadsheets, which senior managers use to track
children at risk of child sexual exploitation and those missing from home and
care, undermines their effectiveness and means that the information has to be
manually analysed. While recognising that these are precisely the kind of
problems that the new electronic case management system is designed to
address, it means that, currently, senior managers cannot be confident that
they know precisely what is happening at the frontline.


The quality and effectiveness of management oversight and control at the
frontline have been problematic, as evidenced by the findings of the local
authoritys internal audits and the case tracking exercise completed by
inspectors. Senior managers have taken decisive action to address
performance issues. Since coming into post in September, the new head of
safeguarding has had a demonstrable impact. As well as strengthening
arrangements at the front door, by developing a more effective triage service
and improving the timeliness of assessments, she has revitalised the LAC and
ARC (looked after children and at risk of care panel) and introduced a
permanence flowchart. Although rightly proud of the progress that has been
made to date, she recognises that childrens social care is not yet where it
needs to be.


Despite the limitations of the tool that managers are using to track children
missing from home or care, senior managers maintain regular oversight of the
local authoritys response to missing children, including children looked after
who have been placed in Rutland by other local authorities. Reports of
children who are missing from school are cross-checked weekly against those
who are reported as being missing from home or care, and the head of
safeguarding chairs a monthly meeting which reviews the position of all
children who are at risk of child sexual exploitation and, or as a result of,
going missing. Since the start of the year, 20 children have been reported as
missing. During that time, only one Rutland child has been reported as
missing from care and that was a single episode.


Senior managers have adopted a systematic approach to strengthening
performance and improving the quality of practice. Measures taken, which
include the introduction of agreed practice standards, a robust supervision
policy and a quality assurance framework, and the adoption of a recognised
social work model, are underpinned by a strong focus on recruitment,


retention and workforce development. While the stability of the workforce has
improved, and the new head of service has introduced a greater level of
scrutiny of practice and performance, there is still some way to go to attain a
consistently good service for children and families.
children and young people, although not consistently across all parts of the
service. The lessons from monthly case audits, dip samples and childrens and
families feedback are shared with staff regularly, through a combination of
monthly quality assurance clinics with managers, monthly childrens
conferences with the entire staff group and supervision with individual
members of staff. Children are increasingly being seen alone and are
benefiting from good-quality direct work done by social workers and family
support workers who know the children well. This followed auditing, which
considered how well the childs voice was being considered in casework. The
quality and timeliness of assessments have also improved as a result of action
taken in response to an audit of assessments. However, managers recognise
that there is a need for greater consistency and that the service that children
and young people receive is still too variable.
this inspection, it only had two members. The local authority is taking action
to address this by, for example, making better use of social media to increase
SUSO's membership, engage more children looked after and increase their
opportunities to participate in decisions that have an impact on their lives.
Work is in progress to refresh the pledge, relaunch the Welcome to the
family booklet for children in foster care and produce and disseminate
information for children looked after and their carers about youth services. It
is, however, too early to evaluate the impact of this work, which is being led
by a senior youth and community development worker.
which have a significant impact on childrens lives, are made without
unnecessary delay. The appointment of the new head of safeguarding
provides an opportunity to strengthen the relationships with the Local Family
Justice Board (LFJB) through active participation in the LFJBs performance
and training sub-groups.
quality and consistency of supervision in childrens social care have been very
variable. However, inspectors found increasing evidence of reflective
supervision and clear case direction, and heard from social workers that the
level of support that they now receive from managers who are active and
visible has improved. (Recommendation)
have been problematic. This has had a significant impact on the quality of
practice experienced by children and the effectiveness of management


oversight. The workforce development strategy, which is comprehensive and
inclusive, is starting to bear fruit. Having introduced market supplements to
ensure that its packages of pay and remuneration for social worker and team
manager posts are more competitive, the local authority has been creative
and imaginative in using a range of different methods to attract and recruit
staff. From a previous position, when there were twice as many agency social
workers as there were permanent members of staff, the position has been
reversed. A new service manager is due to take up her post in January. This
will increase management capacity in childrens social care. Additional
investment in social work posts is reducing social work caseloads.
conferences involving the whole staff group are used effectively to share
information and learning, engage and motivate staff and promote continuous
improvement. Morale is good.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good

Executive summary
This Local Safeguarding Children Board is well run and effective. Rutland and
Leicestershire share the children and adult boards, which are chaired by the same
individual. Visible leadership by the chair and the engagement of leaders across
the partnership are helping to keep safeguarding high on the agenda in Rutland.
The board has developed an ethos of constructive challenge and support. It works
closely with the Safeguarding Adults Board and Leicester City LSCB on areas of
common concern, such as multi-agency training and safeguarding procedures. A
single business unit supports the board and the leads for its six strategic and three
joint priorities.
Drawing on a comprehensive, multi-agency dataset, regular thematic audits and
learning from case reviews, the board has established a wide-ranging evaluation of
the effectiveness of safeguarding, focusing clearly on childrens needs. However,
its section 11 audits are not sufficiently probing.
The boards scrutiny and influence have facilitated a better understanding of the
threshold into childrens social care, more timely identification of the health needs
of children looked after and the improving response which inspectors have seen
when children are at risk of sexual exploitation. Although it monitors completion
rates for return-home interviews for children going missing, it does not give
sufficient attention to the quality and effectiveness of these interviews in improving
risk management.
Its child death overview process is highly effective. A comprehensive analysis of
long-term patterns enables the board to influence wider health priorities and to
promote initiatives, which are improving childrens safety.
The board has developed an effective approach to evaluating safeguarding
training, demonstrating a positive and sustained impact for practitioners.
The LSCB has rightly emphasised the importance of childrens participation in the
work of the member agencies. There are ad hoc examples of the board and
partners reaching out to children. However, children are not directly influencing
the boards own direction and priorities.


Recommendations
management when children are going missing from home or care.
sufficiently probing.
wider community.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
safeguarding high on the agenda in Rutland. The board has successfully
engaged statutory partners and proactively reached out to voluntary and
community organisations to identify their safeguarding awareness and needs.
During 2016, staff changes in Rutland affected the availability of relevant
managers for sub-group meetings. However, attendance by board members
was consistent and this, along with the chair-attending meetings in Rutland,
ensured that key work streams remained on track.
with Leicester City LSCB and the Safeguarding Adults Board in areas of
common concern. This proactive and thoughtful approach provides regular
opportunities for members of these boards to meet together and supports
shared knowledge and a shared agenda.
drawing on regular audit and quality assurance activity, an extensive multiagency dataset and practitioners views.
confident about asking questions and challenging the professionals around the
table.
rate for 201718 as the current year.
questions and challenge each other while maintaining constructive working
relationships. Board members regularly scrutinise monitoring reports,
assessing improvement and challenging each other when performance is not
good enough.


attendance from the local authoritys representative at the relevant sub-group.
The sub-group did not allow this gap to delay the completion of multi-agency
audits, and the gap in attendance was addressed effectively. The audit
themes chosen link clearly to the LSCBs business priorities and learning from
serious case reviews. They direct attention to aspects of help and protection,
such as thresholds and child protection plans, in which the local authority
inspection findings demonstrate the need for scrutiny. Audit findings inform
practice guidance and training for practitioners, with a focus in the last year
on disguised compliance, a neglect toolkit and effective supervision.
has scrutinised practice through a joint report from the two local authorities
and monitors a wide range of relevant measures in the multi-agency dataset.
It has focused multi-agency auditing in this area on the experience of children
when intervention is stepping up from early help to childrens social care, or
stepping down from childrens social care to early help. This selective
approach makes sense and, given inspectors positive findings about early
help in Rutland, an additional audit is not an immediate priority.
who have disabilities. It has made good progress in recent months, analysing
data and preparing an audit tool ready for a multi-agency audit in 201718.
the health needs of children looked after are identified and addressed more
quickly.
are undertaken and published when the criteria are met. Decisions to delay
the recent publication of reports from serious cases from 2012 and 2014,
pending completion of criminal investigations, were appropriate. The board
provides regular learning events and bulletins to highlight lessons from audits
and serious case reviews. Such learning is disseminated, and action is taken,
prior to the publication of serious case reviews when required. Attendance at
these learning events has been generally good, including professionals from
both statutory and independent services. Inspectors found that Rutland social
workers whom they spoke to were aware of key messages disseminated by
the LSCB. These have been highlighted through monthly staff conferences and
meetings.
from serious case reviews. For example, in response to the recent child
murder case in Leicestershire, a powerful Kayleighs love story film is being
used proactively by early help workers, schools, police officers and social
workers to warn children of the dangers of online grooming.


these in response to local and national developments. This work is undertaken
jointly with Leicester City LSCB, an example of joint working arrangements,
which both independent chairs have keenly promoted. Recent examples
include strengthening guidance on bruising in pre-mobile babies, in the light of
serious case review findings, and updating the threshold document to cover
breast ironing, in response to emerging awareness of this issue.
implemented a communication plan, which includes a YouTube video and
engagement activities to raise awareness.
safeguarding children at risk of sexual exploitation, reflected in the wellstructured multi-agency work that inspectors found in Rutland. It has
exercised repeated scrutiny and challenge in relation to practice here. The
independent chair is proactively holding agencies to account and monitoring
the establishment of the multi-agency specialist child sexual exploitation hub.
A data analyst is bringing together information on hotspots and profiles of
offenders and victims. Training and guidance have been informed by regular
multi-agency auditing, and a further audit occurred at the time of the
inspection.
professionals awareness and understanding of child sexual exploitation, with a
sustained increase in the last year in child sexual exploitation-related referrals
to childrens social care. Professionals are also making greater use of a risk
assessment toolkit, which has been introduced to improve protection for
children at risk of child sexual exploitation.
but does not gather information on the quality of these interviews or on how
they are being used to reduce risk. (Recommendation)
challenging partners when improvements are needed. The LSCB sets targets
for improvement and has a clear auditing and monitoring process to assess
whether these are met.
range of other intelligence to evaluate the quality of help and protection and
does not rely solely on these audits, there is a mismatch between the high
level of compliance with standards as reported by member agencies in their
section 11 returns and the more comprehensive and accurate picture of
practice revealed when all of the boards audit and scrutiny activities are taken
into account. (Recommendation)


and challenge other strategic partnerships in their priority setting, for example
prompting discussions about early help and thresholds at the local authoritys
scrutiny committee. The LSCB and the local authority have worked with
schools and other partners to improve understanding of thresholds. The LSCB
annual report and inspectors findings show that referrals come from a range
of agencies, with the majority from education, along with increased
conversion rates from contact to referral year on year.
over the longer term has enabled the panel to identify patterns that might
otherwise be missed. It uses this intelligence well to raise awareness of safety
risks for children, inform improvements and influence wider health and wellbeing priorities. This is a particularly strong element of the LSCBs work.
of safeguarding training. This is also a significant strength. Post-training
survey data shows a consistent picture of safeguarding training having a
sustained impact on trainees skills, knowledge and confidence. The training
offer links clearly to LSCB priorities, reflecting themes from serious case
reviews and audit activity.
to professionals, in an effort to reduce the impact of the drop in practitioners
attending face-to-face training. A very informative Safeguarding matters
newsletter highlights learning from case reviews and audits and provides
practical guidance to promote improvement. Rutland County Council is using
the monthly conferences, which managers run with frontline staff, to help to
highlight these key messages. Voluntary sector representatives are promoting
training to local voluntary sector and community organisations.
the work of the member agencies. The board has agreed to make this an
integral feature across the work programme, although business plan progress
reports do not demonstrate that it is happening consistently, and a subgroup
established specifically to promote childrens influence proved unsuccessful.
There are individual examples of the board and partners reaching out to
children. For example, the chair meets with the youth council and CiCC.
However, overall, current arrangements have not been successful in enabling
the boards direction and priorities to be directly influenced and informed by
the views and experiences of children. (Recommendation)
effectiveness of safeguarding. Importantly for an LSCB covering two local
authority areas, it provides distinct findings about practice and performance in
each. For example, it assesses the impact of improvements in Rutland that the
board and member agencies are making with improving conversion of
contacts to referrals to childrens social care. This reflects the better quality of


referrals in recent months, which inspectors noted during the inspection. The
report notes future priorities, which were also identified by inspectors, such as
the need for more consistent managerial oversight, recognition and analysis of
risk, and ability to write SMART plans. This is transferred into the business
development plan, with actions such as the need for an improvement in
understanding, identification, risk assessment and management of neglect.
scrutiny and challenge has not had the desired impact. In particular, no cases
of children being privately fostered have been identified in Rutland despite
regular scrutiny through the boards quarterly performance data reports.
(Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and one
social care regulatory inspector from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Karen Wareing (HMI)
Deputy lead inspector: Nigel Parkes HMI
Team inspectors: Susan Myers (HMI), Lisa Summers (HMI), Pauline Higham HMI
designate), Russ Henry (HMI), Rosemary Chapman, John Mitchell (Senior HMI)
Senior data analyst: Neil Powling
Quality assurance managers: Sarah Urding (Senior HMI), Nick McMullen (Senior HMI)


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance, Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


