Sefton Borough Council

Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board1
Inspection dates: 11 April to 5 May 2016
Report published: 27 June 2016
Childrens services in Sefton require improvement to be good

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement




Requires improvement

Requires improvement

Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Sefton require improvement to be good. Services for children in
need of help and protection have not made progress since they were last inspected
in 2011 and services for children looked after have deteriorated. Some areas of
improvement identified then, such as ensuring that effective management oversight
is clearly recorded in case notes, have not been sufficiently addressed.
The director of childrens services (DCS), who took up his post in October 2015, and
the head of service (HOS), who has been in post since February 2016, both
demonstrate a detailed understanding of the service. In a short space of time, the
DCS has introduced measures to support more effective practice. These measures
include an increase in the establishment of full-time social work posts, the roll out of
technology to assist mobile working, and improved quality assurance activity.
However, the quality of assessment, planning and review of services for children and
families remains inconsistent. This inconsistency is seen in responses to early help,
children subject to child in need and child protection plans, children looked after and
care leavers.
All work with children and families is undertaken using a casework model. Workers
ability to use the model differs greatly. Generally, it is not used well in assessments
and plans.
The local authority has identified that the current structure of services does not
support its vision of ensuring that children have as few changes of worker as
possible. While the workforce is stable, children experience too many changes of
worker at important transition points, making it difficult for them to form consistent
and enduring relationships. Despite an increase in social work posts, caseloads are
too high in some areas, such as assessment teams, children looked after teams, and
the independent reviewing officers (IRO) service. These issues significantly
contribute to the poor quality of some assessments and plans seen, infrequent and
insufficiently analytical recording of management oversight and a lack of effective
challenge when practice requires improvement by managers and IROs alike.
Although childrens needs in relation to their ethnicity are well understood and
responded to, other needs, such as those arising from the impact of a childs
disability on their identity, are not always sufficiently explored. Diversity is not well
considered for some children.
The local authority has not met national minimum standards in relation to private
fostering. It did not provide an annual report to the Local Safeguarding Children
Board (LSCB) in 201516. There has been no active awareness raising with staff for
over 12 months and workers understanding of private fostering is poor.
When young people aged 16 and 17 present as homeless, some good work is
undertaken to ensure that those young people who should, do return home, and that
others are placed in accommodation that meets their needs. However, arrangements
are sometimes made with neither an assessment of whether the young person needs
to be looked after, nor a discussion with them about the benefits of becoming or
remaining a child looked after. While no young person was seen to be in unsuitable


arrangements as a result of this practice, it is not compliant with case law. In a very
small number of cases, young people aged 16 or 17 and care leavers had been
placed in bed and breakfast accommodation as emergency measures in the 12
months prior to the inspection, with neither a risk assessment being undertaken nor
the young person being provided with additional safeguards. This leaves young
people highly vulnerable. The local authority took swift action in response to learning
from this inspection and the DCS has issued appropriately revised procedures.
Most children and families benefit from good-quality support services, with
appropriate monitoring of their progress from social workers and family support
workers. This compensates for some of the deficits in core practice seen in this
inspection. No children were found to be in circumstances of unacceptable risk.
The local authority intervenes swiftly and effectively when children need to become
looked after. Good use of pre-proceedings agreements result in timely conclusion of
court proceedings. The vast majority of children looked after live in stable, goodquality placements and receive effective support for their educational needs. High
numbers of young people in Sefton are looked after by their parents, subject to
placement with parent regulations. Although no cases of young people being
inappropriately placed at home were seen, some young people remain subject to
care orders for too long, which exposes them and their families to statutory
intervention for longer than is necessary.
Good transition arrangements for care leavers with significant physical or mental
health needs ensure that they receive the services that they need as adults without
delay. Young people with lesser needs, such as mild anxiety or depression, often do
not get the help that they need quickly enough and remain too long in
accommodation that is unsuitable or that does not provide them with the level of
support that they need. Care leavers receive a wide range of good support to meet
their educational and employment needs, and this is preparing many of them for
adult life effectively.
The timeliness of children in need of adoption being placed with adoptive parents
has significantly improved. Other aspects of the service are weaker, such as the poor
contribution of the adoption panel to improving practice and lack of learning from
placement disruptions. Adoptive families receive very good adoption support, which
mitigates some of the deficits.
Strategic responses and practice when children go missing from home, care or
education or are at risk of sexual exploitation are very good and, in some instances,
highly innovative.
The local authority has a strong determination to improve services for children in
Sefton. Learning from independent and external scrutiny is used to inform
improvement planning. Participation of children and young people at a strategic level
is a strength. The Children in Care Council known as making a difference (MAD) has
made a significant contribution that is improving the services received by children
looked after and care leavers. The local authority recognises that the membership of
MAD needs to be extended to younger children so that their voices can be heard and
make a difference.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates three childrens homes. All three were judged good
or outstanding at their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
June 2011. The local authority was judged adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in June 2011. The local authority was judged good.
Local leadership
 The DCS has been in post since October 2015.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services and health.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since December 2012.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 53,480 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Sefton. This is 19.6% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 20% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 15.1% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 13.4% (the national average is 13.9 %).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 4.3% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Mixed and Asian/Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 3.9% (the national average is 19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 3.0% (the national average is 15%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 Sefton has a low proportion of residents from minority ethnic groups compared to
both national and regional rates.
Child protection in this area
 At 11 April 2016, 1,285 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a decrease from 1,720 at
 At 11 April 2016, 253 children and young people were the subject of child
protection plans. This is the same as at 31 March 2015.
 At 11 April 2016, one child lived in a privately arranged fostering placement. The
number as at 31 March 2015 had been suppressed due to small numbers.
 Since the last inspection, five serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and no serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at
the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 11 April 2016, 474 children are being looked after by the local authority (a rate
of 88.6 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 450 (85 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015. Of this number:
authority area
 six live in residential special schools3, of whom 50% live outside the
authority area
 four children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 11 adoptions
 seven children became subjects of special guardianship orders
returned to be looked after
independent living


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


 no children and young people who ceased to be looked after are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.
The casework model used in this area is signs of safety.


Recommendations

Ensure that all assessments of children, young people and care leavers are
timely, address all areas of risk and need and are updated regularly.


Ensure that management oversight and supervision are sufficiently regular
and rigorous to oversee the quality and progress of work effectively, and that
they are clearly evidenced on case files.


Ensure that case and care planning for all children, young people and care
leavers, clearly identify desired outcomes, with timescales, responsibilities and
measures in order to evaluate progress.


Ensure that timescales set for social work assessments and frequency of visits
to children are based on individual need and that performance monitoring of
social work practice rigorously evaluates quality as well as timeliness.


Ensure that for all children issues of diversity are fully considered in
assessment, planning, intervention and review.


Ensure that statutory requirements are met in relation to private fostering and
that training and awareness raising underpin prompt identification,
assessment and support for children in private fostering arrangements.


Ensure that practice in relation to homeless 16 and 17 year olds is compliant
with statutory guidance and case law.


Ensure that when children are placed with parents, the arrangements are
reviewed and, when necessary, the care order is discharged or other remedial
action is taken.


Ensure that IROs, social workers and managers have sufficient capacity to
undertake their work to a good standard and that those IROs and managers
challenge poor practice effectively, to improve outcomes for children and
young people. Ensure that all review meetings evaluate progress in achieving
outcomes effectively, and consider the effectiveness of interventions so that
future work can be appropriately directed.


Ensure that the adoption panel works with the agency decision maker to
champion good practice and that the adoption service takes swift action to
learn from any event that could inform practice, to prevent future placement
breakdown and to ensure that statutory requirements are met.


Ensure that care leavers get timely support for their mental health and
accommodation needs so that they can continue to make progress to become
successful adults.


Summary for children and young people
 Inspectors found that many services for children in Sefton could be better.
Leaders know what changes need to be made and are working hard to make
them as soon as possible.
 A wide range of good early help services means that families get help when they
first need it, including when they are experiencing domestic violence.
Arrangements to support children missing education are good and children who
go missing from home and care or are at risk of sexual exploitation get very good
advice and support, which helps them to keep safe.
 Some social workers and IROs have responsibility for too many children and
young people and this means that the quality of the work that they do sometimes
is not good enough. Managers do not always make sure that children are
receiving the right help to meet their needs as often as they should.
 Workers do not always have enough training to know how to give children who
are privately fostered a good service. They do not always explain clearly to
homeless young people the benefits of becoming a child looked after.
 Some children's plans are not good enough and it is difficult to understand how
professionals will support them or how their needs will be met. Some children
looked after who live at home continue to receive services when they no longer
need them. A few children who are looked after are not visited often enough
when their own social worker is off work.
 Children and young people who are looked after are generally doing well at
school, and staff make sure that they get all the support that they need to
achieve as well as they can and to enjoy what they are doing.
 Children looked after live close to their families and friends with carers who look
after them well. When children are adopted, they get good help to settle into
their new families quickly.
 Care leavers develop positive and trusting relationships with their support
workers, feel safe and get good help with their education and employment. Not
all of them live in suitable accommodation and sometimes they wait too long to
get specialist help if they are anxious or depressed.
 Although workers are good at making sure that they consider children and young
peoples cultures, they do not always think enough about other things that are
important to their identities, such as disabilities.
 Leaders in the local authority are good at listening to young people and at
responding. Young people help to improve services. They know that they make a
difference and that their achievements are well celebrated. However, more work
needs to be done to involve younger children.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

No children have been found in situations of unassessed or unacceptable risk
through this inspection. However, the variable quality of core areas of practice
means that, while some good-quality work was seen, too many children, young
people and families do not receive effective interventions that sustain risk reduction
and improve outcomes in a timely way.
Thresholds are generally applied well within the multi-agency safeguarding hub
(MASH) and by childrens social care. Almost all children and families referred receive
services at the appropriate level of intervention. Early help services are well
coordinated and meet a range of needs, using evidence-based interventions. The
recently established community adolescent service (CAS) is having an emerging
positive impact on addressing and reducing risk. Immediate risk is identified and
responded to well. Strategy meetings share information effectively, leading to timely
proportionate action to protect children.
The majority of assessments, including early help assessments, are not completed
within appropriate timescales for the child. Often, assessments do not analyse well
how any concerns raised are affecting the child. Assessments are not consistently
updated in response to changed circumstances. Although a specific casework model
is used, it is not well applied and most plans, including child in need plans and child
protection plans, do not prioritise important areas of risk or need, do not set
measurable outcomes with clear timescales and lack clear contingency planning.
Child protection conferences do not provide sufficient rigour in evaluating progress
and the effectiveness of interventions.
Sefton has not met national minimum standards in relation to private fostering, and
current practice does not effectively or appropriately identify private fostering
arrangements, which potentially leaves vulnerable children in living arrangements
that remain unassessed.
Young people aged 16 and 17 who become homeless receive immediate support
and, when they are not able to return home, a range of good-quality accommodation
is used. Assessments do not routinely specifically address or discuss with a young
person whether they need to become or remain looked after. These elements of
practice are not compliant with statutory guidance. In the 12 months prior to the
inspection, a very small number of young people had been placed in bed and
breakfast accommodation without appropriate risk assessment and management.
Good work is undertaken with children and young people who are at risk of child
sexual exploitation. This includes highly effective activity to ensure the safety of
young people who are placed in Sefton by other local authorities. Children who go
missing are promptly identified, and return interviews are of good quality.


Inspection findings

The early help strategy, led by the local authority, is well supported by partner
agencies. Coordinated services that meet a range of needs are closely aligned
to childrens social care with one access point into services, leading to more
timely early help service responses. Priority groups include children under five,
children who have disabilities, children at risk of substance misuse, crime and
anti-social behaviour and young carers. All groups have delivery services to
support them. The age range is covered effectively by 10 childrens centres,
four family centres and five youth hubs, with social workers being part of the
early help teams and providing therapeutic interventions to families. A wide
range of evidence-based practice is used in early help to ensure that families
make progress. The multi-agency CAS, established in July 2015, works closely
with young people who are at risk due to a range of issues, including child
sexual exploitation, gang affiliation and youth offending. The service is having
early positive results in reducing risk. Young peoples cases sampled clearly
show how plans had resulted in improvements in outcomes for the young
people and their families. This was particularly evident in relation to youth
offending, with some young people responding better to CAS because it is not
a statutory service.


The local authority monthly data gives a quantitative overview of early help
activity and details the outcomes of closed cases. However, it is not yet
sufficiently detailed to support a comprehensive analytical view of the quality
and outcomes of early help provision. A structured programme of training for
partners, including awareness training for early help plans, early help
assessment training and lead practitioner training, is supporting an increase in
more targeted work. The data shows that parents do not engage with the
early help offer in a quarter of the referrals but, as yet, the local authority and
partner agencies have not undertaken any analysis of the reasons or identified
what action could be taken to address this.


Early help assessments and cases that were seen by inspectors were located
in early help provision, consent had been gained and children and families
received a timely offer of help. A good range of services were supporting
children and families and regular team around the family (TAF) meetings were
evident in the majority of cases. The assessments identified areas of concern,
but the quality and method of recording was too variable and did not support
effective information sharing. The majority of plans did not identify
responsibility, timescales for completing actions or detail measures for
successful outcomes (Recommendation).


Thresholds are understood and applied well in the MASH. The MASH contact
officers consider contacts made from agencies, promptly pursuing additional
information when the contact was not sufficiently detailed. Decisions on next
steps are made by qualified social workers, and contacts are suitably redirected if they do not meet the threshold for childrens social care in a timely


way. Protocols for ensuring that consent has been obtained for referrals and
information sharing across the MASH have been recently implemented, and in
the majority of cases seen had been appropriately used. When the decision is
for no further action to be taken, letters are routinely sent out to families.

More children are receiving help at the right level at the right time and, in
some cases, the early help given is successful in preventing the need for
statutory intervention at a later date. Contacts that do not meet the criteria
for social care are promptly passed to the early help gateway, and, at the time
of the inspection, this constituted 36% of all contacts. The contacts to early
help have contributed to a reduction in the percentage of referrals to social
care that require no further action and to a reduction in the percentage of rereferrals: from 26.8% in 201415 to 17.6% in 201516.


Case management and transfer of cases between early help and social care
operate effectively in the vast majority of cases seen. Cases that step up to
social care do so due to significant changes in circumstances, including clear
escalation of risk. Early help services are suitably maintained to ensure
consistent support for families during and beyond the transition, depending on
the identified need. Cases that step down from social care are well
coordinated, with early help service attendance at meetings, to support a
coherent transfer.


Child protection concerns are appropriately prioritised, and, when there is a
risk of significant harm, prompt multi-agency responses ensure that the
immediate risk is identified, assessed and managed in a timely way. The vast
majority of strategy meetings are multi-agency and are well recorded with
clear actions. Child protection enquiries are timely and result in proportionate
subsequent actions. In cases seen that resulted in an initial child protection
conference, decisions to place a child on a child protection plan were
appropriate.


When risk is less immediate, the majority of assessments do not explore all
potential areas of risk or need and are not consistently updated in response to
changing circumstances, for example, the impact of a parents new partner on
the family or relationships within the wider community. Childrens lived
experiences are often not evident. The local authority does not set timescales
for assessment based on the needs of the individual child, and timeliness is
measured at the maximum of 45 days. Current reported performance for
completion within this timescale is 73%. This means that the outcomes of
assessments and decisions on future actions are often not timely and lead to a
delay in children receiving help when they need it. However, services are
provided as soon as they are identified in the assessment process
(Recommendation).


The quality of pre-birth assessments seen was a strength. They were almost
all of good quality, prompt and thorough. This informed timely planning prior
to the birth, reducing uncertainty for parents. In some cases, this helped them


to engage with services more effectively and in others ensured that there was
no delay in court proceedings when no progress had been made.

The variability seen in the quality of assessments is replicated in plans. The
large majority of plans do not sufficiently focus on important areas of risk and
need, and do not set measurable outcomes with clear timescales. Contingency
planning is absent or not sufficiently clear in too many cases. This means that
plans are not an effective mechanism to elicit change and do not result in
effective evaluations of intervention or support prompt alternative courses of
action (Recommendation).


Child protection conferences are well attended by partner agencies but do not
yet provide sufficient rigour when evaluating progress and the effectiveness of
interventions.


Visiting frequency for social workers is not defined in line with the childs
needs in the majority of child protection cases, but is measured at a 28-day
frequency. Although, in cases seen, social workers and family support workers
generally visited more often and increased their monitoring and oversight of
children in line with changing need, this is too dependent on the professional
judgement of the individuals involved. This, combined with irregular
managerial oversight, means that the local authority cannot be certain that its
current performance of 98% of child protection visits within timescales
ensures that all children are seen as often as they should be
(Recommendation).


Core groups with good partner agency attendance are held regularly, but, in
the majority of cases seen, updated information is shared without sufficient
reference to the plan and ongoing evaluation of risk. The views of children
and young people are evident on records from social workers or other
services, such as family support, but these are not consistently used to inform
planning and the reviewing and evaluation of work. Advocacy services, while
available to children who are subject to child protection plans in Sefton, are
not promoted well and take-up is low.


At the time of the inspection, 253 children were subject to a child protection
plan. Of those, 63% were subject to a plan due to emotional abuse and 16%
due to neglect. The local authority is working closely with the Sefton
Safeguarding Children Board (SSCB) to understand this. The SSCB has
delivered training across the partnership in the use of the graded care profile,
which is a tool used for measuring neglect to assist with early identification.
This tool has been incorporated into the social care electronic system. When
children are subject to a child protection plan for over 12 months, there is a
multi-agency challenge meeting for professionals involved, chaired by an
advanced practitioner. In contrast to most others, these meetings provide
rigorous scrutiny and challenge and provide clear direction for future work.
The local authority performance data shows that, as a result, the number of


children who have been subject to a plan for more than 15 months has
reduced from 10 in March 2015 to five in March 2016.

Workers do not always fully consider issues of diversity in their work with
children and families. For example, the effect of a childs disability on their
identity was not addressed in the majority of cases seen in which this was
relevant. More positive work was evident in relation to childrens cultural
heritage, including clear planning for consideration of contact with family and
linking them to community groups when appropriate. Interpreters were used
when necessary and important documents such as court reports and child
protection plans were translated to assist understanding (Recommendation).


Social workers feel supported by their managers, but management oversight
of casework is not sufficiently evidenced or recorded to ensure timely and
detailed monitoring of the quality of work or to ensure swift case progression.
There is significant variation in social work caseloads, and, when caseloads
are high, this can affect the social workers ability to work effectively. The
current service structure results in several changes of social worker. This
makes it more difficult for families to develop effective working relationships
and is exacerbated when joint visits are not undertaken as part of the
handover between workers. Nevertheless, some positive examples were seen
in which consistent social work support has been important in achieving
positive outcomes for children and families (Recommendation).


Clear, holistic and effective partnership working is evident for children at risk
of child sexual exploitation and who go missing. A clear pathway ensures
timely referral and access to services through the MASH. The missing and
child sexual exploitation group (MACSE) ensures timely information sharing,
case planning and risk management at an individual case level when children
are identified as at risk. Creative direct work that engages young people was
evident from case sampling and was seen to be making a positive difference
for some children. Sefton has developed an innovative approach to ensuring
risk management for children looked after who are placed in Sefton from
other local authorities. Return interviews for children who go missing are
tenaciously pursued and comprehensively completed by the developing
choices team. Information is shared appropriately among agencies and
subsequent actions are undertaken in line with identified risk and need.


The local authority has established effective links and prompt information
sharing with education partners. A multi-agency monitoring placement group
meets fortnightly to ensure that the whereabouts of all children are confirmed
and appropriate actions taken if they are not. The children missing education
(CME) coordinator is part of the MACSE, ensuring that additional vulnerabilities
as a result of children missing education are fully considered.


Currently, 88 children are registered with the local authority as being electively
home educated, and 54 children are being educated in medical facilities or at
home due to ongoing medical conditions. The arrangements to support these


families are thorough. All families who are registered receive an annual
welfare visit from staff, and the authority offers a range of additional support,
including online curriculum resources and exam venues.

Constructive partnership work in relation to children who are affected by
parental mental health, domestic abuse and alcohol and substance misuse is
evident in Sefton. The prevalence of issues affecting children known to
services is understood, and a range of services are available from statutory
and voluntary organisations. These services include some innovative work in
Sefton and the wider Merseyside area. For example, a pan-Merseyside pilot is
identifying and working with a small cohort of families based on the family
drug and alcohol (FDAC) court model. The local authority and statutory
partner agencies have a clear understanding of areas of practice that need to
improve, including planning, a focus on the impact on the child, and
evaluating effectiveness. They are fully engaged in action planning to improve
practice.


The multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC) meets fortnightly and
appropriately considers cases in which domestic abuse is a significant risk.
MARAC ensures that information is shared, children and young peoples needs
prioritised and actions directed that contribute to the safeguarding of children.
The current reported performance of 20% repeat referrals is better than the
national average of 25%. Recording of MARAC activity is minimal. Actions are
not outcome-focused and are not always fully recorded on the childrens social
care file. This does not assist communication, as workers are not always fully
informed of actions taken by other agencies.


Awareness-raising events in relation to prevention and identification of
extremism have been held in Sefton. No cases of concern had been identified
at the time of the inspection. Updated advice in relation to female genital
mutilation is available on the SSCB website, but no current cases relating to
this area of work were identified in the inspection.


Allegations management processes evidence appropriate referrals from a wide
range of agencies, including those from the private and voluntary sectors. The
post is located in the MASH, supporting timely information sharing and
coordination. An experienced, knowledgeable officer has developed clear
systems for receiving referrals, offering appropriate advice and ensuring that
appropriate actions are taken when needed. The database used allows for
continued monitoring and tracking of cases. Evidence was seen of effective
case management, with referrals to the disclosure and barring service made
when required.


Sefton has not met national minimum standards in relation to private
fostering, and current practice does not accurately identify private fostering
arrangements in all cases. An annual report was not presented to the SSCB in
November 2014, and the local authority accepts that this does not meet the


requirement of an annual report. Awareness raising among staff has not been
undertaken recently, and, although the authority does have a private fostering
champion, the role is largely dependent on staff contacting her for advice.
This, combined with the lack of frequency with which workers are required to
undertake private fostering assessments, means that there is no specialised
expertise developed and that understanding is variable. This is illustrated in
one case deemed as private fostering, although the parent was clearly not in
agreement with the placement, and in a second case in which a potential
private fostering arrangement was missed. The authority has put together an
action plan to address these deficits. This will be presented to the SSCB in
May 2016, but, at the point of the inspection, the identification and
assessment of the suitability of arrangements for this vulnerable group of
children have been insufficiently prioritised (Recommendation).

In the vast majority of cases when young people age 16 and 17 present as
homeless, concerted efforts are made to mediate with family members and
the young person, which result in the young people appropriately returning
home. When this is not immediately possible, a range of alternatives are used,
including respite care and short-term accommodation under section 20 of the
Children Act 1989. In cases sampled, the young person then moved on to
supported living arrangements, but these arrangements were made without
an assessment of whether the young person needed or wished to be looked
after. While no young person was seen to be in unsuitable arrangements as a
result of this practice, it is not compliant with statutory guidance or case law.
In a very small number of cases prior to July 2015, young people aged 16 or
measure, without a risk assessment being undertaken or additional safeguards
such as spot checks and support out of hours being in place. This leaves
young people highly vulnerable. The DCS is clear that bed and breakfast
accommodation should not be used, unless in exceptional circumstances and
only then for very short periods of time, and had instructed staff to this effect
upon his appointment in October 2015. As a result of learning from this
inspection, he has given a written undertaking that revised procedures will be
issued, ensuring that no young person is placed in bed and breakfast
accommodation, other than as a last resort following detailed risk assessment
and agreement of a senior manager (Recommendation).


No children were found to be in circumstances of unacceptable risk during this
inspection. Despite the deficits in some areas of core practice, many children
and families benefit from the range of support that they receive, and
outcomes improve for them as a result.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
The Community Adolescent Service (CAS) is successful in helping some young people
on the edge of care remain with their families. When children become looked after,
decisions are timely and appropriate. Public Law Outline (PLO) processes are used
effectively. However, too many children are placed at home with parents without a
thorough evaluation of the appropriateness of the placement.
The overall quality of case recording is not good enough and does not always reflect
childrens lived experience. Assessments lack analysis of some issues and neither
risks, such as identity, nor plans always prioritise important issues for children.
Often, children have too many changes of social worker, which makes it difficult for
workers to form consistent positive relationships with them. Social workers
caseloads are high and a small number of statutory visits have been significantly
delayed or missed.
IROs have caseloads that are significantly higher than is recommended in statutory
guidance. Although timeliness of children looked after reviews is good, the service is
not rigorous in challenging the quality of social work practice and quality of planning.
Initial and annual health reviews are not always timely, and there are delays for
some children in receiving child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS).
The education of children looked after is good. Their attainment and progress are
effectively supported by a well-led and suitably resourced virtual school. The
attainment gap between children looked after and their peers is reducing.
Responses to children and young people who are at risk of child sexual exploitation
and/or who go missing from care or from education are timely and effective.
Timeliness for children placed for adoption has improved and adoption support is a
strength. However, learning from placement disruptions has not been used to
improve practice. Life storybooks and later life letters are not given to children in a
timely way.
Care leavers enjoy positive and trusting relationships with their workers. However,
pathway plans are poor, some young people wait too long to have their mental
health needs assessed, and too many care leavers are currently in unsuitable
accommodation.
The Sefton children in care and care leaver council, making a difference (MAD), is
effective and influential but does not have any members under the age of 13.


Inspection findings

In instances when children have recently become looked after, the decisions
were appropriate and, in the majority of instances, timely. The PLO is used
well with families to address areas of concern. The number of children looked
after in Sefton at the time of the inspection was 473, a rate of 88 per 10,000
population. This is an increase from 450 in 201415, which was a rate of 85
compared with statistical neighbours at 77 and England averages of 60.


The local authority has a clear strategy on using preventative services to
reduce the number of children becoming looked after. The multi-agency CAS
was established in July 2015. The service works with children and young
people who may be on the edge of care due to a variety of reasons. For
example, they may be at risk of or involved in offending behaviour, including
gang membership and gun crime, at risk of child sexual exploitation or
domestic abuse, or may not be in education employment or training (NEET).
Although the service is quite new, there are already good indications that it is
having a positive impact, especially for children and young people involved in
offending or risk-taking behaviours.


When children and young people become looked after, the local authority
effectively prioritises permanence for children before their second looked after
review. Court proceedings are timely at less than 26 weeks.


When considering plans for permanence, social workers are good at
considering a range of options. The quality and timeliness of assessments for
court, including Regulation 24 placements with connected persons and special
guardianship orders, are good, with clear outcomes and recommendations.


A high proportion (21%) of children looked after in Sefton are currently placed
with parents. As a result of a recent audit by the local authority, additional
training has been provided for staff, and decisions for placement with parents
are subject to careful scrutiny by managers and legal staff to ensure that the
placement is the right one. However, for many children already placed with
parents, decisive action has not yet been taken to discharge care orders or to
take alternative action. Only three care orders for placement with parents
have been discharged since the end of December 2015, and 12 children have
remained placed with parents for more than five years. Although no young
people were found by inspectors to be living with parents inappropriately, it
does mean that some children and families remained subject to statutory
intervention needlessly, which is potentially intrusive to them and adds to the
already large workload of social workers and IROs (Recommendation).


The structure of social work teams in Sefton means that children have had too
many changes in social worker by the time they have a permanent plan to be
looked after. This, combined with high caseloads for some social workers,
means that too often children are unable to develop longstanding relationships


with adults and, in part, this contributes to the poor quality of casework across
services (Recommendation).

The quality of case recording, assessments and care plans is not good
enough. Assessments and plans submitted for court proceedings are generally
good, but others are not. Assessments include detailed information and
consideration of childrens views and those of family and others. Ethnicity and
identity details are recorded. Historical information is considered well.
However, overall assessments lacked analysis of many of these important
factors. Chronologies are not used effectively, risks are not always fully
considered and contingency planning is poor. Assessments are not updated
when childrens and young peoples needs change. Consequently, childrens
plans arising from the assessments do not emphasise the important issues
and risks. Management oversight and supervision of the quality of
assessments and plans lack rigour. As assessments are not routinely updated
when the circumstances and needs of children change, plans do not contribute
strongly enough to improvement in outcomes for children looked after in
Sefton (Recommendation).


Unusually high levels of sickness in some teams have led to a decline in the
frequency and quality of recording of statutory visits to children and young
people. This has resulted in insufficient consideration of some childrens
experiences. While in the majority of instances children and young people
have had contact with other professionals, it was only recently that managers
took effective action, in accordance with statutory guidance, to ensure that
their living circumstances had been reviewed and recorded by a qualified,
experienced social worker. In childrens cases, no young person was found to
be unsafe because of these deficits.


Caseloads for IROs are too high. At 30 September 2015, IROs had, on
average, responsibility for 65 children looked after and 33 children on a child
protection plan. Despite these excessive workloads, the completion of children
looked after reviews for this same reporting period was 98%, and 98% of
children over the age of four years provided their views for their review.
Compliance, therefore, is good. IROs prioritise well and ensure that they see
the most vulnerable children between reviews. This is good practice. However,
high caseloads impair the quality of some aspects of the service that IROs
provide. Critically, informal and formal escalation procedures are not used
often enough when concerns about childrens cases are identified, and
challenge is not always rigorous or effective, for example, in considering the
quality of childrens plans (Recommendation).


Placement stability in Sefton is improving for children and young people with
three or more moves. Long-term stability has remained relatively consistent
for several years, at around 69%.


The sufficiency strategy includes suitable regional and local responses to the
recruitment of foster carers. Shortages of foster carers within the local


authority have resulted in targeted recruitment and close working with
regional partners. Initiatives include targeting potential carers online and
commissioning through regional networks, such as fostering front door.
Recruitment of carers, however, remains a challenge regionally and nationally,
particularly for older young people with challenging behaviours and for
children in larger families.

Children are carefully matched to carers, and their views and wishes are
considered well. Brothers and sisters are consistently placed together unless
their plans identify that it would not be in their best interests. Good support
arrangements contribute to the stability of placements. For example, children
and young people receive support at a Sefton childrens home where staff
work to help them to build resilience and self-esteem to enable them to live
with foster families.


The fostering service is managed well to meet the needs of children and
young people as effectively as possible. Foster carers are positive about the
support that they receive, and training opportunities for all foster carers are
very good. This helps them to provide good care for children and young
people. The annual training calendar is comprehensive, and the training
coordinator is tenacious in ensuring that carers know what is on offer and are
encouraged to attend. Foster carers completion of the training and skills
development workbook has improved from 7% in 201415 to 69% in 201516
for mainstream carers, and to 15% for kinship carers. While this demonstrates
significant improvement, it is from a very low baseline. The local authority
recognises that more needs to be done, in particular, to improve kinship
carers engagement with training and has developed a tailored training
package for them to try to improve on this performance.


When a placement cannot be provided by Sefton, the commissioning team
explores placements with independent fostering agencies (IFAs) or
independent children's homes. Placements are only considered within services
that are judged as good or better by Ofsted. If judgements decline, the
service is reviewed and decisions to continue the placement risk assessed and
considered in the best interest of the child. The only instances when children
or young people are not placed in accordance with their care plan is when
they have complex needs that cannot be met, for example, when they would
benefit from placement with foster carers, but their needs are such that they
can only be met in a residential setting.


Case tracking of children and young people placed out of area showed
appropriate access to health services and education. However, given the
complex needs of some of these children, it is often difficult to sustain their
education, and alternative home support is provided. The health reviews for
children living out of area are monitored, with clear expectations for the
quality of these reviews communicated and quality assured. Case tracking
highlighted a lack of communication between some out-of-area childrens
homes and the local authority, which resulted in some poor planning and/or


slow responses to issues of concern, exacerbated by changes in social
workers.

The attainment and progress of children looked after in Sefton is effectively
supported by a well-led and suitably resourced virtual school with firmly
established governance arrangements. Currently, pupils at key stage 1 to key
stage 2 are generally making expected levels of progress given their starting
points. However, levels of progress from key stage 2 to key stage 4 continue
to be a challenge, and a number of pupils are not yet making good progress.
The use and close monitoring of the pupil premium, including ongoing one-toone support, is beginning to have an impact on closing the attainment gap for
this group of pupils.


For the 40 pupils who were eligible to sit GCSEs in 2015, 21% achieved five
GCSEs at A*to C grades, which is above the national rate of 18% for children
looked after. They also achieve one percentage point above the national rate
of 14% when English and mathematics are included.


At the time of the inspection, 22 children looked after were receiving
alternative education. In all cases, the authority make careful checks into the
quality and suitability of the provision, and all provision is registered.


Personal education plans are generally fit for purpose and identify effectively
barriers to learning and the teaching strategies to overcome these barriers. Of
particular note is the detail in relation to the use of pupil premium, which in
most cases carefully identifies how additional money will be spent in
supporting the current progress of pupils, including one-to-one tuition,
therapeutic intervention, accessing the wider curriculum and providing
laptops.


Children and young people enjoy a wide range of leisure activities that support
their wider emotional and social development, both at home and in school.
Within school, children can enjoy music lessons and horse riding. At home,
carers support children and young people well to become involved in social,
recreational and friendship building activities. Passes are provided to enable
them to use local authority leisure services.


Arrangements for supervised contact are provided through the family support
workers or by social workers. Reports are completed by workers and used to
inform planning and assessments. However, although the contact reports
sampled included detailed information of observations, they lacked analysis to
inform ongoing work fully.


Well-coordinated systems and procedures for children who are at risk of child
sexual exploitation and/or who go missing ensure timely and effective
responses. When children and young people are reported missing from care,
prompt action is taken. The developing choices team persists in contacting
children to undertake return home interviews. These are not always


completed or completed within timescales. This is not because of a lack of
capacity within the team, but because of refusals and difficulties in engaging
young people. When children go missing on a regular basis, appropriate action
is taken, including strategy discussions and, when necessary, referrals are
made to the child sexual exploitation team for review and action.

Sefton has well-established and comprehensive arrangements to report, track
and locate any children missing from education. A children missing education
coordinator works effectively across all groups and the MASH for those
missing, including children missing from care, to ensure prompt
communication and effective action across agencies and the MASH. This
means that the vast majority of children missing education are located and
that they remain on the school roll until they are found.


Children and young people looked after who are at risk because of substance
and alcohol misuse benefit from timely intervention, support and advice from
the Sefton multi-agency substance misuse hub (SMASH) service worker, who
is co-located within the corporate parenting team. Responses to ending gang
and youth violence are effective, using innovative work to target children
vulnerable to bullying and intimidation.


The timeliness of initial and annual health assessments is not good enough. In
continuously for at least 12 months had received an annual health
assessment. Current data shows that this is now improved to 85%. This is still
below the statistical neighbour average of 92% for 201415 and below the
England figure of 90% for the same year. The timeliness of initial health
assessments is currently 54.7% within the 28-day timescale. Action is being
taken to improve the timeliness of these, including plans to enable nurses to
use the local authority electronic recording system to improve communication.


CAMHS for children and young people who are looked after are currently
coordinated through Alder Hey hospital via a single point of access. All
children and young people who are looked after are guaranteed an
assessment, and initial triage and screening determines the urgency of
referrals. Access for children looked after to CAMHS follows a consultation
model, in recognition of their increased vulnerability, and children will usually
be seen within two weeks. It is acknowledged by health and childrens
services that waiting times for some children are too long, and better ways of
working are being rolled out through development and coordination between
health and childrens social care of a therapeutic support service. Foster carers
who have had experience of this service are uniformly positive and report
overall that when children need some specific help or input is was made
available.


Older children and care leavers in Sefton are very well represented by MAD.
The group is highly influential in shaping services for children looked after.
Members of the group highlighted issues with entitlements to benefits for care


leavers, which resulted in Sefton pioneering a protocol with the Department
for Work and Pensions to ease the transition for care leavers applying for
benefits and seeking work following their 18th birthdays. This has
subsequently been rolled out nationally as an exemplar of good practice. The
Sefton pledge to children in care and care leavers is given to all children when
they first come into care and is also re-distributed on a regular basis with the
annual survey. This ensures that children looked after are made aware of their
rights and entitlements, including how to complain. Despite the significant
achievements of MAD, there is insufficient representation of the wider children
looked after population and no representation for children under the age of

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement

Seftons adoption service was made the subject of an improvement notice
between December 2012 and June 2014 due to its poor performance in
placing children with adopters quickly. Since that time, effective tracking
systems that ensure that childrens plans consider permanence at an early
stage and monitor their progress through care proceedings have been
routinely used, and unnecessary delay is avoided. Oversight of progress by a
dedicated family finder and senior managers through adoption permanence
panels ensures that plans do not drift. Good communication with the family
finder enables the adoption team to give early consideration to the adopters
already approved and those who are in the assessment process as potential
matches for children.


The authoritys performance against the Department for Educations adoption
scorecard shows a year-on-year improvement in timeliness performance. In
entering into care and moving into an adoptive placement. This is an
improvement from the previous period of 201114, when the average time
was 54 days longer. Unvalidated data provided by the local authority for
children adopted in the past 12 months shows a further reduction to 305 days,
which is significantly better performance than the target of 487 days set by
the Department for Education.


In the last year, there has been a reduction in the numbers of children
adopted. Eleven children were adopted in 201516, which is 8% of the
children looked after population. In the previous year, 20 children were
adopted, 13% of the children looked after population, and seven children
were made subject to special guardianship orders. The reasons for the
reduction in the number of adoptions are not fully understood by the local
authority. Inspectors saw no cases in which children who should have been
considered for adoption had not been.



The local authoritys average number of days between receiving the court
authority to place a child to be adopted and the authority deciding on a match
to an adoptive family in 201215 was 253 days, which is an improvement on
the 282 days for 20112014. This is still 132 days outside the national
scorecard threshold of 121 days. However, in the last year, despite having five
children over the target number of days, the average for all 11 children was
target.


In the last year, seven out of the 11 children adopted were placed outside of
the local authority. One reason for this is that the adopters recruited and
approved by the local authority did not match the needs of the children with a
plan of adoption. The local authority does not target recruitment to the needs
of children waiting or projected future need. Recruitment is limited to general
advertising and a campaign on social media. Currently, there is no strategy for
fostering to adopt placements, and only one such placement was made in the
last year. The effectiveness of recruitment has not been analysed, nor the
means of attracting adopters able to meet a diverse range of needs explored.
Despite its lack of targeted recruitment in 201516, Sefton placed more
brother and sister groups together than the national average.


Adopters are positive about the quality of information and the welcome that
they receive when making an enquiry to become adopters. This includes
relevant literature and research findings, and adopters are asked to complete
a comprehensive workbook at stage one. They attend a three-day preparation
group, which is alternately hosted by the local authority and a neighbouring
local authority. The service does not receive timely feedback from the other
local authority when they have run the preparation group, which can delay
progression to the next stage. However, regular visits to the families
throughout this time to support the pre-approval process mean that few drop
out. The majority of assessments are timely and comprehensive, and delays
are due to factors outside of the control of the service. Adopters in the last
year have been from a suitably diverse range of backgrounds and family
composition, and include people from ethnic minorities, single people and
same-sex couples. The prospective adopter reports seen by inspectors were
comprehensive and thorough. However, in the past year, a number of
assessments that were not of the same quality were completed by a
contracted agency, and had to be deferred by panel while missing information
was added. This has slowed the approval process for some adopters. Once
adopters are approved and when there is not a match within the local
authority, family finding is promptly extended regionally and nationally.


The dedicated family finder is proactive in pursuing options and links for
children through a range of contacts, such as the national adoption register
and exchange days. Currently, there are five children waiting for a suitable
match. Child permanence reports (CPRs) are rarely updated following the
court process, and, therefore, information provided is not current, at this early
stage. This means that for some children potential carers may be ruled in or


ruled out inappropriately, based on analysis of childrens needs that is no
longer accurate as they grow and develop.

In the year 201516, none of the 11 Sefton children placed for adoption both
with Sefton adopters and adopters from other local authorities experienced a
disruption of the placement. However, Sefton adopters experienced unusually
high levels of placement disruptions. Altogether, over half of the children
placed with Sefton adopters by other local authorities in that year suffered a
disruption. No formal consideration of learning or identification of themes has
happened and, consequently, no actions have been taken to prevent further
disruptions in the future. In one case, the report of the childs disruption
review undertaken in October 2015 was not received by the adoption service
until requested by an inspector. This does not demonstrate sufficient urgency
to learn from these childrens and adopters experiences in order to prevent
future breakdowns, and is very poor practice (Recommendation).


Due to changes at a senior management level, there have been three agency
decision makers in the last year. This has inevitably led to a lack of continuity,
and there has been no formal meeting between the agency decision maker
and the adoption panel chair in the last 12 months. The chairs performance
reporting lacks rigour. Essential information, such as the ages and ethnicities
of children, is not included and reporting fails to reference the disruptions that
have taken place. Areas for development in relation to the panel identified in
and use of regional comparative data to benchmark performance
(Recommendation).


The panels membership is too narrow. Although recruitment is ongoing, a
skills gap analysis has not been undertaken and recruitment has not been
targeted. The panel currently lacks expertise in the field of education, and
there is a gender imbalance. A panel member who has experienced adoption
has recently been recruited. This is a positive step. The panel seeks feedback
from those who attend. Some applicants reported that the panel had been a
negative experience. The panel has changed its questioning process in
response to this feedback, although it is too early to measure whether
applicants now have a more positive experience.


The panel provides individual feedback on the quality of the CPRs and
prospective adopters reports. However, it has made no challenge to the
agency decision maker (ADM) or agency adviser when poor or incomplete
assessments are presented, resulting in delays in decision-making. This,
combined with changes of ADM, means that senior managers were not fully
aware of areas for development in relation to the effectiveness of the panel
and the adoption service as a whole (Recommendation).


Once children have been matched, adopters report that the matching process
and introductions were completed at the childs pace. The adopters felt that
they had enough information and if they had any questions, they were always


provided with the answers. Moving on meetings are held to ensure that
professionals and carers have a shared understanding of processes and
timescales. A comprehensive childrens guide is available in three different
versions, to support children of different ages. However, in the last year there
has been no service statement of purpose available, which is a statutory
requirement of an adoption service.

Adoption support is an area of strength. Effective support is available to birth
families, children and adopters. A wide range of support is available, including
direct work with families, letterbox contact, direct contact supervision and
general advice giving. A range of therapeutic services are available through
the use of the adoption support fund. Following a social work assessment,
appropriate support is provided. Support packages are available to all adoptive
families, regardless of the length of the placement. The support offered is
timely and responsive. The service also offers a range of activities to adopted
children, such as bowling, walking and residential trips as well as direct work.


The service-produced life storybooks are of a good standard. However, to
date, children have not received them soon enough. Due to a backlog, books
were commissioned from an external provider, but this caused a further delay
due to more work being required before they met the services appropriately
high standards. Later life letters are of a good standard but too often delayed,
with only three out of the 11 children adopted last year having received them.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement

The local authority is in touch with all but three of the 287 care leavers. Two
of these care leavers have returned home and do not want to engage with the
service, and a third care leaver is out of touch. Personal advisers are highly
experienced and provide a very supportive and effective service. However, a
recent restructure of the leaving care service means that their work with care
leavers often starts after the care leavers are 18. This means that there is only
a short time to engage with and equip young people for independence.
Increasing workloads in the leaving care team are further affecting the ability
of workers to meet the presenting needs of care leavers.


The vast majority of care leavers feel well supported by their personal
advisers and build helpful and trusting relationships with them. Staff are
particularly skilled at helping young people to understand the potential
outcomes of their behaviour, especially in relation to risks, including those that
might affect their sexual, emotional and physical health. As a consequence,
almost all care leavers spoken to by inspectors have a good understanding of
how to keep themselves safe and say that they feel safe.



Pathway plans are not effective planning tools. The majority are too
descriptive, and are insufficiently analytical of the reasons behind the lack of
progress that some care leavers make. This results in targets for remedial
action not being specific or memorable enough for care leavers to understand
what needs to happen. None of the care leavers spoken to for the inspection
remember completing a pathway plan and therefore could not comment on its
usefulness or otherwise.


Of particular concern is the consistently poorly completed education section of
the pathway plan, with few identified actions or options to ensure that young
people are appropriately advised and guided to secure employment or training
as part of the recorded plan. The local authority recognises that the current
pathway plan requires improvement and, as a result, a new plan is currently
being reviewed by young people to ensure that it is fit for purpose
(Recommendation).


Despite pathway plans not being sufficiently focused on education, other
useful work is being done to support young people into education, training
and employment. A well-established corporate apprenticeship scheme has
been running since 2010 and has successfully supported over 30 care leavers
into apprenticeship or employment. As a result, a number of care leavers are
now employed by the authority and two ex-care leavers are employed by a
local charity that supports care leavers.


For those care leavers who choose not to stay on in school beyond Year 11
and who are not quite ready for an apprenticeship scheme, there are
opportunities for structured appropriate work experience that supports them
to develop good employability skills. This helps young people to improve their
confidence and to develop independence. The programme was developed in
risk of disengaging are well supported back into training, and 35 care leavers
have benefited from the scheme since it started.


The current numbers of care leavers who are NEET is 25%. This figure is
lower than the most recently published figures for comparators. However, the
figure rises considerably, to over 40%, for those care leavers aged over 19
years. A thorough tracking system is used to monitor employment and training
destinations for this group, and targeted interventions are made to engage
young people in education or training. Examples include one-to-one advice
and guidance sessions, introductions to potential work placements and
support to attend college courses. A useful protocol has been established with
the Department for Work and Pensions that prevents delays in care leavers
applying for benefits and seeking work following their 18th birthday. As a
result of the above initiatives, the numbers of older care leavers who are
entering training or employment is steadily rising, but this is still lower than
the number of young adults in the general population who are entering
training or employment.



Long-standing and purposeful relationships with two local colleges support
effectively the 53 care leavers who are currently attending further education
programmes. For the 11 care leavers who are in higher education, a good
package of support, including financial and emotional support, is helping them
to achieve. One young person has successfully completed an undergraduate
degree and the authority is now supporting them to complete a Masters
programme.


The transition arrangements for those care leavers with an identified and
long-standing disability are good, and they are well supported to access adult
social care services in a timely way. However, when an assessment is required
to establish whether care leavers meet the criteria for adult social care, the
wait is sometimes too long and there is consequently a delay in their receiving
all the services that they need as adults. For example, a small number of care
leavers have waited for adult social care assessments for over a year. This has
resulted in these young people remaining in circumstances that have not
necessarily met their changing needs, for example, remaining in a residential
childrens home. In another case, a care leaver remained in supported
lodgings, which were never meant to be a long-term placement
(Recommendation).


Care leavers are routinely provided with helpful health information and health
passports. In 201516, 21 health passports were issued. Nurses are available
to provide support, advice and written information. As a result, care leavers
are well supported in relation to their physical health. This is not the case for
their oral health, as very few of them attend the dentist regularly.


All those spoken to recognise the need to take responsibility for their own
health needs. However, a significant number of care leavers expressed
concern about their mental health needs not being well addressed. This is
because of the long wait to access appropriate mental health services. Some
of the tracked and sampled cases evaluated by inspectors also identified and
confirmed this concern.


Care leavers are generally well supported to develop their independence and
self-help skills by access to a charity-run care leavers centre, Our Place. The
centre works effectively in partnership with the local authority. Staff at the
centre, two of whom are former care leavers, provide useful and bespoke
support, helping young people to develop the skills that they need to live
independently, for example, budgeting and cooking. They also provide pretenancy and tenancy support, and counselling and well-being sessions. At
present, the number of care leavers regularly accessing the centre is small.
However, attendance is growing steadily, particularly since personal advisers
are now working out of the centre.


The majority of care leavers live in appropriate housing and are safely and
well accommodated. The growing numbers of care leavers who are staying
put with former foster carers is increasing slowly, and currently 11 care


leavers are benefiting from these arrangements. Three care leavers have been
in bed and breakfast accommodation recently, including one care leaver at the
start of the inspection. In all cases, this was in response to an emergency. In
all three cases, no risk assessments were completed, despite some of the
young people having significant vulnerabilities. A small number of other care
leavers remain in unsuitable accommodation, with four care leavers in family
situations that are unstable and 11 in custody. Personal advisers maintain
strong links with care leavers while they are detained and collaborate well
with other agencies to achieve stability for them on their release, which
reduces the risk of re-offending.

A wide range of accommodation is made available to care leavers, including
supported lodgings, and support with gaining their own tenancies is provided.
While care leavers are given some priority on the local housing waiting list,
they are not included in the highest band. A shortage of social housing,
particularly in the north of the borough, combined with greater priority given
to other groups, such as ex-army personnel, means that some care leavers
wait too long for housing in their preferred area. The local authority
recognises that young people from the north have a very different, distinct
cultural identity from those in the south and is forging links with private
providers to increase the range of choices, but this does not offer the security
of social housing. Some staff spoken to for the inspection reported
reservations regarding the quality of some provision. Issues of concern
included the lack of structured support for young people, poor communication
with the leaving care service, and limited help in preparing young people well
for their future independence. Managers have responded effectively to these
concerns, and a recent re-tender process has been undertaken, focusing on
the quality of provision, and on reducing the number of providers from 57 to
improvements to the service (Recommendation).


Many of the care leavers spoken to by inspectors are justifiably proud of their
achievements, including becoming successful parents. They all agreed that
their achievements are well celebrated by the service through well-attended
annual events that a number of them help to organise, but also by the
ongoing and continual encouragement from staff. All care leavers spoken to
by inspectors know their rights. This is particularly well disseminated by the
MAD group, which ensures that care leavers have a good understanding of
their entitlements, including ongoing financial support if they remain in or
return to education or training.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Although the local authority has taken action to improve services since the last
inspection, progress has been erratic and has not yet resulted in consistently good
services for children, with some recommendations still not addressed. A highly
effective multi-agency strategy in relation to children at risk of child sexual
exploitation has resulted in some innovative practice, and some good practice was
also seen in other areas. However, some core social work services require
improvement, and responses to some vulnerable groups of young people, such as
those who are privately fostered and homeless 16 and 17 year olds, have not been
rigorous enough.
There is a clear alignment between strategic partnerships in terms of priorities that
are well informed by the joint strategic needs analysis (JSNA). The childrens trust
arrangements have recently been subsumed into the Health and Wellbeing Board
(HWBB) in recognition that the HWBBs consideration of childrens issues was too
limited. It is too soon to determine the effectiveness of these changes. The DCS
demonstrates strong leadership and is well supported by the chief executive and
elected members who have a realistic overview of the service, and the pace of
change is now increasing. While leadership is strong and governance arrangements
are sound overall, there are important areas of management that are weak and need
attention in order for this area to be judged good overall.
Caseloads are excessive in some areas, and workers do not always have sufficient
time to provide a good service. Management oversight and supervision are
insufficiently regular or challenging. Although the local authority has taken action to
improve the quality of supervision and challenge to practice by managers and IROs,
this is not yet evident in casework, and the quality of social work practice remains
too variable even within teams in which caseloads are low. The local authority has
identified that structure and transfer of work across services contribute to this
unequal distribution of work and does not achieve its vision of consistent
relationships for children and young people. Currently, too many children and young
people experience changes of worker at important transition points when they would
benefit most from continuity.
Performance management has been an area of significant development in the last
year and there has been a vast improvement in the quality of data. Monthly
performance meetings help to identify deficiencies in practice, but action planning
has been limited. The local authority improvement board, for example, has not set
targets to measure success. Audit and quality assurance activity have been
significantly improved. The recently refreshed quality assurance framework is
rigorous and includes targeted quality assurance in important areas. Findings are
used well to influence workforce development.


Inspection findings

The local authority has a clear determination to improve services for children
in Sefton. Senior leaders have high aspirations demonstrated by the
introduction of an improvement board three years ago, chaired by the chief
executive. While this has ensured that the chief executive and the lead
member receive regular updates on action taken to improve practice, the
impact of the board has been limited. In recent months, with the benefit of
external review, the board has recognised that progress has not been as
significant as it needed to be. While some of the issues identified during the
previous inspection in 2011 have been addressed, others, such as poor case
recording and insufficient management oversight, continue to have a negative
impact on the quality of service that most children receive.


The recently appointed DCS and even more recent head of service
demonstrate an impressive and detailed understanding of the quality and
impact of frontline practice. They are both highly visible, and the DCS has
undertaken direct observations with social workers to help him to understand
the challenges. They have quickly identified some important strategic
priorities, including introducing technology to support mobile working and
reducing caseloads. Almost all of the areas of development highlighted in this
inspection had been identified and actions had been planned or were
underway to support better social work practice.


The DCS also has strategic statutory responsibility for adult social care
services and health. Although this is a wide span of control, it gives him
oversight of the interface between services. An appropriate statement of
assurance has been undertaken to ensure that he has the capacity to fulfil
these statutory responsibilities.


Sefton childrens services benefit from the strong involvement of the chief
executive, elected members and an appropriately challenging lead member.
The regular sharing of information via a variety of methods means that they
have a realistic overview of the strengths and weaknesses of the service and
understand the improvement journey. Childrens services have not been
subject to wholesale reductions in resources and have benefited from
additional investment to improve service development.


Governance arrangements across the strategic partnerships are clear, with
joint priorities through all of the strategic plans, informed by the JSNA. The
HWB has not prioritised childrens issues sufficiently. This has been recognised
by the local authority and partner agencies, and proposed changes to the
structure and governance of HWB to include the childrens trust arrangements
provide a much-needed opportunity to give broader consideration of the
children and young peoples plan and wider safeguarding issues. The board,
however, has not yet met under the new arrangements, and its effectiveness
is yet to be tested. Mental health and emotional well-being are clear priorities


across all the boards and partnerships identified from the strategic needs
analysis. This has led to a formal agreed strategy but, as yet, some children
and young people continue to wait too long to access appropriate services to
address their emotional and mental health needs.

The overview and scrutiny committee meets regularly, with good attendance
from elected members. It considers a wide range of information, including
national and local issues. The value of the committees oversight of
performance is limited because it does not receive routine performance
information and has not undertaken any formal scrutiny reviews in the last
year.

championing the need for an independent review of the board concluded in
January 2016. This resulted in a number of recommendations to improve the
functioning of the board and to ensure that it meets its statutory
responsibilities. The lack of follow up or challenge has left the local authority
vulnerable as multi-agency policies and procedures do not meet statutory
requirements. However, there were no cases seen in this inspection in which
children had not received an appropriate service as a result of the boards
failure to update procedures.
and the work of the board contributes to the improvement of outcomes for
children looked after in Sefton. Chaired by the lead member and with
membership from across the council and wider partnerships, including care
leavers, it has been instrumental in setting up effective systems for monitoring
children and young people looked after placed in Sefton and those from other
areas, ensuring that they are safe and receiving appropriate services. Strong
challenge from board members and especially the MAD group is evident. The
annual survey in relation to the pledge for children who are looked after is an
example of good practice because it is clear that children and young people
are listened to and that action is taken as a result. An example is the
development of an action plan to promote advocacy to children and young
people after increasing numbers reported that they did not know about the
service.
does not have an associated commissioning plan to identify the important
priorities for children. The commissioning arrangements are closely linked to
local need, with priorities aligned with the JSNA and shared strategic
objectives across the HWB. Joint commissioning arrangements are evident,
and a review of substance misuse services has led to a streamlining of
providers and a more family-orientated service provision. The regional review
and recommission of services for children leaving care has not yet been fully
implemented, but the aim is to provide a more flexible approach to
commissioning services so that these meet the bespoke needs of each young


person. Only those services that meet the identified quality standards will be
considered.
provides a detailed overview of service demands, and there is an appropriate
prioritisation to reduce the numbers of children who need to become looked
after. To support this, the authority successfully bid for a social work
innovation fund grant and has used this to establish the CAS, which is
demonstrating some early indications of potential success. Sefton uses a
number of purchasing frameworks to increase placement choice and these
frameworks support better market management and performance monitoring
through effective quality assurance standards and processes.
Sefton. Recruitment and retention is a strength. Sefton benefits from a
relatively stable workforce, with low sickness (6%), and low turnover rates
(6.85%). Use of agency staff is minimal and mainly to cover maternity leave
and sickness when needed. A number of these workers are recruited to
permanent posts when they become available. This stability should contribute
to social workers being able to build effective and meaningful relationships
with children and families, which is a priority for the service. This is not,
however, supported by the current structure, where there is the potential for
children to have three or four changes of social worker at important transition
points, which is when they need consistency most. The local authority has
appropriately identified that a review of the structure is required and the need
for swift effective contingency planning in the event of future unplanned staff
absence.
have in excess of 30 children, which is not reflective of the caseload
management policy. Visiting children within timescales is a clear priority but
not always achieved in periods of high demand within the children looked
after service. High caseloads contribute to the variable quality of assessments
and direct work completed with children and young people. The increased use
of mobile working is having a positive impact but it is not yet available to all
social workers (Recommendation).
management oversight is often poorly recorded across all areas of the service.
This means that that no audit trail is provided and risks miscommunication of
what has been agreed. Staff supervision is not always regular enough and, in
most cases, it is either not recorded in a timely manner or the quality of the
recording is poor. As a result, neither line management endorsement of
practice nor challenge are consistently evident. Senior managers are aware of
these weaknesses and are taking authoritative action to improve supervision
practice. This is recent and has not yet resulted in discernible improvement on
the ground (Recommendation).


aspirations for the workforce and the actions needed to achieve them. The
workforce development team has undertaken a recent training needs analysis
and works closely with operational teams to understand the training
requirements of social care staff. This results in an extensive training offer,
which complements that offered by the SSCB. Learning from audit activity has
been used well to identify staffs developmental needs. For example, practice
weaknesses, identified through audit, have led to the commissioning of
specific training and development programmes, such as that on promoting the
childs voice.
service to understand and improve social work practice nor offered any
challenge in relation to significant issues, such as high caseloads. Until
recently, the role was undertaken by the head of service. Prior to this
inspection, the local authority changed arrangements in recognition that an
important function of the role is independent challenge. It is now undertaken
by an advanced practitioner in each part of the service. This is very new, and
the effectiveness of these arrangements is yet to be determined.
at risk of child sexual exploitation and those who go missing from home, care
or education. These arrangements underpin information and intelligence
sharing and support proactive work on the ground. The DCS maintains a clear
understanding of need and risk in this area through chairing the SSCB child
sexual exploitation and missing subgroup. The provision of services for
children who are at risk of child sexual exploitation or who go missing are
effective overall. Partners and senior and political leaders work well together
to understand the prevalence of child sexual exploitation and to establish
effective ways of overseeing and reducing local need and risk.
information over the last year. The range of data available within the service is
now much more accurate. Monthly performance meetings help to identify
deficiencies but, until recently, did not set clear actions with timescales to
measure success. Further development of the performance dashboard would
be beneficial as the lack of data for important areas such as care leavers and
adoption means that there is not a consistently presented overview of all
areas. The dashboard uses regional and national benchmarking to help the
understanding of progress, but lacks specific targets for measuring success in
Sefton.
improved. The recently refreshed audit cycle ensures that regular and
independent case audits are undertaken across the service. The senior
leadership team and the performance and planning group receive summary
reports that help to identify how the important findings can be cascaded to
relevant staff. Seven-minute briefings to impart the feedback from audits


highlight good practice and ensure that staff get consistent messages about
development areas. The SSCB does not receive the findings from these audits,
and this is a missed opportunity to inform the SSCB about the quality of
practice.
family judge and the Child and Family Court Advisory and Support Service
(Cafcass) to address areas for improvement. Good strategic engagement with
the local family justice board is evident. The social work service benefits from
the support of a strong legal team and a child progression officer who
monitors compliance. These factors are ensuring that timescales meet the
national 26-week target.
the outcomes of complaints is carried out, this does not result in action plans,
or inform or prioritise lessons to be learned to enable practice to improve.
Despite a reported increase, the numbers of children looked after accessing an
advocate are still low (18 during 20152016). Advocacy is primarily taken up
by children looked after. The service is not routinely promoted to children in
need or those subject to protection plans. According to the annual pledge
survey, the numbers of children looked after who know how to make a
complaint or how to access an advocate have reduced, and this is now subject
to an action plan to increase awareness.
awareness raising is not routine or targeted. As a result, this is likely to lead to
under-reporting of potential private fostering situations by the public and
professionals, evidenced by the fact that Sefton is only aware of one such
arrangement. The local authority has developed an action plan to address the
deficits and this will be presented to the SSCB in May 2016, but at the time of
this inspection, the identification and assessment of this vulnerable group of
children had not been effectively prioritised (Recommendation).
is creating meaningful opportunities for young people to engage in strategic
thinking and planning. The MAD group has strongly influenced actions in
important areas and the group provides a range of training to foster carers
and elected members. It exerts influence in most important strategic groups
and planning forums. Moreover, its contribution is highly valued by senior
leaders, staff and elected members. The local authority would benefit from
widening the representation of young people so that younger children can be
more actively involved and their views can influence service development.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate

Executive summary

The Sefton Safeguarding Children Board (SSCB) is inadequate because it is not
discharging all of its statutory functions as set out in national guidance published
in March 2015. However, much of the work it does is good and some very good.
At the time of this inspection, not all of the SSCBs policies and procedures had
been updated. Some, including the multi-agency threshold guidance, had not been
updated since 2013, despite significant national and local changes in practice. The
SSCB website providing information to external agencies was out of date. This
included guidance on the role of the designated officer and on what action to take
if a serious incident should occur. Prior to an independent review of the work of
the SSCB, reporting in January 2016, the board had not recognised these deficits
and, at the point of the inspection, planning to address them remained at an early
stage.
The SSCBs provision of monitoring and evaluation of multi-agency training have
not included some groups specified in the guidance such as young carers. Privately
fostered children who have been identified in the guidance as requiring oversight
by LSCBs, have not been prioritised by the board.
The current board structure has not ensured sufficient delivery of the work
programme. This was recognised by the SSCB prior to the inspection, and recent
decisions have been taken to increase the capacity to address this. Audits and
individual case reviews are not sufficiently focussed on monitoring frontline child
protection practice to identify what needs to change and to ensure that this results
in improvement. The challenges by the SSCB to safeguarding practice, including
section 11 and section 175 audits, are insufficiently well recorded.
Action taken to publicise the SSCBs work is not yet fully effective. Some social
workers, whom inspectors spoke to, had limited knowledge of the range of the
SSCBs work. The last annual report did not include a separate summary or a
childrens and young peoples report, to disseminate important messages across
the childrens workforce and to the wider community.
The SSCB has undertaken good work with health partners to ensure that they
remain integral to safeguarding. Effective links with schools are leading to
improved awareness of issues such as bullying and e-safety. Under the boards
strategic leadership, responses to address child sexual exploitation are strong.
Actions to safeguard children looked after inappropriately placed in Sefton by other
authorities demonstrate outstanding rigour and effectiveness.


Recommendations

programmes to ensure that these are fully compliant with guidance and
legislation. This should include ensuring that they are updated regularly to
reflect any future changes to statutory guidance.
and young people who are privately fostered and those who are young carers
are being met in Sefton.
examine the full range of safeguarding activity, including identification of good
practice.
achievable timescales, that this is integral to its work programme and that the
results are reported regularly to the board and to stakeholder agencies.
challenges and monitors that these have been resolved.
workforce and wider communities, and that its website is up to date, that
there is a regular newsletter, and that the annual report has a separate
summary and childrens and young peoples version.
training on improving practice.


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
statutory functions as set out in Working Together to Safeguard Children
(Recommendation).
its policies, procedures and work programme to take into account major
revisions to the national guidance for LSCBs published 15 months ago. Its
website is also not up to date. As a result, external agencies have not been
given current advice and guidance. Most importantly, two groups of children,
young people and their families who had been identified as a priority for
LSCBs, that is, young carers and privately fostered children, have not
benefited from the leadership of the board to ensure that they receive at least
appropriate, if not good, services.
one-to-one sessions with the chief executive and the DCS. They also meet
regularly in a wider group that includes the lead member and the HOS, to
scrutinise the work of the local authority and the SSCB. These meetings
benefit from the attendance of a chief executive from another local authority
to provide independent challenge. However, these arrangements have not
ensured that the board is working to the national framework for LSCBs.
Following the appointment of the new DCS in October 2015, a review of the
work of the SSCB by an independent consultant was jointly commissioned by
the DCS and the chair. This concluded in January 2016 and identified that
there were issues that needed to be addressed, including that policies,
procedures and the work programme were not fully compliant with the
national guidance. At the point of the inspection, this issue had still not been
fully addressed, meaning that some policies and procedures had been out of
date for over 12 months. This is unacceptable. The SSCBs action planning has
not ensured that the issues identified in the review were addressed in a timely
manner. This has been further compromised by recent staffing difficulties.
which coordinates the work of the subgroups, the child sexual
exploitation/missing subgroup, the joint childrens and adults training group,
the critical incident panel, the pan-Merseyside child death overview panel
(CDOP), the joint Sefton/Liverpool health agencies subgroup, and the
bullying/cyberbullying subgroup. There are also task and finish groups on
neglect, early help and a subgroup on the locally used casework model
concluded in February 2016. The board is well attended by an appropriate
range of local agencies. There are two lay members, one of whom has been
involved for over three years and has provided a significant range of challenge
to the agencies on the board. This structure has not ensured sufficient


delivery of the work programme. This has been recognised by the SSCB, with
a recent decision taken to create a new subgroup to look at auditing and
performance management and to separate the neglect and early help task and
finish group. Work on policies and procedures, and on communications, are
subsumed in the work of the other subgroups, and this has resulted in a lack
of prioritisation of these vital areas of the LSCBs workload.
parenting and community safety boards. However, partnership work between
the strategic boards requires improvement overall. Recent changes to the
Health and Well-being Board (HWB) have been introduced to respond to its
limited consideration of children and safeguarding, but it has yet to meet and
it is still too early to judge whether the SSCB will have an improved and
sufficient influence on the HWB in the future.
the serious case review process and the role of the designated officer, who
should be contacted when there are concerns about adults in positons of trust
potentially abusing children. This is a concern, as some non-statutory
organisations may be reliant on the multi-agency procedures for advice and
guidance. More up-to-date advice on female genital mutilation is included, due
to a pan-Merseyside police procedure, and the child sexual exploitation section
makes appropriate reference to Working together 2015. Children who are
young carers and those who are privately fostered, both identified as priority
groups in the updated guidance published in March 2015, are not included at
all. The current threshold document, used by all agencies, on identifying when
they should be making referrals to childrens services, was updated in 2013
and is not fully compliant with national guidance. The SSCB therefore cannot
be certain that these gaps have not prevented any agencies, including the
large number of local private and voluntary childrens homes in Sefton, from
taking appropriate action to safeguard children and young people
(Recommendation).
Two cases have been appropriately considered and, on the information
available, it was appropriate to look at other means of gaining the learning.
The SSCB learning and improvement framework describes the approach to
looking at practice-based issues. It is clearer in describing SCRs than, for
instance, audits. Overall, the framework does not sufficiently concentrate
activity on action planning for what has been identified as requiring change.
The critical incident panel has looked appropriately at a number of cases and
has undertaken systems reviews. However, the recommendations from these
reviews have not been specific or measurable and lack timescales. It is
therefore unclear what will happen as a result. The panel has concentrated on
poorer-quality work. It has not sufficiently looked at good work, so that
learning from good practice can be communicated to the childrens services
workforce. This is a missed opportunity. These issues were identified in the
independent review of the SSCB (Recommendation).


those completed to date include neglect, child sexual exploitation, vulnerable
children and substance misuse. The methodology has been good, with cases
looked at in great detail by a wide selection of other agency representatives.
However, none of the audits has clear conclusions and action plans. Audit
activity has not concentrated specifically on frontline child protection work.
Learning from auditing has not been collated or disseminated to enable the
SSCB to advise all agencies on ways to improve. The data dashboard used by
the board is comprehensive, with performance management provided from
the partner agencies. However, this has been insufficiently analysed. The
SSCB has acknowledged the weakness of its performance management and its
inability to progress actions to improve practice, based on learning from its
audit activity. Prior to this inspection, plans were underway to launch a new
subgroup to focus on improvements in these specific areas
(Recommendation).
through an action plan tracker. Clearly, work has been done to ensure that
partner agencies are fully involved in safeguarding. This includes resolving
issues regarding CDOP, ensuring that safeguarding self-audit reporting occurs,
involving agencies in multi-agency audits and addressing concerns about the
childrens homes with out-of-borough placements. However, there is a lack of
recording of case-level or thematic challenge. This does not demonstrate that
the board has been concentrating activity sufficiently on improving practice.
Similarly, section 175 audits covering the academic year 2014-15 were
completed by September 2015, section 11 audits were last completed three
years ago, and agencies were asked to update their action plans in 2014.
However, the recording does not sufficiently evidence that the SSCB
vigorously challenged the findings (Recommendation).
provided strong leadership in some areas in Sefton. Good strategic work
underpinned by strong partnership working with other agencies, such as
police and health, has resulted in a whole-systems approach to child sexual
exploitation. This includes a multi-agency child sexual exploitation SSCB
subgroup chaired by the DCS, a public health ongoing child sexual exploitation
health needs assessment, the child sexual exploitation victim/offender location
map and analysis, and the child sexual exploitation awareness day, which
involved a number of events and 300 students from Southport College. Some
of the outstanding operational work in relation to prevention of child sexual
exploitation seen in this inspection has clearly benefited from the strategic
management of the board.
looked after placed by other authorities in Sefton. Due to the mixed and
sometimes poor quality of services, this is a priority for the SSCB this year.
Work has included the involvement of the providers of childrens homes in
training, work with Ofsted to address poor-quality residential provision and


visits to the childrens homes by a commissioned service to raise awareness of
the dangers of child sexual exploitation. The links with independent fostering
agencies, however, are not as strong and they do not benefit from the same
level of scrutiny or support offered to the independent childrens homes.
in relation to e-safety and bullying. Initiatives include bullybusters, which has
a local helpline, organises an anti-bullying conference and supports peer
mentoring across schools. It has recently received an award as an antibullying special educational needs champion from the Department for
Education. A quarterly report is produced specifically for e-safety. A young
adviser is looking at how to gather further involvement by young people, and
a service has been commissioned to work in local schools to raise awareness.
secondary schools are actively involved. Twilight sessions have been held
every term over the last two years, with all schools invited. The board has
provided good, targeted safeguarding training for all headteachers and
safeguarding leads. In Sefton, 99% of schools have completed section 175
audits. Two representative headteachers from the primary and secondary
sectors are members of the SSCB. A joint Liverpool/ Sefton health sub-group
ensures that the health community (commissioners and providers) is
supporting the work of the SSCB. This includes consideration of neglect, outof-area health support and the MASH. The voluntary, community and faith
sectors are highly involved in the work of the board and the representatives
ensure participation in the full range of safeguarding training.
backlog of cases being presented to the panel have been addressed. A new
temporary CDOP chair was appointed six months ago, and the work is now
being completed to a good standard. The CDOP chair reported that the
SSCBs compliance with CDOP procedures was extremely good , that there
were good connections between the issues raised at the panel and that the
community education programmes, such as Safe sleeping run across
Merseyside. In the last business year, CDOP looked at 113 cases, of which 20
related to Sefton. Of these, four had modifiable factors. Positively, there were
no issues involving practitioners learning.
year, 964 individuals attended 16 different courses and this is good. Most
attendees were from Sefton council (27%). However, probation and the police
only formed 6% of attendees. The training programme was developed
following a workforce analysis conducted across the statutory and voluntary
sectors. Courses include effective engagement with families, safer
recruitment, managing allegations against adults, e-safety for schools and
issues about child sexual exploitation. Further work by the board is needed to
evaluate the quality of the courses and the impact of the training on
improving practice (Recommendation).


including childrens social care, the SSCB is not yet fully effective in publicising
its work. Social workers spoken to by inspectors had a limited knowledge and
understanding of the SSCB. Some did not understand its role and function nor
recall any training or learning events such as from SCRs (Recommendation).
have included briefings on child sexual exploitation, missing children and
young people and safe sleeping. Following the briefings, referrals from some
agencies increased, for example sexual health staff and general practitioners.
analysis of the outcomes of the boards work (such as the audits, reviews,
performance management, section 11 and section 175) and what this means
for children, young people and families in Sefton (Recommendation).


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 10 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Shirley Bailey
Deputy lead inspector: Cath McEvoy
Team inspectors: Peter McEntee, Graham Reiter, Fiona Milnns, Rachel Holden, Pam
Blackman, Neil Penswick
Shadow inspectors: Caroline Walsh, Julia Toller
Senior data analyst: Clare Atkinson
Quality assurance manager: Christine Williams


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


