Metropolitan Borough of Solihull
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 25 April to 19 May 2016
Report published: 7 July 2016

Childrens services in Solihull require improvement to be good

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
The local authority is ambitious. Knowledgeable and experienced senior managers
and leaders are working well together to manage change in a systematic way.
Beginning with the restructuring of childrens social care services, they have
established a multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) and are now rolling out the
new early help offer. Firm foundations have been laid. Good progress is being made.
Improvement is continuing.
However, children are not yet being consistently well served. While inspectors did
not identify any children at immediate risk of significant harm, it is evident that some
children have experienced, and continue to experience, drift and delay. The
development of a robust performance culture is still a work in progress. The level of
frontline management oversight is not consistently rigorous or robust. The challenge
is to develop a greater sense of urgency and a more ruthless focus on core practice,
in order to improve outcomes for children and young people.
Children, young people and families are able to access a good range of services to
counter substance misuse and domestic violence, and promote emotional well-being
and mental health. These have been reconfigured and recommissioned to extend
their reach and effectiveness. Early help is being strengthened to ensure that those
families that require a more structured response, based on a holistic assessment of
their needs, are able to the get the early help and support that they need from
groups of professionals working together as a team around the family.
The new MASH arrangements are working well. A good understanding of the
thresholds for access to childrens social care services ensures that most referrals are
appropriate. In almost every case, referrals lead to a suitable and timely service
response. The local authority is taking action to ensure that the issue of parental
consent is fully explored and well recorded.
Strategy meetings organised in the MASH are good, and are used effectively to
shape subsequent action. Away from the MASH, the involvement of partner agencies
and their contribution to strategy discussions are not consistently reliable or robust.
The timeliness of child protection conferences has improved, but core groups are not
always sufficiently rigorous in tracking and reviewing progress.
The quality of chronologies and the timeliness of assessments have improved. In
most cases, the voice of the child is clear and well recorded. However, the quality of
assessments and plans is variable, ranging from good to requires improvement. On
occasion, this contributes to a lack of focus and/or drift and delay, for some children.
Strategic and operational responses to child sexual exploitation and children who go
missing from home, school or care are well developed and well managed. However,
there is still room for improvement, for example in ensuring that the quality of return
home interviews is of a consistently high standard. The local authority has responded
well to the threat of radicalisation.


Decisions that lead to children and young people becoming looked after are
appropriate, although the Public Law Outline is not always being used effectively.
Most children and young people looked after live with foster carers in stable and
settled placements. Good attention is paid to their emotional well-being, as well as to
their physical health, including those who are living out of borough. The virtual
school is becoming increasingly effective in monitoring the progress and achievement
of school-aged children, all of whom have up-to-date personal education plans.
Currently, 80% of children and young people looked after attend a good or better
school.
In the last 12 months, frequent changes of personnel have impacted on the ability of
children, young people and their carers to build and sustain meaningful relationships
with their social workers. In some cases, lack of continuity has contributed to drift
and delay. Most looked after reviews are timely, with good input from children and
young people. However, the reviews are not always effective in ensuring that issues
and concerns identified are quickly resolved.
Even allowing for the large number of asylum-seeking children in Solihull because of
the presence of the UK Border Agencys immigration enforcement unit, the number
of children looked after is disproportionately high for a local authority of its size. Until
recently, the local authority has been sluggish in its approach to achieving
permanence for children, other than through adoption. The recruitment of foster
carers is not well targeted to ensure that there is a sufficient supply of foster carers
to meet current and future demand.
Adoption is routinely considered for all children at an early stage, and adoption
performance is good. Family-finding strategies are increasingly effective. Adoptive
parents are appreciative of the preparation, training and support that they receive.
Inspectors saw some excellent examples of life-story work.
Most care leavers live in suitable accommodation, have clear, comprehensive and
appropriately ambitious pathway plans, and are well supported to develop their
independent living skills. The percentage of care leavers in education, training and
employment has increased. However, more could be done to engage, support and
safeguard the most vulnerable.
The local authority takes its corporate parenting responsibilities seriously, as
evidenced by the impact and effectiveness of the corporate parenting board.
Learning from complaints is used well to improve practice. However, the Children in
Care Council has been allowed to stagnate. The local authority has not organised any
celebratory events for children looked after or care leavers in the last 12 months.
Following the upheaval caused by the restructuring last year of childrens social care
services, the rate of staff turnover has fallen significantly. With manageable
caseloads and good support for newly qualified social workers, there are signs that it
is becoming easier to recruit and retain staff.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority does not operate any childrens homes.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
January 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
January 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services has been in post since February 2014.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since August 2014.
 The local authority has not delegated any functions to a social work provider.
The model of social work practice used in this local authority is signs of
safety.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data, where this was available.


Children living in this area
 Approximately 45,437 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Solihull. This is 21.6% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 15% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 13.3% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 12.1% (the national average is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 17.1% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic group of children and young people in the area is
Asian or Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 6.8% (the national average is 19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 5.5% (the national average is 15.0%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2016, 1,324 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 March 2016 (provisional year end data), 206 children and young people
were the subject of a child protection plan. This is a reduction from 218 at 31
March 2015.
 At 31 March 2016, two children lived in a privately arranged foster placement.
This is a reduction from four at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, six serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and three of these are now serious case reviews that have been
completed or are ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2016, 360 children (provisional year end data) are being looked after
by the local authority (a rate of 79.8 per 10,000 children). This is an increase
from 335 (74.0 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2015. Of this number:
the authority area


 none live in residential special schools3
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 12 adoptions
 four children became subject of special guardianship orders
returned to be looked after
independent living
living in houses in multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or fewer per year.


Recommendations

Ensure that the performance management framework provides middle and
senior managers with a clear line of sight on those issues and areas that
matter most, including, for example, the frequency and quality of supervision
and key aspects of frontline practice.


Ensure that the level of critical challenge provided by front line managers,
child protection conference chairs and independent reviewing officers is
consistently rigorous and robust and that, once escalated, concerns are dealt
with quickly and effectively.


Ensure that the quality and effectiveness of assessments and care plans are
of a consistently high standard, and are regularly reviewed and updated.


Ensure that strategy discussions and core groups are consistently effective as
forums for sharing information, identifying risks and prompting appropriate
action.


Ensure that decisions taken by and action agreed at multi-agency sexual
exploitation meetings are simply and clearly recorded, then routinely
followed up from one meeting to the next.


Ensure that the local authority designated officer is provided with an
effective system for monitoring and recording allegations, one which
facilitates external scrutiny.


Ensure that effective use is made of the Public Law Outline to avoid drift and
delay and, where appropriate, systematically to explore alternative familybased solutions for children who are unable to continue to live safely at
home, including through the use of consistently high-quality viability
assessments.


Ensure that all children and young people who are looked after have plans
that clearly and explicitly address their need for permanence.


Ensure that the foster carer recruitment strategy includes specific targets
and actions. These are to increase the range and availability of placement
options to meet the assessed needs of different groups of children and
young people, now and in the future.


Ensure that appropriate action is taken to increase the range and volume of
suitable accommodation for care leavers in order to reduce the reliance on
houses in multiple occupation.


Ensure that the Children in Care Council is properly supported, to enable it to
reach out to and represent the views of children and young people looked
after and care leavers.


Summary for children and young people
 The council and its partners are taking action to improve how children and
families get the help and support that they need as early as possible.
 Schools work well to try to make sure that children and families get the help that
they need quickly.
 Adults in the borough work well together to try to ensure that children are safe
from harm.
 Some children have had lots of different social workers, which makes it hard for
them to get to know and trust their social workers.
 The council and frontline managers need to work even harder to make sure that
every child or young person gets the best possible service.
 Most children and young people who are not able to live with their own families
are living with foster carers.
 The council needs to do more work to make sure that it has the right kind of
foster carers for children, when children need them.
 When it is not safe for children and young people to go home, the council and
social workers need to improve the way that they write plans so that children
understand what is happening in their lives.
 The council is getting better at finding families quickly for children who need to
move to a new and permanent family.
 The council is also getting better at making it possible for young people in care to
stay with their foster families when they reach 18, if they want to.
 When the time comes for young people to leave care, most of them get good
help and support to prepare them for independence.
 A lot of young people who used to be in care are now going to college or
university, and get the support that they need to do this.
 In the last 12 months, the Children in Care Council has not been given enough
support or attention.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Children and families are able to access early help and support but, until recently,
not in a well-coordinated way, based on the outcome of an early help assessment
or delivered by agencies working together as a team around the family. A new
early help offer is being rolled out, but the level of management oversight is not
yet sufficiently robust.
The good understanding of the thresholds for access to childrens social care
services means that most referrals are appropriate and timely. The multi-agency
safeguarding hub (MASH) ensures that referrals are thoroughly assessed and lead
to an appropriate service response. Consent is routinely sought, but is not always
well recorded. Professionals are able to get advice and guidance from social
workers based in the MASH, and are given feedback on the progress of referrals.
Strategy meetings held in the MASH are used effectively to share information.
Timely decisions result in appropriate action being taken to manage or minimise
risks. Away from the MASH, the contribution of partner agencies to strategy
meetings is less reliable. This has the potential to undermine the effectiveness of
strategy meetings and the action resulting from them. However, inspectors did not
identify any children who were at immediate risk of significant harm as a result.
Most assessments require improvement, although the voice of children is clear in
most cases. While the quality of chronologies has improved significantly, some
assessments lack analysis and fail to take full account of the historical context.
Children in need plans are not always regularly updated. This applies particularly to
children who have disabilities.
The timeliness of child protection conferences is improving. Information is shared
effectively, and partner agencies work well together to safeguard and protect
children. Child protection plans are outcome focused, specific and measurable.
However, child protection conference chairs do not consistently provide the right
level of critical challenge and core groups are not always effective in rigorously
monitoring progress. The quality and effectiveness of frontline management
oversight and scrutiny require improvement to prevent drift and delay.
Work with children and young people at risk of child sexual exploitation and those
who go missing is making a positive difference. Return home interviews are
routinely offered, although it is not always clear how the information is used to
safeguard and protect children. The local authority has a good understanding of
the Prevent agenda.


Inspection findings

Although children and families are able to access a good range of supportive
early help services, very few receive support based on a holistic assessment
of their needs, provided by professionals from different agencies working
together as a team around the family. The local authority is rolling out its
new early help strategy, which has been developed in consultation with
partner agencies. This is intended to bring together the work of the troubled
families team, youth services, specialist careers service, educational welfare
and childrens centres in the new Engage service. Performance
management and quality assurance systems are a work in progress. As yet,
the number of early help assessments (EHAs), which have replaced the
common assessment framework, have not increased significantly. Although
the initial feedback from professionals is positive, the local authority is not
yet in a position to monitor the progress or evaluate the impact of the new
EHAs.


The establishment of the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) is making a
positive difference to children and families. With robust management
oversight at every stage, workflows are managed effectively. Professionals
are able to consult social workers based in the MASH, and receive sound
advice and guidance from them. Thresholds for access to childrens social
care services are generally well understood by partners, and are applied
consistently by staff and managers based in the MASH. Most referrals are
relevant and appropriate. In the last quarter, only 4% resulted in no further
action. When necessary, visits are made, usually on the same day as the
referral, to check that thresholds are met and to determine the next steps.
This is good practice. It helps to avoid drift, and ensures that decisions are
timely and well informed.


Strategy meetings organised by the MASH are well chaired and well attended
by partner agencies. Effective information sharing means that the help and
protection that children receive are proportionate to risk. However, once
cases transfer from the MASH, strategy meetings are not consistently
effective. Health, education and police partners do not routinely attend or
contribute. This means that, in some cases, valuable and important
information is not captured or used to inform decision making.


Child protection enquiries are thorough and timely. Decisions to carry out
joint- or single-agency investigations are appropriate. Partner agencies
contribute well to child protection enquiries and to a shared understanding of
the risks.


The emergency duty team (EDT) provides an effective level of support to
safeguard children out of hours. Its response to unaccompanied asylumseeking children is particularly good. Good two-way communication with daytime colleagues ensures that the service offered is seamless.



The quality of social work assessments, including pre-birth assessments, is
variable, ranging from requires improvement to good. Good assessments are
informed by research, influenced by the childs wishes and feelings, and
result in clear and appropriate recommendations based on good
understanding and analysis of the childs need and circumstances. Weaker
assessments, some of which take too long to complete, are limited in the
depth and breadth of their understanding, particularly of the historical
context, and are short on analysis. A lack of consistently robust management
oversight means that the poor quality of some assessments is not always
identified or challenged by those who are responsible for signing them off.
As well as doing a disservice to children and families, this denies social
workers an opportunity to improve their practice. The timeliness of
assessments has improved. The quality of chronologies has also improved.
Inspectors saw very few case records without an up-to-date assessment, and
chronologies are now being used more consistently by social workers to
inform their analysis and decisions. This is making a positive difference.
(Recommendations 2 and 3)


The timeliness of initial and review child protection conferences is improving.
Most child protection plans seen are good. They are outcome focused,
specific and measurable. However, a failure to focus consistently on progress
against the actions set out in child protection plans means that core groups
are not always effective in tracking and driving change. Currently, managers
are not required to authorise or sign off core group minutes. Additionally, the
challenge offered by child protection chairs is not always sufficiently robust.
Lack of management oversight and challenge contributes to drift for some
children. (Recommendations 2 and 4)


The pre-proceedings protocol is not being implemented soon enough, in
some cases. By not using family group conferences to explore family-based
solutions, including alternative care arrangements for children, the local
authority is missing a valuable opportunity. (Recommendation 7)


The local authority has plans to adopt the graded care profile to assist social
workers and partner agencies in identifying and working with neglect. The
local authority has also introduced a recognised strengths-based and safetyfocused social work model to help families to develop a better understanding
of what it is that professionals are concerned about. This is having a positive
impact, resulting in a 55-strong reduction in the number of children who are
subject to child protection plans because of neglect.


Children are seen alone by social workers, who work hard to build effective
relationships with them. Inspectors saw some good examples of direct work
with children by social workers or family support workers, and of direct work
being used well to influence and inform assessments and plans. Staff in the
children with disabilities team are particularly good at engaging and working
with children. However, while there is an expectation that children who are
subject to child protection plans should be visited at least every 28 days, and


more frequently where the assessment indicates that this is necessary, child
protection plans do not routinely stipulate the frequency of visits. This also
applies to child in need plans and means that the pattern and frequency of
visits are not always proportionate to the childs circumstances or the level of
risk.

The quality of child in need plans seen by inspectors in the children in need
team is good. Clear, outcome focused, regularly reviewed and updated, they
accurately reflect changing circumstances and risks, resulting in cases being
stepped up or stepped down appropriately. However, a shortfall in staffing
and management capacity in the children with disabilities team means that
most child in need plans are not being reviewed or updated in a timely way.
This means that the local authority cannot be confident that the needs of
children who have disabilities are being well met.


Good systems and processes enable homeless 16- and 17-year-olds to make
informed decisions about whether to accept help and support as children in
need or as children looked after. When young people present as homeless,
their needs are thoroughly assessed by a qualified social worker, with
support from a housing officer.


Services work well together to support children and young people who are
affected by parental mental ill health, substance misuse and/or domestic
abuse. Social work assessments show good awareness of the impact on
children of one or more of these issues. Domestic abuse services routinely
complete assessments and safety plans for women and children. The local
authority has recently invested in a post to focus specifically on domestic
abuse in teenage relationships.


The multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC) is in need of an
injection of new life. In 201516, the number of referrals to the MARAC fell.
Only 10% came from agencies other than the police. Senior officers have
plans to revitalise the MARAC and are taking action to increase awareness
and understanding of its important role across the partnership.


With a good understanding of child sexual exploitation and the risks
associated with children going missing, the local authority and its partners
have put in place effective systems, structures, policies and procedures to
manage and support this vulnerable group of children and young people.
The operational group that manages and deals with cases of child sexual
exploitation and missing (CMOG) is an effective forum. Focusing on young
people who are considered to be at high risk of child sexual exploitation, it
enables partners to share information and use intelligence to inform
disruption activity. Children who go missing and/or for whom the risk of
sexual exploitation is less acute are regularly discussed at multi-agency
sexual exploitation meetings. However, while these meetings are well
attended and information is shared effectively, actions agreed are not
consistently well recorded or followed up from one meeting to the next.


Additionally, although child sexual exploitation screening tools are routinely
completed and the level of risk identified accurately, matching concerns in
almost all cases, the resulting action plans are not always sufficiently
outcome focused. Timescales for reviewing progress are not always clear.
(Recommendation 5)

A small but effective specialist team works directly with young people who
are at risk of, or are being, sexually exploited. Referrals are accepted
promptly. There is no waiting list. The support that the team is able to offer
has recently been supplemented by a range of therapeutic interventions.
These are available through the recommissioned emotional well-being and
mental health service, Solar. It is too early to evaluate the impact of this
development.


Children who go missing are routinely offered return home interviews, most
of which are carried out within 72 hours. However, the records of the
interviews are not consistently uploaded to childrens electronic case records
and the information they generate is not always being used effectively to
inform care planning.


The local authority has responded well to the challenges associated with
radicalisation. Although the level of risk in Solihull has been assessed as
being relatively low, the fact that circa 7,000 students travel into Solihull
schools and colleges each day from neighbouring authorities means that
there is no room for complacency. Robust governance arrangements, high
levels of awareness and well-developed referral pathways around
radicalisation mean that, while the number of referrals remains low, Solihull
is well prepared. The Prevent board is well attended by schools, colleges
and independent education providers, the fire brigade, probation service,
police (including counter-terrorism police) and health services. Schools
understand the referral pathways and consult appropriately. Thirty-four
concerns were raised by schools in the last 12 months and two children were
referred to the Channel panel. To date, 4,699 of the 7,000 school and
college staff, including lunchtime supervisors, have received training in
Working together to raise awareness of the Prevent strategy (WRAP), and


Almost all of the young people who are currently in alternative educational
provision receive 25 hours of tuition per week. The small number who do not
are well supported by professionals, including educational psychologists.
Those who receive home tuition for medical reasons, many of them with
emotional well-being and mental health issues, are closely monitored. The
Triple Crown Centre, which is part of the pupil referral unit, caters specifically
for young people with medical conditions.


The missing education service is meticulous in the way in which it carries out
its responsibilities. By July 2015, it had successfully tracked all but two of the


without a known destination. Mindful of the need to ensure that children
attend registered schools, the service is equally thorough in tracking children
of school age who have not applied for a school place. Any concerns about
childrens safety are referred to the MASH.

The elective home education service is careful and conscientious in
developing supportive relationships with parents, assessing the quality of the
education provided and taking appropriate action when it does not meet the
required standard. Parents are signposted to services and resources that
could be useful to them. At the time of this inspection, 102 children and
young people are being electively home educated.


Private fostering does not receive the attention that it requires. Currently,
only two children are known to be living in a private fostering arrangement.
When children are identified, they are visited promptly, in line with statutory
guidance. However, more needs to be done to raise awareness of private
fostering in order to ensure that children who are living informally with
people to whom they are not related are properly safeguarded.


When allegations about adults in positions of trust are made, appropriate
action is taken to safeguard and protect children. Information is shared well
with the MASH. Decision making is timely. However, the lack of a customised
system for recording and monitoring allegations makes it difficult for the
local authority designated officer to track the progress of cases and limits the
effectiveness of external scrutiny. (Recommendation 6)


Senior leaders and managers do not routinely invite feedback from children
and young people about their experiences of, or their views on, the quality
and impact of the help, protection and support that they receive. However,
plans are underway to introduce a feedback survey for young people who
are, or who have been, subject to child protection plans.


A growing number of children and young people are making use of the
independent advocacy service to enhance their participation in, and
contribution to, child protection conferences. Effective advocacy support is
provided to parents to ensure that their views are fully represented in child
protection conferences.


Staff in the team for children with disabilities are resourceful and imaginative
in finding different ways to communicate with children who are not able to
express themselves verbally. Inspectors also saw some good examples
involving the use of interpreters for children and families who speak English
as an additional language. More generally, while social workers routinely
record the ethnicity of children and young people, they do not consistently
ensure that assessments are sensitive and responsive to the differences that
reflect the unique identity of each child or young person. This applies
particularly to White British children.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Although most children come into care in an unplanned way, inspectors found no
evidence of children becoming looked after who should not have been. The local
authoritys response to asylum-seeking children is timely and effective. The quality
of evidence and plans presented in court has improved and, as a result, the
average length of care proceedings is being reduced. However, the Public Law
Outline (PLO) is not consistently being used to best effect and there is room for
improvement in the quality of viability assessments.
Most children live in settled and stable foster placements. Good attention is paid to
their health, including their emotional health and well-being. Children know how to
complain. When they do, their complaints are taken seriously. However, until
recently, a high turnover of staff has made it difficult for some children to build
and maintain meaningful relationships with their social workers. Although the
timeliness of reviews is good, some children have experienced drift and delay
because of a lack of consistent critical challenge and/or rigorous attention to detail
on the part of some front line managers and independent reviewing officers. The
quality of assessments and care plans requires improvement. The local authority is
now taking appropriate action to ensure a more proactive approach to achieving
permanence for children for whom adoption is not the right solution.
All children have personal education plans that are regularly reviewed and
updated. Currently, 80% of children attend a good or better school. At key stages
narrowing. The virtual school is becoming increasingly effective.
The local authority and its partners have a good grasp of the issue of sexual
exploitation. When children go missing from care, they are routinely offered return
home interviews, but further work is required to ensure that they are of a
consistently high standard.
As a result of all the other changes that have been going on in the last 12 months,
the Children in Care Council has not received the attention that it deserves. Its
members feel disappointed and disillusioned.
Adoption performance is good, overall. Adoption is considered for all children at an
early stage. Family-finding strategies are increasingly effective. Adoptive parents
talk very positively about the preparation, training and support that they receive,
both before and after adoption. Life-story work is a real strength.
Most care leavers live in suitable accommodation, and are encouraged and
supported well to take part in education, employment or training. However, more
could be done to engage, support and safeguard the most vulnerable.


Inspection findings

Children only become looked after when it is right that they should be. The
majority of the 10 most recent admissions to care have involved children
who became looked after either in an emergency or at a time of crisis. The
rate of children looked after is higher than in Solihulls statistical neighbours.
Despite these factors, inspectors saw no evidence of children becoming
looked after inappropriately.


The local authority has responded well to the challenges posed by a steady
increase in the number of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
Immediate action is taken to safeguard and protect them. Arrangements to
assess and accommodate them, identify their immediate needs and organise
initial health assessments are well managed. At the time of this inspection,
unaccompanied asylum-seeking children and young people accounted for


The local authority is taking action to make better use of the PLO, either to
achieve meaningful change in families when risks and concerns increase, or
to make plans for children to live permanently away from home. Where the
PLO has been used well, parents clearly understand the issues and concerns,
and what is expected of them. Some parents have successfully managed to
make the necessary changes and, in doing so, avoided the need for legal
intervention. However, a lack of effective management oversight means that
decision making is not always timely. Inspectors saw some evidence of delay
in sending PLO letters and written agreements, and/or in initiating care
proceedings. During the inspection, the local authority introduced a simple
but effective PLO case-tracking tool. (Recommendation 7)


In some cases, viability assessments are being used proactively to identify
whether other family members are able to care for children when it is
apparent that it is not safe for children to continue to live with their birth
families. However, the quality of viability assessments is variable. In some
cases, certain relatives remain to be considered or are ruled out quickly and
effectively. Inspectors also saw examples where significant risks had been
identified, but decisions were deferred until the second stage of the
assessment process. This has the potential to blur permanency planning and
contribute to delay. (Recommendation 7)


A significant reduction in the average duration of care proceedings means
that children and young people are not waiting as long for important
decisions to be made about them. The timeliness of proceedings has
improved, down from 37 to 33 weeks. The local authoritys latest unvalidated
data shows further improvement, with care proceedings now taking, on
average, 28 weeks to complete. Currently, 30 cases involving 59 children and
young people are before the courts, 23 of which are on track to be
concluded within 26 weeks. There are good reasons why the seven
remaining cases will take longer. The Children and Family Court Advisory and


Support Service and the judiciary talks positively about the improved quality
of the assessments, evidence and plans that are presented in court.

The majority of children benefit from settled, stable, foster placements. Most
children are seen regularly by their social workers, who know them well.
However, in the last 12 months some children have experienced repeated
changes of social workers. This makes it difficult for them to establish and
maintain positive relationships with their social workers, and causes
frustration for them and their foster carers. One child told his foster carer
that he could not see the point in having a social worker.


Children and young people know how to complain. When they do, their
complaints are taken seriously. As evidence, for example, a social worker
was changed after a child had complained. Children, including those who
have disabilities, make good use of the advocacy service to raise concerns or
issues, and/or support them in influencing key meetings and decisions that
affect their lives. However, limited capacity means that, at present, relatively
few children are benefiting from an independent visitor.


The local authoritys response to children who go missing and/or are at risk
of child sexual exploitation is thorough and consistently applied, in most
cases. Foster carers and residential staff are clear about their responsibilities
to safeguard and protect children, and raise an immediate alert when
children go missing. Inspectors saw evidence of carers searching actively for
missing children, rather than just leaving the police to do so. In the third
quarter of 201516, there were 34 reported episodes of children looked after
going missing. These relate to 15 young people, five of whom had been
assessed as being at risk of child sexual exploitation.


When children go missing from care, the quality of the information provided
by return home interviews (RHIs) largely depends on who completes the
interview. The majority, which are completed by the independent advocacy
service, are thorough and detailed. The local authority analyses RHIs to
identify patterns and themes in order to strengthen their protective
responses. However, the variable quality of RHIs and the failure to capture
the reasons given by young people for refusing interviews limit the
effectiveness of this approach.


The local authority takes very seriously its responsibility to promote the
health and well-being of children looked after. It has taken concerted action
to make sure that health checks are timely. Unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children are fast-tracked for initial health assessments and immunisations.
Children looked after are seen regularly by dentists and opticians, and 97%
of annual health assessments are completed on time. Children looked after
have ready access to specialist support around substance and alcohol
misuse, contraception, sexual health and teenage pregnancy. Good use is
made of strengths and difficulties questionnaire scores to identify children
looked after who would benefit from a referral to the recently


recommissioned emotional well-being and mental health service, Solar. The
designated nurse for children looked after leads on all health assessments for
children looked after who are living within a 50-mile radius of Solihull,
ensuring that their health needs are met.

Currently, 80% of children looked after attend good or better schools. A
number of other children attend schools which, as recent academy
conversions, do not have a current Ofsted judgement. Where a child is at a
school judged as less than good, the local authority endeavours to mitigate
any possible adverse impact through its rigorous approach to personal
education plans. Schools now complete personal education plans (PEPs)
themselves. PEPs, which are reviewed every term, are mostly evaluative.
They identify clear and measurable actions for improvement and focus well
on the effective use of pupil premium funding. All children and young people
of statutory school age have a PEP, although post-16 institutions have been
slow to ensure that plans are in place for all young people.


Children looked after do well at primary school, but less well at secondary
school. At key stages 1 and 2, their attainment in reading, writing and
mathematics has been consistently at least as good as, and mostly better
than, the average for children looked after nationally. Most children looked
after make expected or better progress at key stage 2 than their attainment
at key stage 1, and the attainment gap between them and other pupils in the
borough is narrowing. However, in 2015, the overall attainment of children
looked after at key stage 4 dipped sharply, with a third making low levels of
progress in English and a half making low levels of progress in mathematics.
By contrast, unaccompanied asylum-seeking young people make reasonable
progress in learning English as an additional language. The PEPs of young
people who underachieved at key stage 4 focus well on their needs and
progress in Year 12.


Good progress has been made in developing the work of the virtual school,
despite the fact that the post of virtual school head had, until recently, been
vacant. The virtual school maintains accurate data on the attainment and
progress of children, which it uses to prioritise work with those at risk of
underachieving. The virtual school board is ambitious for children and young
people, interrogates reports and data carefully and holds the virtual school to
account. However, it is only in the last 12 months that the virtual school has
started to support early years and post-16 learners. There is more to be
done to consolidate its role and impact across the age range.


Nine children looked after are following reduced timetables for health or
behavioural reasons. All have intensive support and are appropriately
safeguarded, including three who are also at risk of sexual exploitation.


Action has been taken to reduce the number of authorised and unauthorised
absences, which was slightly higher than for children looked after nationally.
Settings now report changes in attendance to social workers and the virtual


school to enable prompt intervention. As a result, rates are improving. In the
last three years, only one child looked after has been permanently excluded.
This was unexpected and unavoidable. An alternative school was identified
promptly, and the pupil is now making good progress.

While the availability of in-house foster placements has not kept pace with
demand and the local authority relies heavily on independent fostering
agencies to meet sufficiency, brothers and sisters are generally placed
together. External placement providers say that the authority is very
responsive to the needs of its children and young people. Where additional
support is required, this is made available. Of the 358 children and young
people who were being looked after at the time of this inspection, 203 (57%)
are placed outside the local authority boundary, 109 of these in neighbouring
authorities. Children living out of area have timely health assessments,
prompt access to primary health services and suitable education.
(Recommendation 9)


The local authority responds promptly to enquiries from those interested in
fostering. Progress from the initial stage to full assessment is timely. The
service focuses appropriately on prospective carers motivation and their
ability to safeguard children and young people. Applicants are prepared well
and, once approved, receive good support, supervision and training.


In most cases, permanence is considered at the second looked after review.
However, apart from those for whom adoption is considered to be in their
best interests, permanence in all its different forms is not consistently well
addressed or followed through into the care planning process. Until very
recently, the local authority has not been making effective use of special
guardianship orders to achieve permanence for children with relatives,
friends or foster carers. The local authority has also been slow to review
those children who are the subject of care orders and have been living with
their birth families, in some cases for considerable periods of time. This is
changing. The local authority now has clear plans in place to address both
sets of issues, although it is too early to evaluate the impact of the action
that is being taken. (Recommendation 8)


As part of its drive to adopt a much more robust approach to permanence,
the local authority is also reviewing the relatively high number (92) of
children and young people, excluding unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children, who are accommodated under section 20 and also the
circumstances of all children looked after who are not living in long-term
placements. In the last 12 months, permanence through long-term fostering
has been achieved for 18 children. A further nine children are progressing
towards a match with permanent long-term foster carers. However, there is
still a long way to go.


The quality of care plans seen is variable. There are as many examples of
care plans that need to be significantly strengthened as there are of good


care plans. Good examples focus on outcomes, and are specific and
measurable. Weaker examples include plans that are not specific to
individual children, lack focus, do not set out clearly who needs to do what
by when and, in some cases, do not effectively address issues of childrens
diversity. Inspectors also saw a small number of cases in which rehabilitation
plans had either not been fully developed, or been allowed to drift, or were
no longer relevant or realistic. This is unhelpful for children, and confusing
for them and their carers. (Recommendation 3)

Childrens plans are regularly reviewed by independent reviewing officers
(IROs), and 90% of reviews are completed on time. Children are encouraged
and well supported to contribute to and take part in their reviews, and 90%
of children looked after between 13 and 16 years old do so. However, the
local authority recognises that, when IROs make use of the escalation
process to raise issues or concerns on behalf of children, the response of
social workers and their managers is not consistently rigorous. In some
cases, this results in drift and delay. Action is being taken to increase the
effectiveness of management oversight in this area.


While the Children in Care Council (CiCC) was previously involved in, and
made a significant contribution to the redesign and recommissioning of the
emotional well-being and mental health service, Solar, it has effectively been
at a standstill since the restructuring last year of childrens social care
services. The council has not met for some time. Core members of the CiCC
who are keen for it to be an active and effective forum representing the
views of children looked after have been left feeling disappointed and
disillusioned. They also regret the fact that there have not been any events
to celebrate and value the progress and achievements of children looked
after for some time. (Recommendation 11)

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

Adoption performance is good. Adoption is routinely considered for all
children in need of permanence. Drive and determination, with an
appropriate and demonstrable sense of urgency, mean that the local
authority is increasingly effective in securing permanence for children
through adoption, when this is in their best interests. The adoption team
managers involvement in the early stages of care planning, when
permanence options for children are discussed and explored, facilitates this
approach. Children experience very few moves before placement because,
when adoption is in their best interests, it is fully integrated into the planning
process.


Children and adoptive families benefit from a service that is well led and
managed. The progress of children who are the subject of legal proceedings


or who already have placement orders is monitored more rigorously than
those who have been assessed as needing a different form of permanence.
Regular and effective monitoring meetings make good use of an adoption
tracking tool to check and rate progress using a red, amber and green(RAG)
scale. This level of scrutiny means that managers are able to identify any
slippage promptly and take appropriate action to avoid delay.

Members of the adoption team are reflective, creative, show tenacity and act
as passionate advocates for children. On occasion, for example, when The
Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service and the courts have
seriously questioned whether adoption is appropriate or realistic for children
with complex needs, the local authority has not given up. Its persistence and
dogged determination to find the right families eventually resulted in
placement orders being granted.


Family-finding strategies are well developed. Early consideration is given to
approved in-house adopters. There are also good systems in place to track
adopters who have been approved through the local adoption consortium.
Where appropriate, prompt referrals are made to the adoption register and
other extended family-finding services. The local authority is confident that
plans to establish a regional adoption agency, Adoption Central England, will
further strengthen family finding and increase placement choice.


The adoption reform grant has been used to good effect to increase the
capacity of the adoption service, for example by funding a family-finding
worker post. Effective family finding ensures that the right matches are
identified for children and young people with adopters who can offer them
safe and nurturing lifelong care. Although placing groups of brothers and
sisters together is challenging, the service has made good use of the welldeveloped local consortium to do so. This has resulted in five groups of
brothers and sisters being placed together in the last 12 months.


While the number of children adopted in 201516 was down slightly on the
year before, 12 as opposed to 15, currently 24 children have active plans for
adoption, including two who have disabilities and complex needs, three from
minority ethnic and faith backgrounds, and five aged five or over. This
provides further evidence of the local authoritys commitment to achieving
permanence through adoption when it is in a childs best interests, even if
the associated challenges mean that it may take longer to achieve.


Timeliness has been an issue. However, the local authority has a detailed
and comprehensive understanding of the factors at play, including those
exceptional cases that involve long legal proceedings and take a
disproportionate length of time from children entering care and being
adopted by their foster carers, albeit with the benefit of placement stability in
the interim. In other cases, delays have been caused by the length of time
taken to find a suitable match for children with complex needs. However,
contemporary practice evidences definite signs of improvement. The local


authoritys own data for 201316 figures shows this in terms of the average
length of time taken between children entering care and moving in with their
adoptive families

Practice is sharply focused on finding the right adoptive families for children.
Whenever possible, children are matched and placed with minimum delay.
Inspectors saw two examples of two children who had been matched and
placed within three months of the placement orders being made.
Performance in 201215, against the adoption scorecard indicator of children
who wait less than 18 months between entering care and moving in with
their adoptive families, was 50%. This is in line with the national average of


Recognising the need to increase placement choice in response to the
diverse needs of children, including brother and sister groups, children who
have disabilities and complex needs, older children and children from
minority ethnic backgrounds, the local authority has revised and refreshed its
adoption recruitment strategy. This has led to an increase in the number of
adoption enquiries. In 201516, 19 adoption applications were completed at
stage two, resulting in nine adoptive placements. Five more approved
adopters are being matched with children. With a clear policy framework
around foster to adopt, there is already one such arrangement in place and
another three in the pipeline.


Adopters assessment reports are strong. They are detailed, thorough, child
centred and full of information about applicants histories. They carefully
consider how individuals or couples can provide children and young people
with lifelong stability and security. Robust analysis identifies potential
adopters strengths and any areas of support that they might need, as well
as addressing issues around difference and diversity. Rigorous scrutiny of
prospective adopters by the adoption and permanency panel ensures that
childrens needs, not least for physical safety and emotional security, are
carefully considered. The panels recommendations are systematically
reviewed by the agency decision maker, whose decisions are well balanced
and timely. All of the adopters consulted by inspectors described the
recruitment process as timely, effective, smooth and supportive. They said
they felt that they had been well prepared for the task of becoming adoptive
parents, particularly by the training provided.


Child permanence and adoption support reports are comprehensive,
analytical and of a consistently high quality. They reflect a good
understanding of childrens needs and histories. Information about birth
parents is thoughtfully considered. These reports are sensitive to the impact
on both the birth parents and other family members, including the extended
family.


Life-story work is well supported by an experienced life-story consultant, who
also offers advice and support to adopters. Inspectors saw some excellent


examples of life-story work, and of life-story books that described the childs
journey wonderfully well and captured their past and current experiences in
a clear, sensitive and child-friendly manner. Adopters speak very highly
about the timeliness and positive impact of life-story work, and are generous
in their praise of the quality of their childrens life-story books.

No adoption placements have broken down within the last three years. This
is due in no small part to the careful consideration given to the approval of
adopters, the quality of the matching process and the success of the ongoing
post-adoption support available to families.


The local authority provides good pre-and post-adoption support, including
therapeutic support. Currently, 29 families and 41 children are being
supported post-adoption, including 12 families who are in receipt of postadoption allowances and four adults who are being supported to access their
adoption records. One adopter, who had been able to access the adoption
support fund to pay for direct work with her child, said I would be lost
without this support. Adopters extended families are also able to access
support, for example by participating in training and/or having books on
adoption made available to them. At the time of this inspection, there were
directly in seven of them. In addition, where agreed as part of childrens
plans, letterbox arrangements support adoptive families to exchange news
with childrens birth and extended families.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement


The local authority is in touch with 206 (97%) of its 212 care leavers. The
majority of care leavers benefit from positive relationships with their social
workers and personal advisors. Most benefit from effective wrap-around
support and services to safeguard and protect them, and to promote their
independence.


Unaccompanied asylum-seeking young people receive specialist advice and
support from the child asylum and post-16 service. This enables the team to
develop and maintain an effective overview of their needs and progress.
Three of the six care leavers with whom the local authority is not in contact
were originally accommodated as unaccompanied asylum-seekers. They only
stopped contact after they had been refused leave to remain.


Most young people live in suitable accommodation. The level of support
provided is good. A specialist accommodation officer assists care leavers,
including asylum-seeking young people, to apply for tenancies and secure
their benefit entitlements. Care leavers who become parents are helped to


get appropriate tenancies and are supported by the family nurse partnership
scheme to develop their parenting skills. Tenancy officers work with young
people who are at risk of losing their tenancies.

The quality of support that care leavers receive in order to develop their
independent living skills is good. Social workers and personal advisers take
care to ensure that young people are helped to learn to manage their
finances and develop the practical skills that they need for the future. Care
leavers who met with inspectors spoke very positively about the support that
they have received from their personal advisers or social workers, and about
the quality of their relationships with them.


However, while good use is made of a range of resources, including two
training flats, four supported lodgings placements and floating support to
prepare care leavers for independence, for some care leavers the choice of
accommodation options available is limited. Currently, the local authority is
heavily reliant on hostel-type facilities for 16- to 24-year-olds. Some of these
are provided and managed by private and voluntary organisations, both
inside and outside the borough, including a number of high-rise blocks that
have been redeveloped and refurbished as part of the regeneration
programme in the north of Solihull. This situation is largely a reflection of the
local property market and a product of the pressures on existing housing
stock. Some care leavers told inspectors that they felt that the wide age
range that these facilities cater for is not always suitable, particularly for
younger care leavers.


Forty care leavers are living in semi-independent accommodation in houses
in multiple occupation. While their needs are carefully assessed beforehand
and floating support is provided, this is not ideal. The local authority
recognises that it needs to increase the range of accommodation options
available, including specialist accommodation and support for more
vulnerable care leavers, including those who are at risk of child sexual
exploitation or have mental health issues. (Recommendation 10)


Additionally, inspectors identified five care leavers, one of whom was under
the age of 18, who had been assessed for several years as being at risk of
sexual exploitation. Although all are being supported, the focus of attention
in multi-agency meetings has been on information sharing and work with the
young people to manage and reduce the risks to which they are exposed.
Insufficient action has been taken by the council and its partners to disrupt
the activity of the alleged perpetrators, and significant risks remain.


All care leavers have good up-to-date pathway plans that are regularly
reviewed, either by service managers or, in the case of care leavers who are
under 18, by independent reviewing officers. This level of scrutiny ensures
that plans are relevant and appropriate, and are updated when necessary.
Social workers and personal advisors use checklists effectively to make sure
that young peoples needs, wishes, feelings and aspirations are explored and


recorded. Most pathway plans are clear and comprehensive, and list options
and alternatives in recognition of the fact that the young persons
circumstances may change. However, the extent of young peoples
contribution is not always clear. The local authority also recognises that the
views of foster carers are not always well recorded.

Good attention is paid to care leavers health. In the majority of cases, health
issues are clearly identified, effectively addressed and well met. Care leavers
who live in Solihull have prompt access to counselling and emotional wellbeing and mental health services. A strong focus on supporting care leavers
with additional healthcare needs is helping them to manage their health
conditions better. However, in a minority of cases, when care leavers are
involved in substance misuse and/or experiencing emotional well-being or
mental health problems, or are not engaging with the support and services
offered, a lack of tenacity on the part of the professionals involved has
resulted in poorer outcomes. Similarly, care leavers who are living out of
borough do not always have the same easy access to emotional well-being
and mental health services as their counterparts in Solihull.


When young people leave care and formal support from the designated
looked after health service comes to an end, care leavers receive
comprehensive health passports, together with a personalised letter with the
contact details for the designated nurse. As a result of the positive
relationships that she has developed with them, it is not uncommon for care
leavers to contact the designated nurse at a later date. The designated nurse
is always happy to provide advice or information, or to signpost them to the
appropriate service.


Young people who wish to remain with their foster carers after they turn 18
are encouraged to do so. At the time of this inspection, 15 young people
were living with their former foster carers under the terms of a staying put
arrangement.


From an early stage, young people are actively encouraged to consider their
post-16 options. Two careers advisers, who are part of the virtual school
team, work well with schools, social workers and personal advisers to
provide timely and effective advice and guidance to young people. Links
between the leaving care team, the virtual school and local providers of
education and training are well developed. The number of young people
participating in education, training or employment (EET) has increased
steadily over the last three years. In March 2015, 93% of 16-year-olds, 88%
of 17-year-olds and 78% of 18-year-olds were in EET. This provides a firm
foundation for young people as they leave care. The authority tracks the EET
activities of 19- to 21-year-olds well. Only 3% are unknown.


However, in the case of young people who are not in education, training or
employment and/or do not show a significant level of commitment to
learning, pathway plans are not sufficiently specific about what professionals


will do, or by when, to help them to explore their options. This has the
potential to limit the effectiveness and impact of the pathway plans.

The council is increasingly proactive in establishing agreements with
contractors involved in major infrastructure developments to employ young
people and prioritise opportunities for care leavers. Currently, four care
leavers have apprenticeships. Twenty-nine care leavers are at university,
with a further five due to enrol in September. The local authority has been
particularly successful in working with care leavers who originally arrived in
Solihull as unaccompanied asylum-seeking children or young people, 18 of
whom are now at university.


The number of care leavers in custody is relatively low, at five. Pathway
plans are in place, young people are visited regularly and personal advisors
work well with the youth offending team, probation service and housing
providers to accommodate young people on release and encourage them to
undertake meaningful activities. One young person who was recently
released is now in full-time employment.


In recent times, care leavers have not had an opportunity to come together
to celebrate their own and each others achievements. Young people who
spoke to inspectors said that this was something that they missed. The
manager of the leaving care team is aware of the issue and has identified a
personal adviser to work with care leavers to address this omission.


Although there is a clear housing protocol in place in relation to the
accommodation needs of homeless young people, a shortage of emergency
accommodation means that, in the last 12 months, a very small number of
care leavers have been placed temporarily in bed and breakfast
accommodation. This was for between two-and-a-half and five weeks before
suitable accommodation was found for them. In each case, the use of this
accommodation was a means of providing urgent protection to children at
risk of sexual exploitation and was comprehensively risk assessed.
Nevertheless, this is still not good enough. (Recommendation 10)


Care leavers receive good-quality information about their rights and
entitlements in the form of a clear and accessible booklet. Personal advisers
provide timely advice on financial matters and work with young people to
help them to understand their entitlements. Although some care leavers who
spoke to inspectors were not aware of the councils We listen, we care
promise, they were all clear, and spoke knowledgeably, about their
entitlements. However, not all care leavers have received a copy of their
birth certificates.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Senior managers and leaders have a clear sense of vision and purpose. The pace of
change has increased. Improvements are being made. However, children and young
people are not yet being consistently well served. Practice standards are improving
but, in some areas of the service, not quickly enough. Frontline managers, many of
whom are relatively new in post, do not always pay rigorous attention to detail or
provide the right level of critical challenge. This contributes to drift and delay for
some children.
While there is a strong focus on performance, senior managers do not have a direct
line of sight on some key aspects of frontline practice. Audits, which focus primarily
on process and compliance, tend to under- or over-estimate the impact of current
practice on the experience and progress of children and young people.
A high turnover of staff, and an organisational structure that involves a significant
number of built-in transfer points, have led to repeated changes of social workers in
some cases. While staff turnover is now much reduced, the lack of continuity has
made it difficult for some children and young people to develop meaningful
relationships with their social workers and has contributed to start again social work
practice.
With clear lines of reporting and accountability, governance arrangements are
robust. Highly developed strategic partnerships are being used effectively to support
transformational change.
The health and well-being board is influential in driving the improvement agenda.
Well-developed joint commissioning arrangements are responsive to the needs of
local communities. However, fostering recruitment strategies are not well targeted.
They are general, rather than specific. The local authority does not have enough
foster carers with the right mix of skills, knowledge and experience to meet current
and future demand.
The Children in Care Council (CiCC), which previously made a significant contribution
to the design and development of the emotional well-being and mental health
service, is currently in limbo. This is particularly surprising, given that the corporate
parenting board is well organised, well led, in touch with the wishes and feelings of
children in care and is making a difference.
The local authority has worked hard to ensure that, with average caseloads of 18,
social workers have a working environment which is conducive to good practice.
Manageable caseloads, good access to training and an active and effective principal
social worker are increasingly making it easier to recruit and retain staff.


Inspection findings

Senior managers and leaders have a clear sense of vision and purpose. They
are child focused, ambitious and driven. They are systematically putting in
place the essential foundations for the local authority to achieve the
consistency and quality of services that it aspires to. Childrens social care
services have been restructured in order to provide a sharper focus on key
stages in the childs journey and make better use of resources. Having set up
the multi-agency safeguarding services (MASH), which is making a real
difference to the way in which contacts and referrals are dealt with, the local
authority is now implementing its new early help strategy. This has been
designed and developed in close collaboration with a range of different
partners. Plans to create a 0 to 25 service for children who have disabilities
are well advanced.


Good engagement with elected members and clear lines of reporting and
accountability mean that governance arrangements are well developed and
effective. Regular face-to-face contact between the leader of the council, the
lead member for childrens services, the chief executive and the director of
childrens services (DCS) ensures that senior managers and leaders have a
shared understanding of the day-to-day challenges facing childrens social
care services.


However, the scrutiny function in relation to childrens social care is
underdeveloped. The scrutiny board was involved in designing and
implementing a new fee structure for foster carers, and in the past 12
months has reviewed the development of the MASH and considered the
implementation plans for the new early help offer. However, it is not yet
offering the robust and systematic critical challenge that middle and senior
managers need, and that children and families have a right to expect.


Highly developed strategic partnerships are being used effectively to support
transformational change. The ongoing regeneration of the north of the
borough, and the significant investment that has been made in schools
there, are helping to improve the lives of children, young people and
families. Perhaps because of these improvements, there is a powerful sense
of organisations and people working together to get things done. The police
superintendent, who is a member of the local authoritys corporate
management team, and his chief inspector, who chairs the Local
Safeguarding Children Board sub-group against child sexual exploitation,
have made significant contributions to the work to counter child sexual
exploitation and domestic violence. This work is helping to safeguard children
and families. Schools and academies are equally well engaged with, and are
making a significant contribution to, safeguarding in general. They are also
involved in specific initiatives, such as Prevent and the threat of
radicalisation. This means that issues and concerns are being identified and
discussed and, where appropriate, referred appropriately to the Channel
panel.



The health and well-being board is chaired by the lead member for childrens
services. The childrens trust was absorbed into the board and this has
strengthened it. It has a strong focus on ensuring that children and young
people get the best start in life and is influential in driving the improvement.
It played a key role in the redesign and recommissioning of the new
emotional well-being and mental health service, Solar, which went live in
April 2015 and is being delivered by through a small consortium of statutory
and voluntary organisations. By making better use of resources, Solar has
reduced waiting times and made access to services possible for children and
young people who previously would not have been able to do so. Schools are
major beneficiaries, and are able to refer children who they are concerned
about quickly and easily. Currently, 83% of children are seen within six
weeks.


Well-developed joint commissioning arrangements are responsive to the
needs of the local communities. They are informed by a clear and coherent
joint strategic needs assessment and supported by a longstanding section 75
agreement with health services. Commissioners with relevant specialist
knowledge and experience have led the way in re-providing substance
misuse and domestic violence services, as well as the emotional well-being
and mental health service. Public health, which transferred from the NHS to
the borough council in April 2013, has been at the heart of that process.
Contract monitoring arrangements are effective. Providers, both voluntary
and statutory, speak very positively about the way in which they are
encouraged and supported to be creative and innovative, as well as being
challenged on key deliverables. As evidence of impact, the reconfigured
substance misuse services have extended their reach to the point that
Solihull now has a higher than national average proportion of parents and/or
adults who are living with children in treatment programmes.


Sufficiency, not least in terms of in-house foster carers, remains a challenge.
The foster carer recruitment strategy is general, rather than specific. It
focuses on numbers and net gains rather than targeting specific audiences in
order to recruit carers for particular groups of children, including older or
Muslim children. Even so, the local authority is not meeting its own targets.
The number of foster carers recruited in 201516 was low. Only seven new
households offered 12 placements, three short of the local authoritys target
of 15. This is before taking into account the 21 foster carers who decided to
stop fostering in 201516. If the local authority is not able to recruit more inhouse foster carers, it will continue to rely on independent fostering
agencies, which means that more children, not fewer, will end up being
looked after out of borough. (Recommendation 9)


Senior leaders take their corporate parenting responsibilities seriously. The
corporate parenting board is chaired by the lead member, who makes sure
that members of the board have direct face-to-face contact with children and
young people at regular intervals, away from the formality of the council
chamber. With its own action plan and performance scorecard, the board is


making a difference. It was responsible for setting up a governing body for
the virtual school, improving the timeliness of initial and annual health
assessments, and introducing a more robust approach to monitoring the
offer and completion of return home interviews. It also arranged for foster
carers to be given delegated responsibility to approve sleepovers for
children, without having to get permission from the childs social worker.
Every child looked after receives an annual award and a personalised letter,
hand-signed by the leader of the council and the DCS. However, in the last
achievements of children looked after or care leavers.

The CiCC was involved in the design and development of the emotional wellbeing and mental health service, even choosing its name. Lately, however, it
has been allowed to stagnate. It has not met for some time, leaving a
committed group of core members feeling disappointed and disillusioned.
(Recommendation 11)


The leader of the council and the chief executive meet with the chair of the
LSCB at regular intervals, as do the DCS and the lead member. They
welcome the LSCB chairs insights and challenges, not least because she is
able to offer a different perspective, but equally they are able to, and do,
challenge the chair of the LSCB and hold her to account.


While there is a strong focus on performance, the development of a robust
performance culture is still a work in progress. Middle and senior managers
regularly scrutinise performance data but, in its current form, it does not give
them a direct insight into some key aspects of frontline practice, including,
for example, the frequency and regularity of supervision. Additionally, some
of the data in the childrens information and performance system is unclear
or unreliable. (Recommendation 1)


Quality assurance systems have been strengthened. The local authority has
increased its use of audits to get under the surface of different types of
activity to explore not just the quality, but also its impact and effectiveness.
However, the current audit tool, and the way in which it is being used, tends
to focus primarily on process and compliance. This has the potential to
under- or overestimate the impact of current practice on the experience and
progress of children in need of help and protection and children looked after.


The quality of management control at the frontline is variable. This is
significant and has the potential to dent the local authoritys ambition to
provide excellent services for all children and families. As a result of the
restructuring last year of childrens social care services, there are a
significant number of team and assistant team managers who are in a
management or supervisory posts for the first time. The local authority has
invested heavily in their development as leaders. However, in the short term,
a lack of consistently robust critical challenge and rigorous attention to detail
in some areas of the service have contributed to drift and delay, for some


children. This means that children and families are being let down every time
that a weak assessment or plan is allowed to pass unchallenged, or an
opportunity to explore and address permanence for a child is missed. What is
required is a greater sense of urgency and a more ruthless focus on core
practice in order to improve outcomes for all children. (Recommendation 2)

Over the course of the last 18 months, senior managers and leaders have
consciously tried to inject a greater sense of realism, based on openness and
transparency. Not afraid to be self-critical and always eager to learn, senior
managers are demonstrably committed to continuous improvement. They
are currently introducing a recognised model of practice, and plans to adopt
the graded care profile are well underway.


Strong on complaints, the local authority acts on the learning from each one,
using a spreadsheet to track the response and identify emerging themes.
Additionally, 297 children and young people looked after have made use of
the online portal, Viewpoint, since it was introduced in 2014. Responses are
analysed and used to inform individual and corporate improvements. The
local authority is also about to introduce a new system for gathering
feedback from children and families who have been involved in child
protection processes.


With productive working relationships between the Children and Family Court
Advisory and Support Service, the family courts, the local family justice board
and the local authority, the timeliness in completing care proceedings has
improved significantly.


The recruitment and retention of social workers have been a major issue.
During and immediately after the restructure of childrens social care
services, this resulted in increased staff turnover. This had a major
debilitating effect. When combined with a lack of robust management
oversight, it engendered a sort of starts again social work practice, in some
cases. It has certainly affected some children and young peoples ability to
develop and maintain meaningful relationships with their social workers.
Action taken by the local authority has resulted in a significant improvement,
and turnover is now down to 12%. This is an indication not only that things
are beginning to settle down, but that the restructure has had a positive
impact on recruitment and retention.


Acting as an effective bridge between senior managers and frontline social
workers, the principal social worker has been instrumental in translating into
practice the messages for improvement gleaned from audit activity.
Improvements in the quality and use of chronologies are due in no small part
to the work done by the principal social worker. Close relationships with local
universities are supporting continuing professional development. Monthly
newsletters are used to promote training and its take up.



The local authority provides good training and development opportunities.
The average caseload is 18 for social workers and 12 for newly qualified
social workers (NQSWs). Agency staff are used to backfill for NQSWs in order
to ensure that they have protected caseloads. This is further evidence of the
local authoritys commitment to creating an environment that is conducive to
good social work practice.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
By providing strong leadership, effective coordination and robust challenge, the LSCB
is helping to strengthen the work of partner agencies with children and families in
Solihull. As well as improving the quality of the services provided, this is leading to
better outcomes for children. Ably supported by a very capable business manager,
the independent chair of the LSCB provides clear direction and guidance. With good
engagement from board members, there is a real sense of commitment and
momentum. The work of the LSCB is increasingly focused, coherent and
authoritative.
The LSCB makes good and effective use of performance management information
and multi-agency audits to home in on its three strategic priorities: children who go
missing or are at risk of child sexual exploitation; early help; and neglect. Once areas
for improvement are identified, the board provides effective challenge. The board is
doubling the size of its case audit sample in 201617 to strengthen its overview of
the quality and impact of practice and compliance with practice standards, including
the use of child sexual exploitation risk assessment tools. The boards improvement
plan also includes a clear commitment to strengthen its focus on domestic abuse,
and to work with children and young people living in homes affected by domestic
abuse.
The board provides effective leadership around work with children and young people
at risk of sexual exploitation and those who go missing. It ensures that collective
efforts are well supported by a clear governance structure and an appropriate set of
up-to-date policies and procedures.
Early help services are being monitored, but the boards challenge to partner
agencies does not yet have the same rigour and focus evident in other areas of its
work.
Training provided by the board is well-targeted, incorporates learning from local and
national serious case reviews (SCRs) and is evaluated. To date, SCR work has been
well managed by the independent chair but, looking ahead, she is unlikely to have
the capacity to combine this with her primary role as chair of the board.
The child death overview panel (CDOP) is effective, not least in identifying relevant
public health and practice improvement priorities. However, the CDOP needs to
continue to work with health agencies to ensure that, when children die
unexpectedly, a fully staffed rapid response service is available.


Recommendations

Strengthen the focus and rigour with which the new early help service is
monitored, to enhance the effectiveness of the leadership and challenge
provided by the board to partner agencies.


Ensure that the board has sufficient capacity to manage SCRs and any
related learning reviews or single-agency case audits.


Ensure that, when a child dies unexpectedly, there are adequate rapid
response arrangements in place.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The engagement and commitment of partner agencies to the board is
impressive. This is given direction and momentum by strong and effective
leadership by the independent chair, supported by a highly capable business
manager. The work of the board is supported by a clear and functional
structure and effective governance arrangements. Taken together, this
means that the LSCB is successfully fulfilling its role as critical friend to
partner agencies, providing leadership and challenge in relation to the quality
and impact of services for children and young people in Solihull.


The LSCB has a small number of sub-groups that are focused on discharging
the boards statutory responsibilities and delivering on its three key priorities:
children who go missing or are at risk of child sexual exploitation; early help;
and neglect. The work of these sub-groups is overseen effectively by an
executive group that carefully considers performance data and audit findings,
and sets the agenda for board meetings. Board meetings are sharply focused
on the most important issues, with a strong emphasis on making a
difference. For example, through its monitoring of practice, the sub-group to
counter child sexual exploitation identified a number of concerns about the
support provided to young people at risk of sexual exploitation once they had
turned 18. Having discussed the issue, the executive group took it to the
next full board meeting. As a result of this, and robust challenge by the
independent chair, the local authority took appropriate action to ensure that
young people continue to receive support after turning 18.


The LSCB works well with the local family justice board and the health and
well-being board. Using the learning from an SCR, the LSCB has provided
effective challenge and guidance to the health and well-being board, both on
the development of the new education, health and care plans for children
who have special educational needs or disabilities, and on the importance of
ensuring that safeguarding issues and concerns are appropriately addressed.


The board regularly reviews a range of performance data, with particular
attention to its three strategic priorities. It has a specific performance
scorecard for each. The neglect scorecard is particularly strong, reflecting the


LSCBs commitment to implementing its strategy to counter neglect. As well
as performance data, the scorecard also covers attendance at LSCB training
on neglect and evaluation of the impact of this training.

The board has been involved in discussions about the development of the
new early help strategy and receives regular updates on the implementation
of the new early help offer that started in October 2015. However, the
boards scrutiny of early help services does not show the same degree of
rigour. While the board collects a range of relevant data, it has not yet
focused on the key issues of whether there has been an increase in the
number of early help assessments completed or sought to evaluate their
impact. In that sense, the board has not provided the same degree of
challenge, not least about the pace of change, as it has in other areas of
practice. (Recommendation)


The LSCBs multi-agency audit programme in 201516 was well managed
and focused appropriately on the boards priorities. It identified both good
practice and areas for improvement, which were then used to inform the
work of the board and to help to shape its priorities for 201617. For
example, when audits identified a lack of understanding of the thresholds for
intervention, the LSCB adapted its existing training courses to include a
section on thresholds and decision making. However, although rigorous in
their execution, the boards multi-agency audits in 201516 were completed
using a relatively small case sample of 11. This means that the learning
about particular areas of practice, which only featured in some of the
childrens cases, tended to be case specific rather than representative. For
example, the LSCBs strategic priority on neglect includes a particular focus
on the impact of the toxic trio of domestic abuse, parental mental ill health
and parental drug, alcohol and substance misuse. A larger audit case sample
is required to be able to assess thoroughly the quality of practice in relation
to these areas of concern. The LSCB is aware of this deficit and has agreed a
case sample size of 24 for 201617.


A section 11 audit of how well partner agencies discharge their
responsibilities to safeguard and protect children, which was carried out in
the autumn of 2015, was very thorough. It was used effectively, not only to
test compliance but also to identify thematic areas for improvement. This is
also true of a more recent section 175 audit of schools. An LSCB education
sub-group includes representatives from all of the collaborative school
groupings in Solihull, as well as from special and independent schools. This
means that the level of schools engagement is strong, both with the audit
and with the LSCB.


Given the relatively high number of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children
in Solihull, the LSCB has also taken the positive step of requiring the UK
Border Agency to complete a self-assessment of how well it discharges its
responsibilities to children and young people under Section 55 of the
Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.



The LSCB publishes and regularly updates its guidance on the threshold
criteria for access to childrens social care services. The document covers all
the areas required by statutory guidance and is responsive to the latest
developments in practice, such as a stronger focus on early help. Concerned
that thresholds were not consistently well understood or applied by agencies,
the board produced a short summary leaflet that was widely circulated.
However, an independent review of the thresholds, which was commissioned
by the LSCB and completed in February 2016, has highlighted the fact that
the threshold between early help and children in need requires further
clarification. As a result, the document is currently being revised, and this
work has not yet been completed.


The LSCBs learning and improvement framework is clear, succinct and
covers all matters expected by statutory guidance. It has a good focus on
local priorities, and identifies how learning is disseminated and evidence
gathered in order to show that it is making difference. The LSCBs training
strategy and training programme are based on a review carried out in April
and national SCRs, existing local priorities, and feedback from children and
young people in receipt of services. This has resulted in a well-targeted and
well-attended programme of training. The board uses an effective online
survey tool to gather feedback from course participants and their managers
about the impact of training on their practice at three months after they
have completed training. Almost all social workers spoken to by inspectors
were positive about the quality of LSCB training. They were able to talk
confidently about SCR learning and its relevance to their practice.


At present, the LSCB does not have a formal SCR sub-group to coordinate its
work around SCRs, learning reviews and any single-agency audits that have
been commissioned by the board. To date, this work has been led by the
independent chair. In the event that further reviews or audits are required,
over and above the work that is already underway, it is unlikely that the
independent chair would have sufficient capacity to manage this on top of
the demands of chairing the board. (Recommendation)


The child death overview panel (CDOP) has been effective in analysing
information at the individual child and the thematic public health levels. For
example, the CDOP has ensured that midwives and health visitors routinely
use an assessment tool to identify the likely risk of sudden infant death, and
that the protocol on the sudden and unexpected death of an infant is
understood and implemented by all of the relevant agencies. However,
despite ongoing efforts, including escalation via the board, the CDOP has not
yet been able to ensure that health partners provide full 24/7 cover as part
of the rapid response arrangements. (Recommendation)


Under the strategic leadership and direction of the LSCB, there are clear and
appropriate structures in place to identity and respond to the needs of
children at risk of child sexual exploitation and those who go missing from


home or care. Information about children missing education is well
integrated into this process. The child exploitation sub-group advocates
strongly on behalf of this vulnerable group of children, has a good oversight
and is demonstrably committed to continuous improvement. However, it
makes sense to extend the scope of multi-agency audits to ensure a fuller
understanding of the quality and impact of practice, and to comply with
practice standards. The LSCB monitors data on the prevalence and severity
of assessed risks associated with sexual exploitation, on children and young
people missing from home or care, and on the completion of return home
interviews and the intelligence that they generate. The LSCB provides
training, promotes awareness raising and challenges agencies to do better,
as and when necessary. For example, at the time of this inspection, the LSCB
was challenging the police and the local authority to improve the way in
which they collate and analyse information from return home and police safe
and well interviews, better to inform their prevention and disruption
activities.


The LSCBs annual report for 201415 is a clear and well-focused document
that covers all of the relevant areas. The results of the boards monitoring
and scrutiny of practice were used effectively to identify priorities for 2015
Any outstanding actions have been carried forward into the 201617
improvement plan, which the board is now working on. The improvement
plan encompasses the learning and recommendations from SCRs and areas
for development identified through performance and practice monitoring. It
sets out clearly the outcomes required, actions that need to be taken and the
measures that will be used to monitor and maintain improvement.

Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Nigel Parkes
Deputy lead inspector: Dominic Stevens
Team inspectors: Ken Jones, Fiona Parker, Lolly Rascagneres, Jenny Turnross and
Caroline Walsh
Shadow inspectors: Shabana Abasi
Senior data analyst: Alison Edwards
Quality assurance manager: Lynn Radley


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2016


