St. Helens Metropolitan Borough
Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
And
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 5 November 2014 - 25 November 2014
Report published: 20 January 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services require
improvement
The authority is not yet delivering good protection and help and care for children,
young people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.2
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires Improvement

permanence

Requires Improvement


Requires Improvement


Requires Improvement


Requires Improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Areas for improvement


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in St. Helens require improvement because:
Help and protection
 Early help services do not support some children soon enough to prevent their
situation from getting worse. There is insufficient focus on children in need, and
too many childrens cases are closed or stepped down to universal services before
needs have been fully assessed and sustained improvement assured.
 Too many children are subjected to child protection enquiries when they are not
required, and many children wait too long, and have repeat referrals and child
protection plans, before a stable, safe outcome is achieved.
 Assessments do not sufficiently consider or analyse historic risk which impacts on
the quality of child in need and child protection plans.

Looked after children and care leavers
 Leaders at all levels are not sufficiently ambitious for looked after children and
the attainment gap is not closing quickly enough. The achievement of looked
after children is poor.
 Not all looked after children benefit from up-to-date assessments and not all
childrens plans reflect their current needs.
 Adoption is not achieved quickly enough for some children who have waited, and
continue to wait, too long before being placed with their adopters.
 Too many care leavers are not in education, employment and training. There is a
lack of aspiration and priority afforded to the education of these young people by
corporate parents which is impacting on the ability of some children to achieve
their full potential.

Leadership and management
 Managers do not have sufficient oversight of case work and do not quality assure
assessments or plans robustly enough.
 Domestic violence services for children and their families are underdeveloped.
 The development of the Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH) has been slow
and has not yet secured the involvement of key partners to improve the quality of
information sharing and risk assessment.
 Performance management arrangements do not sufficiently focus on the quality
of practice and the outcomes for children and young people.
 Information obtained from interviews when children go missing is not yet
informing strategic activity to understand the prevalence of Child Sexual


Exploitation (CSE). Patterns and trends of perpetrator behaviour are not fully
understood.

What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Looked After Children

Ensure that the profile, aspirations and educational attainment of looked after
children and care leavers are raised by concerted effort from partners and the
local authority as corporate parents.

Early Intervention

Ensure full implementation of the early help strategy and that all partners
undertake common assessments and the role of lead professional for children
and families who have emerging vulnerabilities.

Thresholds

Ensure that there is a clear understanding and implementation of thresholds
across the continuum of need so that children and young people receive the
right help at the right time.


Review the thresholds applied to child protection enquiries and strategy
discussions and ensure that there is appropriate multi-agency information
sharing to inform decision making, so that children and families are not
unnecessarily subject to child protection investigations.

Missing children

Ensure that appropriate systems are in place to gather and analyse information
on missing children and children at risk of sexual exploitation, to enable
patterns and trends to be identified and used to inform intervention and
support for young people at risk, and enable perpetrator disruption.

Assessment and planning

Address the outstanding recommendations from the previous inspection to
improve the timeliness of childrens health assessments and improve the quality
of Personal Education Plans (PEPs) for looked after children


Ensure that managers are effectively monitoring and influencing the quality of
social work practice in assessment and planning.


Areas for improvement
Early help and protection

Complete the implementation of the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) to
fully support information sharing and evidence-based decision making in child
protection work at an early stage.


Develop a common risk assessment model for domestic abuse and ensure that
child and adult victims have access to targeted support services based on an
analysis of local need.

assessments, and ensure that assessments consider and analyse historical risk
factors and address all aspects of need before cases are stepped down.
factors; that they are specific, with clear timescales and measurable outcomes;
and that the impact of interventions is closely monitored by managers.
heart of practice and particularly within recorded assessments and plans.
cultural identity, religion and disability are fully incorporated in assessment,
care planning and recording.

Looked after children
assessment and appropriate support to demonstrate that the plan is safe and
the family can sustain change. Ensure that appropriate support is provided.
provision have an up-to-date care plan which is outcome focused and
addresses their current and emerging needs.
circulate reports in sufficient time to enable Independent Reviewing Officers
(IROs) to prepare adequately and to enable parents, carers and children to
fully participate.
demand for kinship assessments and the recruitment of foster carers, and
ensure that all foster carers are offered training and development opportunities
to keep their skills up to date and help them care for children more effectively.


Adoption and permanence
made.
what is happening to them.

Care leavers
ensuring that they have access to up-to-date information.
focused, addresses all of their needs and is subject to management review.

Leadership, management and governance
services to children as well as compliance to requirements, and ensure that this
is underpinned by an improved analysis of performance information.
impact of interventions on outcomes for children and young people.
supervision is reflective and addresses the development and training needs of
social workers.
provided to the social care workforce.
(WWISH) to ensure that it is able to respond effectively to the need to
undertake assessments of adopters within government timescales.

The local authoritys strengths
quality. There is a solid offer of support for newly qualified social workers
(NQSWs) and social workers in their first year of qualification (ASYE). A
comprehensive training and development plan and access to good quality
training supports the recruitment and retention of qualified social workers.


duration of care proceedings to 24 weeks, against a national average of 31
weeks.
Fostering for adoption placements are actively considered so that children can
live with their adopters as soon as possible. Social workers are tenacious in
finding adoptive placements for hard to place children and children with
complex needs.
opportunity to participate in the Webster Stratton parenting programme since
as play therapy are provided to adopters together with support for school
admissions and any health issues. Placement stability for children is good.
There is a wide range of services and bespoke packages to support the
emotional well-being of looked after children and care leavers, which means
that they receive timely responses to their therapeutic needs.
Care leavers benefit from close, supportive relationships with workers who
know them well. The local authority is in touch with all of them. The range and
standard of accommodation for care leavers is good.
children and young people between the ages of six and 18 years of age
providing group work, one-to-one support, weekends away and emergency
responses. There are clear pathways to childrens social care if safeguarding
needs are identified.

Progress since the last inspection
in June 2012. That inspection judged the overall effectiveness for both
safeguarding and looked after children services to be good, with outcomes for
safeguarding judged to be adequate. Action planning in response to that
inspection has been methodical although, three recommendations remain
outstanding:
 the local authority is not yet ensuring that all looked after children
receive their annual health assessment within statutory timescales
 the authority has not improved the quality of Personal Education Plans
(PEPs) nor improved the quality of pathway plans for care leavers.
 the authority has not yet ensured that team managers in assessment
teams are having sufficient impact on individual cases and social work
practice to improve the quality of assessments and care planning.


leavers in employment, education and training have deteriorated significantly
since the last inspection.
overall effectiveness of service provision achieves better outcomes for children
and families. Action has been taken to address poor quality child protection
planning in cases of chronic neglect. This resulted in the looked after children
population growing from 350 to 412 which is significantly higher than similar
authorities.
shared adoption service. In response to poor performance, the casework social
workers were relocated back to the authority in April 2014. This is beginning to
have a positive impact on outcomes for children and young people.
refreshed Continuum of Need threshold document. In June 2014 the local
authority restructured its early help services, locating the priority families
programme alongside the early intervention service. Childrens centres were
reorganised into two clusters in July 2014, each based on a hub and spoke
model. Many service changes have been introduced in recent months and are
yet to show significant impact; some are yet to be fully implemented.
was launched. An Assistant Director of Early Help and Protection was
appointed. The number of teams and social workers was increased and a
dedicated duty function was created. A Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH)
was developed in January 2014 which co-located the Police Family Crime and
Investigation Unit (FCIU) with childrens social care, but development of the
MASH has not yet included the introduction of other partners.
engaged in peer challenge summits on self-assessment, data and performance.
Findings correlated broadly with inspection findings, although the local
authoritys most recent self-assessment does not sufficiently identify all
required areas for improvement.
Reforms has improved coordination of work. So, too, have the reviews of Child
Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) and speech and language therapy
services. A social worker from adult services has been allocated to transition
planning for children with disabilities to co-work with every young person from
their 16th birthday.


Exploitation (CSE) training to the LSCB and elected members to raise the profile
of CSE. To further strengthen their approach; in June 2014 St Helens
commissioned Catch 22, an independent provider, to deliver a CSE service to
children and their families and also to lead on missing from home and care
interviews.
Framework and a review of the safeguarding unit is underway. This new
framework is yet to have an impact on improving the consistency and quality of
social work practice.


Summary for children and young people
 Services that provide help and protection for children, young people and families
in St Helens are being improved to make sure that support is available when it is
needed. Many changes have been made recently, some only in the last few
months, and it is too early to see what difference they are making. Parents,
children and young people, as well as local authority managers and staff, are
positive about the changes, but they know that there is more work to do. Those
in charge of services recognise that they need to listen more to children, young
people and their families to help them make services better.
 Social workers need to give children and young people more help and support to
understand what is happening to them and how long it will take. Parents and
carers also need to know what they have to do to make things better, who is
going to help them and what will happen if things do not improve.
 When children and young people first need help, teachers, health visitors,
midwives or family intervention workers will find out what help is needed and
provide support, but not all professionals provide this help soon enough. If
children and young people need protection, social workers quickly become
involved to make children and young people safe, but sometimes children and
young people experience a child protection investigation when this is not needed.
When support is needed, social workers and managers do not always stay
involved with families until they are sure that parents and carers have made
lasting changes to whatever difficulties they were experiencing. Sometimes they
end their involvement too soon.
 When children and young people cared for by St Helens Council have brothers
and sisters, social workers try very hard to keep them together if that is best for
them. If children cannot return home, social workers find good homes for them
where they are looked after well. Some children go to live with forever families
which means they are adopted by new parents. The social workers work very
hard to find adoptive families quickly but sometimes this can take too long.

 When children and young people are looked after by the Council, many do not do

as well in school as they should. Much more work needs to be done to make sure
that children and young people make good progress at school and have enough
qualifications to get jobs or go on to college or university. Care leavers need
much more help and need lots of information about their lives, their health and
what they are entitled to that will help them to successfully live independently.
They get good support to find a safe place to live and some care leavers continue
to live with their foster carers. More foster carers should be supported to look
after young people after their 18th birthday if that is what young people want.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area
 Approximately 36,271 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in St Helens. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 23.7% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 22.6% (the national average is 18.0%)
 in secondary schools is 18.9% (the national average is 15.7%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 3.1% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.1% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
White Other (which includes Eastern European children) at 0.82% and Mixed
White and Black Caribbean at 0.51%.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 2.1% (the national average is 18.7%)
 in secondary schools is 1.2% (the national average is 14.3%).
 Over recent years there has been an influx of Eastern European migrants to St
Helens seeking employment opportunities. The Borough's largest distinct ethnic
group are Irish travellers.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 1,505 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 March 2014, 231 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 156 children at 31 March 2013. At 6
November 2014 there were 257 children subject to a child protection plan.
 At 31 March 2014, 13 children lived in private fostering arrangements. This is an
increase from 12 children at 31 March 2013. At 6 November 2014 there were 13
children privately fostered.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Children looked after in this area
 At 6 November 2014, 412 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 114 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 432 (119 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014. Of this number:
authority area
 one child lives in a residential special school4 and lives out of the
authority area
 one child is an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 20 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupations.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two childrens homes. Both were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since August 2012.
 The Chair of the LSCB has been in post since June 2012.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Requires Improvement

Summary
 The local authority has embarked on a wide range of improvement work,
resulting in much change to organisational structures and work processes in early
help and protection. Many have been implemented in recent months and are yet
to show significant impact, and some are yet to be fully implemented. Not all
children and young people are receiving the help they need at the right time.
Thresholds for access to childrens social care are not sufficiently understood by
partner agencies, which results in too many inappropriate referrals; some are of
poor quality. Despite this, referrals are dealt with in a timely manner and
signposted to universal services or childrens social care as appropriate.
 Of those referred to childrens social care, too many have not received support
early enough or for long enough to prevent problems escalating There is a high
prevalence of domestic violence in the area but services for children and their
families affected by domestic abuse are underdeveloped.
 Too many children experience repeat referrals and child protection plans before a
stable, safe future is achieved. Other children and families are subjected
unnecessarily to intrusive child protection enquiries before the threshold for
significant harm is established.
 When risk of significant harm is established, often through a significant incident,
there is a swift and robust response but strategy meetings do not routinely
benefit from multi-agency information sharing.
 Assessments are mostly timely, though the quality is inconsistent. Not all
assessments analyse historical risk factors sufficiently nor evidence the wishes,
feelings and experiences of the child.
 Thresholds for escalation to child protection or step down to children in need are
not sufficiently understood nor applied.
 Plans often mirror assessments, with too many being unclear about what needs
to change by when, and lacking a robust alternative if change does not occur.
Child protection conferences and core groups take place regularly, but too many
children are stepped down from protection plans without sufficient evidence that
change has been achieved and sustained.
 Team managers are not scrutinising or challenging social work practice robustly
enough.


teams of family support workers have been created who respond to the needs
of families identified at level three on the Welfare Continuum of Need.
However, there is confusion around this work. Although Children in Need (CIN)
single assessments are undertaken in the duty teams, the majority of children
in need cases referred into the local authority are managed in the early
intervention service. These cases are held by social workers who use the
Common Assessment Framework (CAF) even though the threshold for a child in
need assessment has been met. CAF assessments do not explore more complex
needs, which means that childrens needs are not being sufficiently recognised
or understood. Too often cases are stepped down inappropriately to universal
services when their needs require more in-depth assessment and support.
(E-CAF), which means that some children are not benefiting from an early
assessment of their needs and early opportunities to improve childrens
outcomes can be missed. Some professionals within schools are unwilling to act
as lead professional for children with lower level needs. This means that cases
are often closed without support being provided to prevent problems getting
worse.
no longer require a social work service, there is not enough support from other
services to help them to sustain change. When partner agencies refuse to
provide lower level support there is limited evidence of effective multi-agency
escalation processes being used to address this. In September 2014, two early
help managers were appointed. This has begun to have an impact on direct
management oversight and monitoring of cases that had been open to
childrens social care for too long, some for as long as two years.
people when difficulties emerge. The early help offer from the local authority
aims to provide a more coordinated, targeted service from childrens centres,
with targeted support by family intervention practitioners as a core part of the
offer. The authoritys Priority Families Programme is now located alongside the
Early Intervention Service. This is beginning to show some positive outcomes.
Examples of recent improvements can be seen in the provision of speech and
language therapy and a robust focus on parenting support. There is good
access to accommodation for vulnerable teenagers, substance misuse services
(for both adults and young people) and those presenting with conduct or
behaviour difficulties. Individual packages of home-based support and
parenting advice by family intervention workers are valued by parents. The use
of Family Action Meetings (FAM) is well-established, but parents do not receive
reports prior to these meetings; this makes it more difficult for them, and
young people, to fully engage in the process or raise all matters that concern
them.


than their 25 hours entitlement; 55% have less than 15 hours provision whilst a
further 20% have five hours or less. The vast majority of these children are
receiving additional early help services from the Priority Families Programme
due to a variety of social care needs, which means that the local authority is in
touch with this cohort of children. However early help assessments and plans
do not focus sufficiently on childrens educational development, which is most
often overshadowed by social care needs.
underdeveloped. There is a high incidence of domestic violence in the borough
with 5,681 referrals being made to childrens social care between Oct 2013Sept 2014. There has been an increase in high risk cases in the half year
between April-November 2014 with 393 cases referred to Multi-Agency Risk
Assessment Conferences (MARAC) in comparison with 432 cases for the full
year 2013-14. Early help pathways are not yet fully developed to address this
prevalence in the Continuum of Need. There is a lack of service provision to
support children and young people who have experienced domestic abuse with
not enough direct work with children or access to counselling, and limited
access to adult perpetrator programmes. There is no single risk assessment tool
for domestic violence across partner agencies, which means that professionals
are not helped to identify risk.
which is improving communication and coordination between schools and the
police about domestic violence incidents. When a domestic incident occurs,
police immediately notify the childs school, which ensures that a designated
member of staff makes contact with the child to assess the level of support
required.
Arrangements (MAPPA) is not being used effectively to communicate risks to
childrens social care where children are not open cases. This means that for
this cohort of children there are missed opportunities to provide early help and
assess where children may be suffering harm from exposure to domestic abuse
or unsafe adults.
misuse of drugs or alcohol for either adults or children are identified in a childs
single assessment. Parental mental health needs are mostly recognised with
joint work being undertaken, but there are examples where assessments and
plans have not been fully coordinated between agencies, which means that
information needed to inform assessments can be missed.


those in similar authorities. This increased by almost a quarter between 201213 and 2013-14 to 812 per 10,000 children. The national level is 573 per
substantial number of re-referrals, as high as 29% in the past eight months
compared to 21.9% 2013-14.The majority of children with disabilities seeking
social and leisure opportunities do so through a statutory social work
assessment when they have no other presenting social care needs. This means
that this group of children do not have equal access to services and are
subjected to unnecessary statutory interventions.
partners complete the service request form and some referrals do not contain
enough information. Valuable resources are wasted while social workers seek
enough information to make a determination about next steps. There are no
clear arrangements for agencies to seek advice regarding referrals, and almost
all contacts result in a referral. Of those contacts sampled by inspectors, four of
schools; the former often relate to domestic violence. The police acknowledge
that over 700 domestic abuse notifications are sent to childrens social care
each month without the required triage and risk assessment; they agreed with
inspectors that the local authority is inundated with these notifications. During
the inspection, Merseyside police proposed improved risk assessment
arrangements which have the potential to reduce notifications by around one
third, however no implementation date has yet been set.
including those out of hours. Consent to enquiries and assessment is sought
where appropriate. Management decisions in the first response team are clearly
recorded and communication with duty teams for the transfer of cases is
effective. In many cases, however, the transfer is so rapid that not all
information is either acquired or considered prior to determining next steps,
including child protection enquiries.
had not been acted on. The co-location of police and social care in January
leading to improvements in child protection work. This is acknowledged by the
local authority as a gap, with some key agencies, notably health and adult
services, yet to join. Information sharing is not always timely.


to evidenced child protection concerns are appropriate, with actual and
potential risks identified. However, decision-making points for child protection
enquiries operate at too low a threshold, resulting in too many children being
subject to enquiries before sufficient assessment and consideration of agency
information. The number of child protection strategy meetings rose by 20% in
strategy discussions are limited in identifying the risk of significant harm, or the
range of actions planned, and some can take several weeks to record. The
majority of strategy discussions also only involve social care and the police, so
the richness of multi-agency information is not accessed to inform decisions or
contingency planning.
to initial child protection conference. Those decisions are appropriate, but this
indicates that many families have been subject to these enquiries
unnecessarily. Where cases proceed to initial child protection conference,
interim protection arrangements are unclear and poorly recorded.
Children are seen alone where appropriate, with practitioners routinely seeking
their views about incidents, injuries and recent events, although their broader
wishes and feelings are not always clear.
communicating with younger children to gain their wishes and feelings,
including observations of non-verbal children. This positive practice does not
extend to meeting the communication needs of all children with disabilities.
There is no telephone facility for those with hearing impairments and few
practitioners trained in common alternative communication methods, such as
Makaton.
local authority has taken steps to increase awareness of neglect across the
childrens social care workforce and with partner agencies, but as yet there is
limited evidence of the impact of this work. Case files do not evidence use of
the recently introduced graded care profile for identifying neglect.
seen during assessments in the majority of cases. Since April 2014 there is
evidence of clearer management direction, although assessment quality
remains variable. Not enough assessments evidence use of the recently
introduced signs of safety model or graded care profile to support effective
analysis of risk. Insufficient attention is given to the family history or the impact
of parental behaviour.


social workers to recognise the cumulative impact of abuse on children. There
is little evidence that the impact of domestic abuse on childrens emotional and
physical safety is understood. The impact of faith, culture and disability does
not have a high enough profile.
stepped down from child protection plans or child protection enquiries. This
means that child protection processes are being used as a precautionary
measure to ensure that risks are identified. Whilst immediate risks are not
missed, this has unintended consequences for children and their families as
they are exposed to intrusive interventions which are disproportionate to their
level of need.
sufficiently identified, exposing children to potential harm. One case sampled by
inspectors found that risks to two very young children had not been sufficiently
assessed prior to them returning home from care. The inspectors concerns
resulted in the local authority quickly escalating the cases to a child protection
conference and legal advice being sought. The local authority also immediately
reviewed and amended their return home policy to include a service managers
agreement before decisions are taken to return a child home from care.
and by when, and what support is to be offered. Too many cases are stepped
down from child protection to children in need and early intervention teams
with insufficient evidence that change has been achieved and sustained.
Inspectors found one case of children not being visited for seven weeks
following step-down from a child protection plan, and indications in two cases
of proposals having been made by managers to remove child protection plans
without evidence that risks had been reduced. Robust challenge by the
conference chair in both cases prevented the plan from being stepped down.
ceasing as a child in need within three months of ending the child protection
plan is 37.1%, which is considerably higher than the national average of
drift and delay. This is not being consistently identified and challenged by
conference chairs and managers. Change is not being robustly driven through
conferences and core groups. Not all protection plans are specific about how
risks are going to be managed and how children and their families are to be
supported and not all core group minutes show how progress is being
measured against protection plans. Timescales for change and what action will
be taken if childrens circumstances do not improve are unclear in the majority
of plans seen. Team managers are not quality assuring protection plans or
reviewing whether interventions have been effective and robust.


previous three months, 32% had previously been subject to a child protection
plan for similar reasons. This demonstrates that parents and carers have been
unable to sustain the necessary changes therefore exposing children and young
people to further harm. This figure has reduced in recent months, but there
continue to be a significant number of cases where too little is changing and
where there is change, this is too slow.
of emotional harm. Nearly half (46%) of children subject to protection plans
show neglect as the category of abuse, and emotional abuse is the category for
of the assessment and some are too adult focused with childrens needs often
swamped by adult issues.
focus sufficiently on the underlying risks and need. This means that outcomes
sought for children are not informed by robust assessment of need. Some are
not recorded clearly enough and lack timescales for achieving sustainable
change.
this is still below the authoritys own target of 96%. Statutory visits when
children are subject to child protection plans are timely however the purpose of
visits is not always well recorded and it is unclear from records how these visits
are monitoring and contributing to the progress of plans. Case files do not
always present evidence of direct work undertaken with children or reflect the
knowledge social workers have of the child.
within pre-proceedings and legal planning frameworks. This is the result of
appropriate assertive action with a clearer perspective on seeking permanence,
particularly for pre-school children. Pre-birth assessments are also receiving
more rigorous assessment of risks and needs within a more focused timescale.
voices are not sufficiently heard and understood. Children are not being
supported enough to participate in child protection conferences and childrens
views are not routinely being sought to contribute to service development and
improvement. The recent commissioning of the National Youth Advocacy
Service (NYAS) aims to address this. Every child subject to child protection
processes are now being offered an advocate to support their participation in
assessments and meetings which concern them, subject to the child or young
persons age and level of understanding. This service is however so recent that
the impact of this is yet to be fully demonstrated further awareness-raising
training for social workers is also planned to support placing the child at the
heart of their work.


eventualities. Procedures provide clarity for all professionals as to the role of
different services and give advice why different groups might be missing
education. School attendance is robustly monitored and communicated to
childrens services as appropriate. The policy to pursue children missing from
education is well demonstrated in a number of cases seen by inspectors
involving Education Welfare Officers tracking children and in one case
exhausting local enquiries and extending its search into Europe to establish the
whereabouts of a missing child.
Elective Home Education (EHE) for their children. The LSCB reviewed
arrangements for children who were effectively home educated, some of whom
had not been visited for two years. As a result of this work the local authority
ensured that every such child was visited and a new protocol was implemented
to strengthen the safeguarding and educational oversight of those children
following this a number of children re-entered mainstream education. The Local
Authority has also been requested to participate within a national initiative to
address safeguarding with an EHE context.
missing from home and care service, which has begun to provide an active,
energetic approach to identifying children and young people who are at risk of
CSE. As this service is so recent, the findings have not yet been analysed by the
local authority or police to inform service planning around risk management and
support. The work of Catch 22 is not familiar to all social workers, and findings
from return home interviews are not yet informing childrens plans, which is a
significant gap. Social workers do not routinely use a specific risk assessment
tool with children where there may be a CSE concern, which means
opportunities to identify children and young people potentially at risk are being
missed.
Children at risk of CSE are managed through the developing Multi-Agency Child
Sexual Exploitation (MACSE) arrangement. In the past 12 months, 19 cases
have been discussed at MASCE: eight looked after children, one care leaver,
two children in need and eight children not previously known to childrens social
care. Whilst strategic intelligence sharing at MASCE is improving, this is not
routinely informing childrens plans. In four out of five cases sampled by
inspectors, strategic information sharing did not translate onto children and
young peoples files and no safe care strategies were recorded. Where matters
of actual or likely harm are identified, the police are active in pursuing
prosecutions. However, current police and social care capacity to routinely
analyse and evaluate patterns that may lead to prevention or disruption activity
is limited.


however there has been no publicity or awareness raising since April 2013. At
the time of the inspection 13 notifications were actively being worked. The
majority of initial assessments seen by inspectors do not provide holistic
assessments of the childs needs and circumstances, which means that the
needs of this vulnerable group of children are not well understood.
timely initial response to referrals from the Local Authority Designated Officer
(LADO), although follow up meetings to track the progress of investigations can
take longer than they should to be completed. The vast majority of referrals are
made by schools, residential childrens homes and the fostering service. The
annual report does not sufficiently analyse where there are gaps in agencies
reporting to the LADO. This limits the ability to use this information to target
agencies and ensure that the LADOs role and function is understood across the
partnership.
the local social housing agency, Helena, is in place for homeless 16- and 17year-olds. A dedicated young persons accommodation officer robustly assesses
young peoples needs and provides ongoing support to ensure that they
become settled in accommodation, including advice on benefits, education and
employment. While some are supported by mediation to return back to their
families, the majority are provided with dedicated emergency supported
accommodation. The council is compliant with the Southwark Judgement and
ensures that where appropriate young people are accommodated under Section
for these vulnerable young people.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Requires Improvement

Summary
 There are currently 412 children looked after by St Helens council. The rate of
looked after children has been consistently higher than both the national level
and statistical neighbours.
 At 31 March 2014 St. Helens had 430 looked after children at a rate of 119 per
substantially above neighbouring authorities at a level of 74 per 10,000. This is in
part due to action to address drift in a significant number of neglect cases but
also a lack of effective early help services.
 Decisions to look after children are now more timely and no cases were seen
where children were looked after unnecessarily.
 The educational achievement of looked after children is poor and based on
starting points, the progress achieved is too slow. The most recent results show
that on average, pupils at Key Stage 4 are at least 32 months behind pupils
nationally. Personal Education Plans (PEPs) do not focus sufficiently on childrens
educational attainment. Too many care leavers are not in education; employment
and training, with only four accessing higher education. The lack of aspiration and
priority afforded to the education of both looked after children and care leavers
by corporate parents is seriously compromising their life chances.
 Implementation of the Public Law Outline (PLO) process has helped to reduce the
time it takes to complete care proceedings and to make plans for childrens
permanent care. Plans to return children home from care when they are not
subject to legal proceedings are not sufficiently informed by robust assessments
to ensure that risks have been reduced and change can be sustained.
 Assessments and care plans are not consistently updated and some lack detailed
information about important events in childrens lives. Not all children have
looked after plans which reflect their current and emerging needs or which are
informed by their wishes and feelings. Not all looked after children receive a
timely initial health assessment.
 Arrangements for assessing risk and keeping young people safe from CSE,
especially when they go missing, are not yet fully understood by all staff.
 Almost all care leavers remain looked after until they reach 18 years of age, and
the local authority is in touch with all of them; however, few care leavers remain
with their foster carers beyond 18 years of age. The range and standard of
accommodation for care leavers is good, but the current location of the care
leavers service does not provide opportunities for direct work with young people.
 Care leavers have insufficient information about their medical histories and
entitlements. Pathway plans and reviews are not clear enough about the support


young people need and how this will be achieved.
 Some children awaiting adoption have waited, and continue to wait, too long
before being placed with their adopters; a number have already waited in excess
of government targets. However, the local authority does work hard to find
adoptive parents for hard to place children and children with complex needs, with
positive outcomes. There are delays in completing life story work with children to
help them understand their background and to prepare them for adoption.
 There are good quality foster placements and residential provision. Placement
stability is also good. There is decisive action to find families and match children
appropriately.
of looked after children has continued to be high compared to statistical
neighbours. This is a result of positive action taken in the early help and
protection services on a number of cases which had drifted which has resulted
in children being taken out of situations of risk who are now living in safe and
stable placements. Thresholds for becoming looked after are now understood
and applied consistently. Legal planning meetings are chaired by senior
managers which ensure that children do not become looked after unnecessarily
and provides an additional level of scrutiny to ensure all alternatives to care
have been explored.
risks which led to the child becoming looked after were not robust in a small
minority of cases sampled. This means that children are sometimes returning
home without purposeful work to ensure that the family can sustain change.
the average duration of care proceedings to within 24 weeks, against a national
average of 31 weeks. Inspectors saw some good examples of parallel planning,
which means that children and young people are waiting less time to achieve
legal permanence. Whilst Cafcass reports that the quality of care applications is
improving, the quality of social work practice prior to care proceedings being
initiated is not consistently good or well evidenced. Letters before proceedings
are well written and expectations of parents are clear, but management
oversight of decisions and progress monitoring of pre-proceedings work is not
always robust. The result is delay for some children where further assessments
and information is needed to analyse risk.
the majority of cases seen, as assessments are not routinely updated. In a
small number of cases, assessments had not been updated for several years.
This means that plans lack important information about things that have
changed for children, and in some cases plans have drifted without the right
intervention or actions.


arising from their cultural or ethnic identity. Childrens needs in relation to
contact with family members are not well recorded. The majority of plans seen
did not routinely record childrens views and wishes or reflect how they are
involved in the planning process. Inspectors did see some examples of better
plans, which contained the views of children and included clear timescales and
contingency planning.
sufficient priority either at an operational or corporate level. Social care
assessments and plans do not focus enough on childrens educational needs.
There is still more work to do in relation to school readiness. At Key Stages 1
and 2, looked after children make progress which is in line with expectations
nationally, and a few reach the higher levels in Key Stage 2. The majority of
looked after children in Year 1 reach a good level of development in the phonics
screening checks, but only a small minority reach a good level of development
in early years.
on educational outcomes and do not consider whether pupil premium funding is
being used to support childrens progress. This means that children and young
people are not supported to achieve their full potential and opportunities are
missed to identify where children need additional help. This is reflected in the
poor GSCE results for young people at Key Stage 4 and the low numbers of
young people accessing higher education and employment when they leave
care.
is above the national average and behaviour is well managed. There have been
no permanent exclusions of looked after children in the past four years and
fixed term exclusions are well below the national average, at 6.3%. Despite
these positive indicators, standards and aspirations for looked after children are
too low.
varied considerably over the last four years. Improvements when made are not
sustained and standards are not high enough when compared with statistical
neighbours. Low results mean that when looked after children leave school at
age 16 they are on average 32 months behind in their learning.


In 2014, one quarter of year 11 looked after children were identified as having
special educational needs. By the end of year 11 the overall progress of this
cohort was below the expected progress for similar groups both within the local
authority and nationally.

teacher, and planning for improvement has only recently started with a
restructure of the virtual school. The appointment of a part-time head teacher
from a previously outstanding school is a step forward; the new appointee
should challenge the culture of low expectations and ambition for looked after
children and lead on an action plan to improve progress and attainment at all
key stages.
timescales and recorded on childrens files, and most social workers spoken to
could add rich context about the child and their lived experiences. It was clear
that social workers were helping many children to understand the reasons for
becoming looked after. There were some good examples of observations of
very young children being used to understand their wishes and feelings.
holding up to 30 cases, which affects their capacity to see children consistently
and undertake direct work in all cases.
responsibilities. Independent Reviewing Officers (IROs) do not contact all
children before reviews, although they do prioritise those children who live
outside the borough and make visits to those children who do not attend their
own meetings to explain any decisions made. There is evidence on case files of
IROs challenging plans where there is a lack of progress for children, although
this does not always result in actions to improve social work practice or
expedite the childs plan.
professionals, which means that the IRO is unable to prepare ahead of the
meeting and children and parents do not know what is going to be said about
them. The local authority is not yet meeting its own target for reviewing
childrens plans in a timely manner. In September 2014, only 85% of reviews
were completed within timescales against a target of 96%. Very recent steps
have been taken to address this issue by recruiting additional IRO capacity.
well by clear policies and guidance for staff. A permanency panel meets
regularly to consider childrens needs and potential matches. Life story work for
children with a plan for permanence is not delivered consistently, and too much
reliance is placed on foster carers to complete this vital work.


years. Placement stability at year end 2012-13 was 67.3% Between April and
September 2014, 71.3% of children had been in the same placement for two
years or more. Of the 143 children who have been looked after for more than
at least two years. Short term stability is also good, with only 39 children (7%)
having had three or more placements over a three-year period against a
national average of 11%.
placements for children which helps to prevent placement disruption. Foster
carers spoken to feel well supported. Providers of agency foster carers report
that the authority provides flexible help and support to placements. Suitable
monitoring and quality assurance processes are in place to ensure that
residential placements continue to meet statutory requirements and the needs
of children and young people.
authority area, of which the majority, 156, live within 20 miles of their home
address. There are 30 children who live more than 20 miles from their home of
whom the majority, 15, have been in the same placement for more than two
years. Social work visits to children living outside the area are prioritised.
to assessments of family members who come forward as potential carers for
children during court proceedings. However, the recent prioritisation of these
assessments has had a negative impact on the capacity of the fostering service
to complete the assessment of new foster carers and has also led to delays in
the training provided. This compares to the effective recruitment performance
in 201314 which showed an increase of 50% from the previous year. At the
time of inspection there were; 29 family and friends and 22 prospective
applicants in the process of assessment. A total of 35 foster carers have left the
authority since September 2013.
Guardianship Orders (SGOs) to secure legal permanence for children and young
people with their carers. Focused work has resulted in 44 children ceasing to be
looked after in 20132014 via SGO arrangements. Foster carers are supported
if they want to apply for a SGO, but not all foster carers were clear about the
levels of financial support available to them. Since September 2013 nine foster
carers have become special guardians and two are currently being assessed.


undertaken within timescales. The fostering panel is led effectively by an
experienced independent chairperson. Panel membership is appropriate and
includes an elected member, who ensures that there is a good link to corporate
parenting. Minutes show that the panel meets regularly and that members are
appropriately challenging of social workers presentations in order to contribute
to and improve practice.
workers and can talk to them about most things. Children told inspectors that
they feel safe at home and school but, importantly, they know what to do if
they are unhappy. Young people could describe examples of when things had
changed because they had told their social worker about something. Children
knew how to report bullying and where to go for help.
and Young People Now Awards 2013, where they received second place under
the category Best Children in Care Council. Members of the CICC said that they
feel listened to in a genuine way and feel that their opinions are valued. They
gave examples of changes that had been made to the leaving care allowance
and to pocket money levels because they had spoken directly to the Director of
Childrens Services.
Advocacy Service (NYAS) and are offered the support of an advocate to
promote their participation in their reviews. Young people know how to
complain and those who do are offered a service from an advocate. The
majority of complaints are resolved at the informal stage and are dealt with
promptly. Children and young people are encouraged to make friendships and
to have hobbies and interests, and are supported to try new activities.
September 2014, 15% were looked after children. A dedicated Youth Offending
worker has recently been appointed to ensure that looked after young people
are not entering the system unnecessarily.
have their medical assessments on time, but targets are still not being met and
the percentage of medical assessments completed within timescales fell to
needs are not understood and addressed in a timely way.


health and well-being. The emotional well-being panel creates bespoke
packages of support from a range of providers including CAMHS and NSPCC.
Children and young people who misuse substances and alcohol are well
supported by Youth Action Against Addiction who provide support through
transitions into adult services for care leavers.
accommodation and respite services. Parents spoken to were positive about the
experiences for their children, and value the practical and emotional support
arrangements. However, none of the childrens plans seen during the inspection
were up to date which means childrens plans did not reflect their changing and
emerging needs.
provides return interviews for all children, including those who live out of the
borough. Since June 2014, all children who have more than one episode of
being missing are risk assessed for CSE and all children are offered ongoing
work from Catch 22. However, social workers do not have a full understanding
of this work and do not routinely receive the outcome of assessments.
Childrens plans are therefore not being informed by this work. Information
from these interviews is collated by the provider to identify patterns and trends,
but this work is so recent that the first quarterly report has only just been
provided to the local authority and is yet to be evaluated and analysed to
inform strategic planning.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement.
looked after and being placed with their adopters. In 201314 the average
number of days a child living in St Helens waited to be adopted was 629. This
has increased since the last published figures and is further away from the
time has reduced to 629 days but this remains 142 days away from the target.
been made has also increased since the last published figures, from 205 days in
some of this has been unavoidable due to the complex needs of some children
with plans for adoption. There has been no drift in social workers family finding
for children who are harder to place. Social workers are tenacious and do not
give up which will affect performance in relation to the national adoption
scorecard. The authority understands this challenge well and continues to
pursue adoption where it is in a childs best interests, which is good practice.


their adoption social workers back from the tri-borough service, WWISH, which
had been responsible for adoption since October 2011. Capacity in the adoption
team was increased and a permanence coordinator role created. Improved,
comprehensive and robust monitoring and tracking of adoption plans was
implemented. As a result, the time between coming into care and being placed
for adoption is beginning to reduce.
WWISH. Regular meetings take place with the permanence coordinator to
discuss children waiting and potential adopters. Recruitment is informed well by
the needs of children waiting and also targeted for older children, siblings and
for children where their developmental progress is uncertain. Assessments are
prioritised accordingly.
of successful recruitment campaigns. However, this large number affected the
services capacity to carry out prompt initial home visits to people considering
adoption.
therefore makes regular use of a small pool of experienced independent social
workers. Despite this, WWISH has been unable to provide assessors for foster
carers of 14 children, who have recently come forward to be assessed as
adopters. As a result, St Helens has very recently commissioned these
assessments from other independent social workers. Stage 1 of the approval
process is not always completed within two months, and adopters said that
they experienced delays in receiving initial home visits. WWISH reports some
delays at stage 1 due to late receipt of medical reports and the need to obtain
checks from overseas agencies.
oversight of adoption work. Staff are passionate about achieving adoption for
all children who are unable to live with their birth family, placing siblings
together where possible and promoting contact between siblings where
appropriate if placement together is not possible. Children are beginning to
benefit from fostering for adoption placements, with 14 children placed with
their adopters from birth. This is good performance. The permanence
coordinator ensures that family finding enquiries begin promptly through
effective communication with social work teams and timely forward planning.


knowledge and understanding of adoption to provide robust challenge to the
panel chair when this is appropriate. Priority is given to the consideration of
Best Interests decisions, which are made following careful scrutiny of each
case. No adoption disruptions have occurred in the past three years. The ADM
makes any decisions to change a childs adoption plan and ensures that the
reasons are appropriate. Usually it is because the childs needs or background
are such that, despite prolonged family finding, a suitable adopter cannot be
found. When plans are changed, purposeful alternative permanency planning
takes place.
the progress of the 88 children who currently have an adoption plan or a likely
adoption plan is monitored at each stage. Since April 2014, fourteen children
have been adopted. This is more than in each of the previous three years and
represents 19% of children discharged from care.
for the 37 children who are not yet placed. As a result, family finding is
focussing on those 11 children for whom adopters have not yet been identified.
All family finding work is diligent, creative, tenacious and extensive. Time is not
wasted as there is up-to-date intelligence about families available through
WWISH and the two Voluntary Adoption Agencies used by the authority.
Childrens profiles are circulated promptly through the regional group, Adopt
North West, Be My Parent and other national links. The authority has used
adoption activity days and another is planned. The adoption team does not like
to give up and, as a result, some children with complex needs or challenging
backgrounds, older children and siblings have eventually been placed. This
inevitably means performance against the scorecard will be negatively affected,
but the outcomes for the children are positive.
This is linked to capacity within the adoption team to do this work, and
arrangements are now in place with a voluntary agency to address this.
Children experience helpful direct work from their foster carers and social
workers to help them understand what has happened in their lives, and to
prepare them for adoption; for example, memory boxes are created and they
are helped to complete all about me booklets.
provides good pre-placement information about the children prior to formal
matching and facilitates meetings with foster carers and nursery/school key
workers. Introductions are well planned and move at the childs pace. Regular
visits and reviews take place. Adopters value the continuity of IROs because
they know the child well. The decision about when to apply for an adoption
order is discussed appropriately. None of the adopters spoken to said that they
felt they were being either pushed or slowed down in moving to the next stage
saying Its going at our pace.


alongside assessment to provide adopters with information and promote their
understanding about a range of issues. This includes the impact on child
development of substance and alcohol misuse, foetal alcohol syndrome,
parental mental ill-health, attachment, and neglect. This preparation helps
applicants to make an informed choice about children whose needs they can
meet and what support they will need before and after children are placed.
Adopters are positive about their experience and the benefits gained and said it
had helped them once children were in placement.
independent chairperson. The membership of the panel is appropriate,
attendance is good and panels are always quorate. Panel members provide
social workers with constructive, robust challenge and give feedback to improve
practice.
the quality of analysis is improving. Similarly, childrens permanence reports,
matching information and adoption support plans are usually of a good quality
and provide panel members with the information that they need. This is
supported by the inspectors findings from the evaluation of case files. Panel
minutes are comprehensive, focus on relevant issues, reflect discussions well
and provide the clear reasons for the panels recommendations. The working
relationship with the ADM is effective.
adoption process. The adoption service plans to further improve quality and
consistency of support plans by using the British Agencies for Adoption and
Fostering (BAAF) form from January 2015. Fifty families across the three
boroughs have participated in the Webster Stratton parenting programme since
therapeutic interventions such as play therapy and support adopters with
school admissions and any health issues. Specialised support and bespoke
packages are also provided by WWISH to new adoptive placements. WWISH
provides a well-established post-adoption contact service which is available until
the child reaches 18 years of age. There is a dedicated coordinator for each
local authority. Of the 359 active post-adoption contacts, 134 are from St
Helens. The coordinators monitor the exchange of information, support parties
with letter writing, and regularly review each familys contact agreement to
ensure that it continues to meet the childs needs. The service also contacts
adopters regularly to provide information and to invite them to its regular social
events.


the demand for this service is high. Across the three authorities, 31 adopted
adults are receiving a service and 56 adults are waiting. A further 15 families
are supported with searching and reunifications. The local authority also
commissions a service through WWISH for birth parents from Birth Ties (After
Adoption), and five birth parents are currently using this service.

The graded judgment about the experience and progress of care leavers is
that it requires improvement.
of the inspection, of the 71 care leavers, only 32 (45%) were in education,
employment or training. This figure is too low, and is a consequence of not
enough looked after young people leaving school with appropriate
qualifications.
engaging care leavers in finding employment. Nevertheless, with only seven
care leavers in apprenticeship schemes, much more needs to be done to
increase their employment rate. Only four care leavers are in higher education.
Of the 36 apprentices currently working with the local authority, only two are
care leavers.
those spoken to did not express sufficient belief in themselves that they can
progress on to higher education or employment. Young people spoken to who
are in apprenticeships value the experience highly, and the stabilising influence
of employment has had an evident positive impact.
happen and by when. They are too often confusing, containing outdated
actions and lacking in timescales and contingencies. This makes it difficult to
measure the true extent of progress. Plans are reviewed and updated regularly
by personal advisors, but this offers no opportunity for scrutiny or independent
challenge to the young person when they make poor decisions.


personal advisors for information about their rights and entitlements. Leaflets
are available, but they are not specific to St Helens and are rarely used. The
local authority recognises that this is not preparing young people well for
independence, and is currently developing a care leavers handbook with the
assistance of the CICC. Based on feedback from young people, the local
authority launched a website for looked after children and care leavers in
September 2014. However, not all children and young people have internet
access in their placement; whilst 85% of looked after children have access to
the internet, only 50% of care leavers do. The local authority intends to review
its provision to ensure that all looked after young people and care leavers are
able to access the website.
offered to young people leaving care, and that a letter containing their health
information is provided. Inspectors met with six care leavers, none of whom
reported receiving information about their health history or appeared to know
that this information was available to them. More needs to be done to ensure
that care leavers take up the service, and that they are reminded how to get
their health information if they choose not to attend their final health
assessment.
of 14 and care leavers is co-located with the youth offending service. This gives
an unintentional negative message to young people about the local authoritys
aspirations for their future. One care leaver told inspectors she did not like
going there because if friends see her going into the building they assume she
has committed an offence. There are insufficient resources for staff to mentor
young people with daily tasks, such as filling in housing applications or making
a meal. The local authority has recognised this is a gap in provision and has
plans to identify a suitable venue with drop-in facilities.
placements after their 18th birthday through the local authoritys staying put
policy, which was updated in February 2014 and provides clear guidance. Takeup is low, with only three care leavers currently with former carers under a
staying put arrangement. There is a good range of supported lodging provision
for care leavers who would benefit from a family environment. This service can
also respond to emergencies, which is strength. Currently nine care leavers are
supported in this way.
benefit from their plans being overseen by independent reviewing officers. The
local authority is in touch with all of them. Some young people in cases seen
have clearly benefited from enduring relationships which they have built up
with workers over time. Others, however, have experienced too many changes
of worker at a time when they most need continuity.


at age 16. Planning for adulthood is often lengthy for these young people due
to the complexity of their needs. This can cause uncertainty for them and their
carers. In one case seen, an appropriate placement had not been identified at
the point of the final looked after childrens review. It is unclear how childrens
services are kept informed that statutory responsibilities are being exercised
once care leavers transfer to adult services. The local authority had identified
the need to start transition planning for disabled young people earlier as an
area for development prior to this inspection. This process has commenced,
with all disabled young people now allocated on their 16th birthday to an adult
services social worker, who co-works with childrens services. This is providing
an opportunity for rapport and relationships to develop, and enables the
complexities of young peoples needs to be well understood before transition to
adult social care.
misuse or for their emotional health, their needs are considered by the
Emotional Well-being Panel, which reduces delay and ensures that young
people are quickly directed to the most appropriate service. Services for care
leavers out of area are dependent on local provision. In cases sampled, all of
the young people were receiving a similar level of service to those within area
and were not disadvantaged by distance. There are acknowledged differences
in application of thresholds between childrens mental health provision and
adult services. However, CAMHS continues to work with young adults who are
already receiving a service up to age 19 and services for young adults who
misuse substances are readily available and of good quality.
suitable accommodation. Although this is not as good as the 100% figure in
published data (which reports on where care leavers are living on their 19th
birthday), it still represents strong performance. Appropriate action is being
taken in all cases where young people are not in suitable accommodation. The
range of accommodation available to care leavers is comprehensive. It enables
young people to move towards sustaining their own tenancy in incremental
steps, with flexible support, at their own pace.
with providers to fill the gap. Placement providers are required to demonstrate
that they meet appropriately exacting standards. The local authority has
identified that risk assessment in relation to location is a gap and these
assessments are in the early stages of completion. All of the young people
spoken to reported feeling safe in their current accommodation, and that it met
their needs.


One team one voice. It takes an active role in championing the needs of care
leavers both strategically and in individual cases. The local authority holds a
yearly event to celebrate the achievements of looked after children, which
includes care leavers. Care leavers spoken to value their relationships with
workers and feel valued in return. One young person said I know I would be
six feet under by now if I hadnt come into care.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
 The restructure of early help services and statutory social work teams took
place in September 2014 and as such changes are very recent and are not yet
embedded. Not all partners are working together to deliver early help and this
has not been robustly challenged by senior leaders, elected members or the
LSCB.
 Despite the recently refreshed continuum of need document, thresholds for
access to childrens social care and transition points for children moving
through the continuum are not sufficiently understood or applied within social
care or across the partnership. Opportunities to prevent childrens needs
escalating are being missed. Senior leaders within the council have
precautionary approach to child protection which has unintended
consequences for families, subjecting them to intrusive investigations when
lower level support would suffice.
 The local authority as corporate parents has not been an effective champion
of children looked after or care leavers. There is insufficient focus on
improving the educational progress and achievement of looked after children.
Outcomes for the vast majority of children and young people are poor, which
is limiting their life chances.
 The quality assurance framework provides some good levels of information
and data which is leading to targeted work and service improvements. The
action taken to date however has yet to identify all service deficits, in
particular deficits in the quality of risk assessment, care planning and
thresholds for child protection enquiries. The local authoritys self-assessment
appropriately identifies strengths, although areas for improvement are not so
well understood. Performance management arrangements are compliance
driven and there is an insufficient focus on outcomes for children and the
quality of social work and front line managers practice to achieve this.
 The Director of Childrens Services (DCS), the Chief Executive Officer (CEO)
and elected members of the council understand their roles well. The CEO
monitors and holds to account the LSCB Chair. Improvement work has been
prioritised and financial support has been secured. Governance arrangements
are clearly defined; however, the dissolution of the Childrens Trust
arrangements in March 2013 has weakened the implementation in some areas
of the strategic plan for children and young people. This is particularly in
relation to looked after childrens attainment; education, employment and
training opportunities for care leavers; and the local partnership with the
police. The recent formation of a Childrens Steering Group should resolve


this.
 The Joint Strategic Needs Analysis (JSNA) effectively prioritises children and
the recent co-location of Public Health within childrens social care is
strengthening strategic planning.
 Commissioning services are strong and there is a comprehensive sufficiency
strategy.
 The workforce strategy and supervision policy are of good quality and
recruitment and retention rates are also good. However, the quality of social
work knowledge and skills is not consistently good or embedded in practice.
Training is not systematically evaluated for its impact on practice or yet
ensuring consistently good quality practice.
 There is a renewed focus on the voice of the child; however, more work is
required to ensure that the lived experiences of children and young people are
understood and reflected in case work.
awareness of front line practice, strengths and areas for improvement with the
exception of child protection processes. Despite regular audits, self-assessment
and peer review, whilst strengths are accurately identified thresholds for child
protection enquiries and children in need assessments had not been recognised
as areas needing improvement.
been protected from budget cuts. Oversight and challenge by senior leaders,
members and the LSCB, although appropriately focused, have not been robust
in improving outcomes for children in need of help and protection and looked
after children. This is especially so in relation to narrowing the attainment gap
between looked after children and their peers and improving employment,
education and training opportunities for care leavers. Action has been taken to
address these shortfalls, for example, the appointments of a schools
commissioner to help schools improve, the appointment of a part-time virtual
head teacher and extended provision of the connexions service. These
improvements are very recent and are not yet making a difference for children
and young people.


strategic partnership arrangements have been managed through the Health
and Wellbeing Board, Community Safety Partnership and the Merseyside
Domestic Abuse Forum. The Corporate Parenting Forum reports into the Health
and Wellbeing Board. Whilst this has secured strong strategic oversight of
children and young peoples health and public protection arrangements, it has
weakened strategic oversight and implementation of the strategic plan for
children and young people. This includes improving attainment for looked after
children; and education, employment and training opportunities for care
leavers. The impact of domestic abuse services has not been driven sufficiently
at a local level nor sufficiently challenged by members. This has hindered
implementation of the MASH and weakened the strategic focus on reducing, the
high number of domestic abuse notifications made by the police that do not
meet the threshold for childrens social care.
Childrens Steering Group to oversee the delivery of the draft children and
young peoples plan (2014 to 2017) in order to appropriately prioritise services
for children. The steering group is due to have its first meeting in December
roll out a model for their risk assessment of domestic abuse incidents, though
there is no confirmed timescale for implementation of the domestic abuse risk
assessment protocol. There is effective prioritisation of children and young
people within the joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA), including early help,
and this is helping to formulate a shared set of priorities within the Health and
Wellbeing Board and the provision of services based on known prevalence. This
includes domestic abuse, substance misuse and adult mental health services.
Through a number of intelligence and evidence gathering processes, including
the JSNA, the local authority has a good understanding of the key issues facing
children. There are 136 adults accessing drug and treatments services, and 57
adults accessing alcohol treatment, who have one or more child living with
them. A range of accessible services are appropriately available to meet the
needs of children, young people and their families in this regard.
leading to strengthened strategic planning and improved coordination of
services for children and families. For example, the review of CAMHS has
increased capacity within early help from 285 to 430 young people reducing the
time children and young people wait for triage assessments of their emotional
needs. Lower-level therapeutic services have been developed which are
preventing some childrens needs escalating, and creating more capacity within
tier three services where children and young people have more complex needs.


September 2014 and, although it is early in its development, this is already
improving the coordination of services for children. There are clear protocols in
place for young peoples transition to adult substance misuse services.
Transitions for young people into adult mental health services are currently
under review. The local authority recognises that this is a gap, with just two
young people transferring into adult mental health services since January 2014,
and action is being taken to address low numbers with plans to work together
with CAMHS and plan effective transitions where appropriate.
people and their families and robust contractual oversight of provision and
placements. A comprehensive sufficiency strategy, overseen effectively by the
Corporate Parenting Forum, evaluates the placement needs of looked after
children, making clear and correlated findings on gaps in service provision.
Consultation is underway with providers to address the gaps in provision for
mother and baby placements and in-house residential placements for older
children and young people with more complex needs.
improve services for children and families. These are underpinned by a
measureable set of performance indicators, which include outcomes to be
achieved. However, service plans have not been translated in to team plans,
and social work practice is not yet coherently aligned with the workforce
development strategy. This is a missed opportunity for operational staff to own
the vision and influence service developments and improvements within teams.
service managers. Data analysts are contributing to a good oversight and
understanding of some performance trends, but this does not include an
understanding of children in need cases at tier three or the effectiveness of
step down arrangements to tier two, and this is a gap.


A substantial number of case file audits have been carried out by managers and
externally commissioned services since September 2012 as part of, and in
addition to, an established quality assurance framework. This includes an
internal wholesale review of looked after children; those children subject to
child protection plans; and more recently a review of children receiving early
help. Whilst the audit findings have effectively contributed to the restructure of
services for children and young people and assured compliance, for example, in
ensuring those children experiencing long term neglect have become
appropriately looked after, opportunities have been missed to use this as a
means of embedding learning and improving the quality of practice internally
and across the partnership. The audits undertaken have not sufficiently
identified the gaps in social workers knowledge around CSE risk assessment or
missing from care protocols. The audits have failed to raise the profile of
educational attainment and achievement and do not give sufficient weight to
quality of social work practice, for example, the impact of historical concerns in
cases. Some of the audits are overly optimistic and do not focus on the impact
of experiences on the child and subsequently on how this may impact on
decision making in cases.
level to strengthen operational oversight, but it is not yet having sufficient
impact on improving the quality of social work practice. The local authority is
not meeting its own targets in a number of areas. For example, timeliness of
reviews, the number of re-referrals and the number of children being subject to
child protection plans for a second and subsequent time. As corporate parents,
the local authority has not been robust in improving performance in relation to
childrens attainment or for care leavers not in education, employment or
training.
quality. There is a clear focus on safe workloads, effective supervision,
continual professional development, training, and workforce planning, but this
is not yet fully implemented in practice. Professional supervision is mostly
regular, but the newly introduced templates are not being completed as
intended to evidence reflective practice. There are missed opportunities to
embed learning and raise the bar. Where performance or casework is
discussed, this is focused on maintaining compliance as opposed to improving
quality. There is insufficient focus on the impact of interventions or the
progress of plans.


managers can be seen in case records since April 2014. However, case
supervision is not yet securing consistently robust challenge by operational
managers, for example, where the quality of assessments and plans are weak.
Where children are not receiving timely services to meet their needs, or where
agencies disagree about decisions made, managers and IROs are not
escalating their concerns to a sufficiently senior level within childrens services
or the LSCB. The dispute resolution process has very recently (during the
inspection) been reviewed, but has not yet been implemented.
improvement and organisational needs. Training opportunities for staff are
good and there is effective learning from serious case reviews. All service
managers have completed NVQ level 5 qualifications in management, and team
managers are currently undertaking accredited supervision and mentorship
training. The multi-agency training panel, chaired by the Assistant Director for
safeguarding, is providing a continuous focus on training needs and provision.
However, training is not systematically monitored for its effectiveness on
practice and this is not leading to a consistently good understanding of the
impact of training both for individual social workers through supervision or by
the organisation. Records of staff appraisal are sporadic and they do not
consistently identify learning needs or address performance.
improving manager responsiveness to social workers caseloads. However, the
point system is being inconsistently applied across the teams. Caseloads remain
high in some teams; particularly some looked after children teams and the
fostering team. This is reducing capacity to complete direct work with children
and viability assessments in a timely way. The local authority has recently taken
action to reduce high caseloads for IROs with the appointment of two additional
officers, but this has not yet led to a consistently robust overview of cases
between reviews nor contributed to improving the quality of social work
practice.
and there is a good offer of support for newly qualified social workers (NQSWs)
and social workers in their first year of qualification (ASYE). There are wellestablished recruitment schemes such as grow your own and step up to social
work.


service. The local authority actively ensures those childrens voices are
influential both strategically and operationally incorporated in the priorities of
partners. Looked after children are contributing effectively to service delivery
through the children in care council and Corporate Parenting Forum. The local
authority has worked hard to ensure that looked after children can influence
social work, though there has been insufficient focus on how children in need of
help and protection can contribute to service development and improvement. A
recently commissioned service from NYAS for children subject to child
protection planning is now being offered where appropriate. This service is so
recent that it is yet to impact on the participation of children at their meetings
and child protection conferences, or to capture their voices to influence service
planning.
children, young people and their families. Positive action has been taken in
response to concerns raised by looked after children, such as a review of the
financial policy and staying put policy for care leavers. For children in need of
help and protection, this is less well developed, and has only been available
since April 2014.


Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.

Summary of findings
The LSCB requires improvement because:
Child Sexual Exploitation
 The LSCB has not mapped and analysed intelligence around CSE in order to
understand the scale, nature and patterns of sexual exploitation in its area and to
use this to inform support, disruption, prevention and strategy.
 The LSCB does not exercise sufficient oversight of children missing from home,
care or education (including children placed out of the local authority area).

Early help
 Progress around the development of Early Help is still at an early stage and more
needs to be done to help workers understand the thresholds for access to
childrens services and facilitate viable inter-agency lower level services. The
Boards scrutiny and challenge to partners around the application of thresholds
and use of escalation needs to be stronger.
 The LSCB has not provided sufficient leadership or impact on addressing domestic
abuse in its area, nor has it been effective in holding partners, particularly police,
to account for the high number of domestic abuse notifications which are
inappropriate.

Performance Management
 The data used by the Board are not sufficiently broad. Key multi-agency data is
lacking and data is not used effectively to identify strategic need, inform business
planning, or to hold agencies to account for performance. There has been
insufficient focus on improving outcomes for children and young people and on
challenging the quality of social work and multi-agency practice.
 The LSCB Business Plan does not have specific or measurable targets, and
timescales for actions are unclear. The plan does not cover many of the Boards
areas of responsibility.
 The Board is not sufficiently robust in scrutinising, challenging and tracking
progress in key areas, such as reports about the work of the LADO.


Scrutiny and challenge
 A large number of safeguarding policies and procedures are out of date.
 The LSCB has not exercised sufficient oversight of public protection arrangements
such as the MAPPA or MARAC.
 The LSCBs work on the voice of the child is not yet having an impact on children
in need of help and protection
 The LSCB has not completed a training needs analysis, and has not exercised
sufficient oversight of its training programme. Evaluation of training is still at an
early stage.

What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
area and use this to drive disruption, prevention and victim support.
and education (including children placed out of the local authority area), using
data and analysis effectively to reduce incidents of children going missing and
placing themselves at risk.
requirements and best practice.
delivery of early help provision, and ensure that the threshold is understood
and well embedded by partner agencies.
addressing domestic abuse.
Areas for improvement

Data and Performance
information from across the partnership, including police, health, education,
housing, and data on missing children and CSE. This should include the
educational attainment of the most vulnerable children. The LSCB should use
data to understand strategic need, and to hold agencies to account.
practice in early help, child in need and child protection.


Governance
decisions and actions arising.
MARAC.

Development of Key Areas
children with a child protection plan and children in need. Ensure that creative
methods are used to capture the voices of children with disabilities.
ensure that the needs of the partnership are being appropriately met, and that
training is evaluated effectively.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
Services, Chief Executive and the Independent LSCB Chair. The Chief Executive
provides oversight of the work of the Board Chair and holds the Chair to
account through a work plan which is reviewed regularly. This contains clear
direction and timescales for actions. This rigour has been instrumental in
driving recent improvements in the Boards performance from a previously low
base. The LSCB has a constitution in place which sets out clear roles and
responsibilities in line with statutory guidance.
membership at the appropriate level of seniority to represent their agencies and
commit resources. The LSCB also has three Lay Members who play an active
role.
established links with the Health and Wellbeing Board, the Community Safety
Partnership and the local Criminal Justice Board; respective chairs meet
quarterly to monitor progress against set priorities. It has recently engaged
with the Criminal Justice Board to improve court consideration of childrens
safeguarding when making bail conditions for offenders, following the learning
from a Serious Case Review (SCR). The Board also has active links with the
Family Justice Board through the Chair and legal advisor, which enables it to
oversee issues arising in public and private proceedings. This has led to the
Board challenging delay in issuing post-proceedings letters, the management of
child mental health issues in public and private proceedings, and a protocol to
ensure that young people are not bailed to police cells.


MARAC. This means that it has not scrutinised the public protection
arrangements around the management of dangerous offenders and cannot
therefore be confident of the effectiveness and impact of these arrangements
commissioning arrangements of the Health and Wellbeing Board. A
Memorandum of Understanding to clarify governance between the two Boards
is in place. As a result of Board challenge, the Health and Wellbeing Board has
included the voice of the child in its commissioning arrangements. This resulted
in over 4,000 children contributing feedback to the Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA), which has been used to inform a number of significant
service improvements in health commissioning for young people, such as a tier
two substance misuse worker being commissioned to work in schools.
the JSNA and has recently re-commissioned arrangements for tier two CAMHS
provision. This initiative was undertaken as a result of a LSCB learning review
which concerned a young person who had attempted suicide, and LSCB data
which indicated that St Helens has a high rate of teenage self-harm. This has
improved access to help for young people with mental health problems and
could potentially reduce incidents of suicide and self-harm.
audit and its consideration of data, to identify the need to challenge and
develop better early help arrangements across the partnership. This includes
recently publishing the Continuum of Need document, which realigns early help
provision. However, this is at an early stage of implementation and there
continue to be difficulties engaging some universal services partners in the
delivery of the early help framework. This has been recognised by the Board,
who have included the review of this gap in the work plan going forward,
together with consideration of the need for further commissioning but the pace
of this work needs to increase.
difference to high referral and re-referral rates to Childrens Social Care, and
more needs to be done to hold partners to account and ensure that they
understand and more consistently apply agreed thresholds.
early stage and more work is needed to ensure health participation in the
arrangements.


gaps and needs in partnership work on domestic abuse. The Community Safety
Partnership has led the work on domestic abuse locally, but their focus has
been on adults, and a strategy for children has not yet been developed. The
LSCB has not taken a strong enough lead in challenging and scrutinising the
effectiveness of partnership work despite the fact that this is a key priority for
the Board. For example, policies and procedures are underdeveloped, and
domestic abuse is not well integrated in the Continuum of Need. The Board has
not scrutinised commissioned arrangements, audited practice or developed an
effective data set to monitor performance. These issues have not been
adequately addressed in the Business Plan.
children; there is little or no preventative work in the community, in schools and
with parents around the harm caused by domestic abuse. The professional
network is not yet sufficiently trained to work with victims, perpetrators and
their children, and there are gaps in early help provision and pathways around
domestic abuse. Professionals have no risk assessment tool for working with
domestic abuse, nor developed protocols and procedures, and there is very
limited resource available for direct work with the children in these situations.
which is improving communication and coordination between schools and the
police about domestic violence incidents. When a domestic incident occurs,
police immediately notify the childs school, which ensures that a designated
member of staff makes contact with the child to assess the level of support
required.
has very recently used to inform its priorities and planning. However, the Board
needs to improve the use, range and analysis of multi-agency data to
strengthen its strategic understanding of local need and to hold partners to
account more effectively. The current data set does not have enough data from
the police, education, health, and housing; nor does it include recruitment,
retention and caseload rates of partners. It does not include data around
children missing from home, care or education or those at risk of child sexual
exploitation. The educational attainment of children subject to child protection
plans or child in need plans is not reviewed.
the local commissioning budget and planning cycles. It has only just been
signed off by partners.


safeguarding in the area; it sets out appropriate priorities drawn from data and
has a work plan to tackle these. However, the analysis within the report is
limited because the data available to the Board is overly focused on social care
performance and does not sufficiently evaluate that of the wider partnership.
The Board has an understanding of the underlying reasons for the trends in the
data it has considered, but this is still at an early stage and further work is
required.
have been drawn from an analysis of local need, the JSNA and data. The new
priorities have been used to drive the Business Plan, which appropriately
focuses on the most vulnerable children: those at risk from neglect, domestic
abuse, substance misuse, mental health, and CSE. Although the priorities have
only been signed off recently, they have been informing much of the planning
over the past twelve months, and have led to improvements in recommissioning early help arrangements, the use of the graded care profile, tier
two CAMHS support, Operation Encompass for child victims of domestic abuse,
Catch 22 service for missing children, a dedicated CSE unit in the MASH and a
new quality assurance post in the LSCB to strengthen its scrutiny. However,
whilst the new Business Plan is ambitious in its scope and vision, it is
insufficiently clear about how its priorities will be delivered. The Business Plan
does not comprehensively address all the areas that the LSCB is required to
scrutinise or coordinate. It is a development plan around the key priorities, but
this means that the Board does not have a suitable plan for the rest of its
business.
have led to some strong examples of impact and improved outcomes for
children. For example, the LSCB reviewed arrangements for children who were
electively home educated, some of whom had not been visited for two years.
As a result of this work the local authority ensured that every such child was
visited and a new protocol was implemented to strengthen the safeguarding
and educational oversight of these children; following this, a number of children
re-entered mainstream education. In addition, the multi-agency review of
neglect led to the introduction of the graded care profile to help agencies
identify and escalate neglect better. The implementation of this model is very
recent and is yet to demonstrate impact on the number of children suffering
neglect, but has the potential to be a positive development.


reducing the rate of re-referrals, and it informed the work plan around the
realignment of the statutory social work teams and the Continuum of Need.
Further work is now needed to review the impact of this and to develop a
neglect strategy for the partnership, which is now the Boards top priority. The
Board also undertook a rigorous review of the restraint of children in a local
residential unit following a high number of incidents leading to hospital
attendance. The review challenged practice in the home, as a result of which
there has been staff training, tighter procedures and a reduction of incidents.
impact and effectiveness it has only been partially aligned with its new
priorities. The Board has recognised the need for greater focus on core
business and has recently set out a new timetable of multi-agency audit to
include children on child protection plans and children in need and early help,
and has procured additional resource to deliver this.
of some partners, this is inconsistent and follow up often lacks rigour. For
example the LSCB Board meeting did not scrutinise the LADO, Private Fostering
or the IRO annual reports. The Board noted the reports for information, but did
not properly examine them, nor identify relevant issues within the Annual
Report. Similarly, discrepancies identified in data did not lead to robust action
to check why some parents on the MARAC were not known to social care.
nor show that these have been followed up at subsequent meetings. The local
authority has undertaken a recent audit of LSCB processes at the request of the
CEO. The outcome of the audit findings were not available for inspectors to
evaluate.
has offered places to 2,000 members of staff. This is informed by the priorities,
learning from SCRs, and emerging needs analysis. Almost all GPs have now
received bespoke level 3 safeguarding training. Training is valued by
practitioners and they report that it is influencing their practice, with tangible
examples given of cases being escalated to strategy meetings as a result of
training, or improved responses to children subject to CSE or at risk of Female
Genital Mutilation.
need in the partnership and there are some gaps, for example, working with
adult mental health and disabled children. The LSCB has also not had a report
for last years training activity nor the training offer for this year. This means
that the Boards ability to review the suitability of the training offer and the
multi-agency take-up of training is limited.


provide some strong examples of impact on practice, but this is still anecdotal
and reliant on practitioner self-report. Independent feedback from managers is
not yet being used to evaluate the impact of training on practice.
do not reflect recent guidance or best practice, nor do they integrate the new
thresholds and pathways around Early Help. This includes the procedures
around missing episodes, child sexual exploitation and domestic violence. This
means practitioners across the partnership do not have an up-to-date resource
to assist them assess levels of risk and need, which potentially leaves children
and young people at risk and contributes to the volume of inappropriate
referrals to childrens social care.
CSE. However, this is yet to be translated into up-to-date procedures which
reflect the level of activity and referral pathways. The LSCB has carried out
some awareness raising within schools and in businesses, and has trained over
has been set up to review all children believed to be victims of CSE in the area
and coordinate an appropriate response. The police have resourced a unit
within the MASH to work with children who are victims of sexual exploitation.
As a result of the LSCB work plan, in June 2014 Catch 22 were commissioned to
undertake return interviews of children who go missing from home or care and
provide direct work with those who are being sexually exploited. However, this
strategy is still in its early stages and the Board has not yet completed a
problem profile to identify the extent of child sexual exploitation in its area and
links with neighbouring local authorities. This means that the LSCB does not
have a good understanding of the extent or nature of child sexual exploitation
in its area.
statutory requirements. A new data set has been developed by Catch 22, who
were commissioned through the LSCB to deliver return interviews and direct
work to children who go missing for the first quarter of 201415. This has been
seen by inspectors and will meet statutory requirements going forward.
However, it does not capture data on those children placed out of the local
authority area who go missing. The LSCBs oversight of children missing from
education is not currently robust and needs to improve.


are currently in progress. Ofsted has been notified appropriately in accordance
with statutory requirements. Learning from a SCR published earlier this year
has been used effectively to improve practitioner awareness and to drive
training and service improvements across the partnership. The impact of
learning is tracked rigorously by the Chair of the Critical Incident Panel. A local
learning and improvement framework is in place. There is training provided to
staff around the lessons. Most of the staff that inspectors spoke to said that
they had attended SCR training, and they were able to articulate some of the
learning from local and national reviews and relate it to their practice.
promote E-Safety within schools; this has reached over 4,000 pupils in antibullying initiatives. Around 400 children and young people have been trained as
anti-bullying ambassadors in schools. The Board ran an E-Safety conference
with young people, and produced a pack for foster carers in collaboration with
young people in care.
within wider health commissioning arrangements and other universal services.
As a result of feedback from children, a tier two drugs and alcohol worker has
been commissioned to work in schools, self-harm has become a higher priority
for the local authority Scrutiny Committee, a housing provider, the womens
refuge and the Troubled Families Team who are all working to integrate the
voice of children more closely into their work. Agencies have reported back to
the Board about how childrens voices have been heard and acted upon.
hearing the voice of the child, and the National Youth Advocacy Service (NYAS)
has been recently been commissioned to provide advocacy to young people in
child protection conferences. A further round of training is planned for 2015.
Inspectors did not see any advocates at the child protection conferences that
they observed and are therefore unable to judge the impact of this work. Whilst
the Board has been consulting young people about the best way to do this, the
voice of the child is not yet effectively represented at Board level.


account for safeguarding. The audit was last carried out in 2013 with statutory
agencies, looking in detail at all areas set out under section 11 legislation. A
multi-agency panel met to scrutinise senior officers closely over the evidence
base of their audit and progress made since the last audit. A detailed report
was produced for the Board on the strengths and weaknesses of each agency,
and they were charged with taking development points forward. The panel
were assured that each of the agencies met the criteria for governance and
that safeguarding was prioritised appropriately in each of the organisations. The
audit highlighted issues around E-Safety; incorporating the voice of the child in
both service design and delivery, including in child protection conferences; and
raising community awareness of CSE. These have been taken forward by the
work of subgroups.
proportionally between partners.
Greater Merseyside. It is well attended and functions well. It provides an
effective analysis of child deaths in the region, which is broken down by local
authority so that they can understand local as well as regional data. The Panel
tracks issues back to partner agencies rigorously for follow up where modifiable
factors are identified. Although the Panel and its partners have not run a large
scale public health campaign for some time, one is being planned for next year,
once the Panel has completed an analysis of the trends and patterns of all child
deaths since 2008.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff works with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 8 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Tracey Metcalfe
Deputy lead inspector: Sarah Urding
Team inspectors: Brendan Parkinson, Judith Nelson, Susan Myers, Carmen Rodney,
Shirley Bailey and Deane Jennings
Quality assurance manager: Paul Armitage


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Text phone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


