Surrey Safeguarding Children Board
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board
Inspection date: 15 June 2015  17 June 2015
Report published: 3 August 2015
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.


Contents
Information about this area


Children living in this area


Child protection in this area


Children looked after in this area


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings


Information about this review



Information about this area1
Children living in this area
 Approximately 246,600 children and young people under the age of 18 live in
Surrey. This is 22% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 10% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 9% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 7% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 13% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian and mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 12% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 9% (the national average is 14%).

Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 4,538 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 March 2014, 925 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 890 at 31 March 2013.
 At 31 March 2014, 10 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from nine at 31 March 2013.
 Between the start of 2012 and the time of the inspection, 18 serious incident
notifications had been submitted to Ofsted and 10 serious case reviews had been
published.

Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 793 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 31 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 831 (33 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2013. Of this number:

The LSCB was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it with
local unvalidated data where this was available.

authority area
authority area
 five live with parents, of whom one lives out of the authority area


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or fewer per year.


Executive summary
The independent chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been
central to the developing authority of the board and to its strengthened focus on key
priorities. Progress has accelerated in the last year and brought a growing culture of
professional challenge. This has focused particularly on the need for significant
improvement in child in need and early help services and on those for children at risk
of sexual exploitation or who go missing. Despite this, the LSCBs influence on key
bodies such as the Health and Wellbeing Board and Local Family Justice Board, and
the independent chairs links with the chief executive of the local authority, are not
yet strong enough for the board to achieve the greatest leverage from its scrutiny
and challenge role.
The thresholds document Early help: multi-agency levels of need does not meet the
requirements of statutory guidance. It does not provide clarity about the types of
need that can be met through early help, and those requiring a statutory social work
service. This does not help ensure that children get the right service. However, the
LSCB has been a champion for improving the quality of work with children in need,
young people who go missing and those at risk of sexual exploitation. Its challenge
to agencies has been a catalyst for the establishment of a service to provide return
home interviews to children who have been missing from care. It has secured an
undertaking from the local authority to improve its services for children in need.
The LSCB uses a multi-agency data-set to scrutinise agencies performance, but it
neither analyses the data consistently and fully nor does it link data analysis with
audit findings to develop a full understanding of the quality of practice. There has
been little success in securing childrens views to inform the work of the LSCB.
Decisions about when to initiate a serious case review are sound and learning from
such reviews is disseminated effectively. The Child Death Overview Panel considers
all deaths in a timely manner, oversees the provision of a valued bereavement
service and disseminates public health information on issues such as co-sleeping and
head injuries.
The LSCB annual report 201314 covers all appropriate areas but lacks rigour in its
assessment of the effectiveness of local services. The recently revised 201215
business plan, which is informed by the annual report, contains appropriate priorities
for 201415 but does not include measures to assess progress. It has not been
linked with the boards own data-set or learning from audits. Plans to remedy these
gaps are in place, with work underway on the 201415 annual report and 201518
business plan, but these are at too early a stage to have had an impact.
The board provides a broad range of appropriate training. Feedback about its quality
is largely positive, but there is no formal evaluation of the long-term impact of
training on the quality of practice. This limits the boards ability to understand
whether it is providing the right training and how it could best improve its quality
and range.

Recommendations
 Update the Early help: multi-agency levels of need document as a matter of
urgency, so that it more clearly reflects the expectations of statutory guidance
and provides an effective tool to direct and support those who work with children
and young people in Surrey (paragraph 4).
 Strengthen the leadership and scrutiny role of the LSCB by developing the
strategic statement, action plan and action plan activities so that they better
integrate information about child sexual exploitation and children missing from
home, care or education, are underpinned by clear impact measures and fully
reflect the expectations of current statutory guidance (paragraph 7).
 Improve the existing multi-agency data-set so that it contains a full range of
accurate data and enables rigorous analysis and scrutiny of practice; and consider
it alongside qualitative information from audits and consultation with children and
their families to develop a full picture of quality and effectiveness (paragraph 10).
 Strengthen the relationship of the LSCB with the Health and Wellbeing board and
Local Family Justice Board to enable the LSCB to better exercise its critical friend
role and help shape the development of services to children and their families
(paragraph 2).
 Strengthen the governance arrangements between the chief executive of Surrey
County Council and the independent chair of the LSCB so that the chief executive
can better hold the independent chair to account for the effective running of the
LSCB (paragraph 3).
 Improve the quality and consistency of multi-agency audits so that they can
better inform the scrutiny role of the LSCB, priority setting and the content of
training courses (paragraph 10).
 Continue the process of developing a 201518 business plan that is smarter than
the 201215 plan and underpinned by clear timescales and impact measures that
enable the board to measure progress (paragraph 16).
 Put in place a process for assessing the impact of training on improving the
quality of practice (paragraph 15).


Inspection findings

The LSCB benefits from the strong leadership of an experienced independent
chair who took up post in September 2011, and from effective business
management. This has been important in strengthening the coherence and
authority of the board. In November 2014 an Ofsted inspection of Surrey
County Councils services for children in need of help and protection, children
looked after and care leavers found significant failings in the response to
children in need and those who go missing or are at risk of sexual exploitation.
Since then the board, led by the independent chair and supported by the
councils chief executive, has continued to strengthen its challenge and has
brought a particular focus on these areas of deficit.


Despite this, the boards influence on key partnership agencies is not as strong
as it could or should be. Although there is a protocol in place detailing how the
LSCB will work with the Health and Wellbeing Board (H&WB), the Children and
Young Peoples Strategic Partnership (C&YPSP) and the Surrey Safeguarding
Adults Board (SSAB), it is difficult to see how this has supported the scrutiny
and challenge of partner agencies in their development of services for children.
Nor is it clear how the board has drawn on the joint strategic needs analysis
(JSNA) to inform its work as outlined in statutory guidance. The board is not
represented on the Local Family Justice Board (LFJB), and this is a missed
opportunity to influence its thinking and approach. When the LSCB does exert
influence, it is often issue-specific and reliant on the individual authority of the
independent chair, rather than as part of a consistent exercise of the boards
role as critical friend.


The independent chair and chief executive of the local authority meet formally
on a one-to-one basis only twice a year and these meetings are not minuted.
There is no annual appraisal by the chief executive of the chairs performance.
This makes it difficult for the chief executive to hold the chair to account for the
effective running of the LSCB or to benefit fully from her independent view
about the quality and effectiveness of services for children provided by the local
authority and partner agencies. The lack of strength and formality in the links
with the chief executive of the local authority, and the LSCBs relationship with
partnership groups such as the H&WB and LFJB, mean there is a risk of loss of
impetus when the current independent chair steps down in August 2015.



The LSCB thresholds document Early help: multi-agency levels of need
(January 2015, interim update published March 2015) does not adequately
meet the expectations of statutory guidance. It lacks clarity about the
distinction between the needs and characteristics of children and young people
who could benefit from early help services and those whose level of need is
such that they need help under section 17 of the Children Act 1989. The
document brings together both of these groups of children and young people
into one category described as a Tier 3 level of need. It uses a set of examples
of Tier 3 levels of need but does not distinguish between those examples that
could require early help services and those requiring a statutory social work
service. This lack of clarity does not help professionals who may be considering
referring a child to childrens services, or social workers in making decisions
about levels of need and what action to take. The document also lacks
guidance on the thresholds for significant harm, care orders and the duty to
accommodate a child. It is not clear about early help processes, noting that the
CAF still has partial acceptance amongst partner agencies, and has not been
updated to include clear procedures and processes for cases relating to the
sexual exploitation of young people, in line with changes to statutory guidance
in April 2015. If professionals who work with children and their families are not
provided with a clear, complete and consistent framework for understanding
how national legislation and guidance are translated into services at ground
level, children and young people are less likely to get the services that best
meet their needs.


Although the thresholds document is weak, the LSCB has provided strong and
consistent scrutiny and challenge to the local authority about the quality of
work with children in need, those receiving early help services and the lack of
clarity between the two. This challenge is evident throughout 2014 but is
clearly stronger in 2015. The publication of the LSCBs early help audit in
January 2015 highlighted this and was followed with a meeting of the LSCB in
March 2015 at which the local authority provided a report undertaking to
strengthen its work with children in need and ensure that it was compliant with
legislation and statutory guidance.


The LSCB has provided robust scrutiny and challenge about the quality and
effectiveness of work by the local authority, police and other agencies with
children who may be at risk of child sexual exploitation or who go missing. The
well-focused LSCB child sexual exploitation audit, board meeting minutes, the
boards challenge log and an extraordinary LSCB meeting in March 2015 all
exemplify the strength of this challenge. The LSCB highlighted that children
who have been missing were not being offered a return interview by an
independent person, as expected by statutory guidance. Such a service is now
in place for children who have been missing from care and the board remains
tenacious in highlighting the continued absence of such an offer for children
who have been missing from home.



The LSCB has, through its scrutiny, increased the pace of service improvement
for children who are missing or at risk of sexual exploitation. It has ensured a
clear governance structure is in place for work in relation to child sexual
exploitation, which separates service delivery and operational oversight from
monitoring and strategic planning. However, its own strategic statement, action
plan and underpinning activities are new (June 2015) and so largely aspirational
as yet. These documents do not clearly link consideration of children missing
from home, care or education with those at risk of sexual exploitation. They are
not supported with a clear plan for assessing progress and do not include the
requirement from Working together to safeguard children (March 2015) that
LSCBs should conduct regular assessments on the effectiveness of Board
partners responses to child sexual exploitation.


The LSCB is adequately funded by partner agencies and has negotiated
increased funding for 201617. This is positive and supports the LSCBs
aspiration to enhance its influence on agencies to improve the quality and
effectiveness of the services they provide to children. The board is well
attended by a full range of partner agencies. It receives regular reports from
sub-groups and others, such as the local authority designated officer (LADO),
who handles allegations made against adults whose work brings them into
contact with children, and MAPPA (multi-agency public protection
arrangements), which deal with safety planning in relation to potentially
dangerous offenders in the community. When reports are late, such as the
recent annual corporate parenting report of May 2015, this is pursued by the
board until they are received.


The LSCB has an appropriate range of sub-groups. Four area sub-groups keep
the work of the LSCB alive across the county and agencies in localities are well
engaged. A monthly operational group ensures area boards communicate
effectively and deliver consistent messages. The child protection conference
dissent and health sub-groups are particularly strong. The child protection
conference dissent group provides an effective venue for challenging decision
making and planning at conferences to ensure that children have plans that
meet their assessed needs and risks. The activity of the health sub-group has
led to an increase in the number of safeguarding lead nurses across the county
from one to three, driven 100% attendance at level three safeguarding training
by general practitioners (GPs) and significantly improved the number of reports
from GPs received at child protection conferences from a low base of 20% to a
current figure of 47%.


scrutiny role but it requires further development to be fully effective. Work with
some partners to provide an analysis and narrative to support their data has
not yet been successful. In a more limited number of cases data has either not
been provided or is of questionable quality. The quality of analysis and
narrative in performance reports to the board is variable and some issues such
as poor timeliness of assessments are not commented on. Audit activity takes
place routinely and several multi-agency audits have been completed. Audit
processes do not adhere to one methodology or format which unnecessarily
complicates the task of linking audit findings to performance data. An example
of this is that concerns identified in an audit about the effectiveness of child
protection core groups are not considered in conjunction with related
performance data. Evidence demonstrates that some good quality audit work is
undertaken, for example the child sexual exploitation audit, but the reporting of
other audits is not sufficiently sharp or analytical. However, despite the
variance in quality of reporting, issues of concern are identified clearly.
Concerns identified in audit findings are passed to safeguarding leads in the
relevant agencies and through area safeguarding boards to ensure appropriate
actions are taken. Audits are repeated to test whether actions have had the
desired impact.
annual report, the board has had only limited success in engaging children and
young people in shaping its priorities and using their feedback to understand
the quality of practice. There has been a small scale audit involving children
from nine families who have been through the child protection process but this
is an isolated example and it is not clear how the findings have been used. The
LSCB has not used mechanisms or organisations such as a childrens shadow
board, young inspectors, the youth parliament, school councils or the Children
in Care Council to engage with children and young people. Although the LSCB
has made contact with a representative of the Anglican diocese of Guildford
and Portsmouth, it has not been successful in engaging faith organisations in its
work. The LSCB has been more successful in its 201415 aim to engage with
voluntary sector organisations and now has board members from an umbrella
organisation for charities working with children and families in Surrey and from
two other charities.


well established and appropriately overseen by the strategic case review subgroup. This group also monitors and challenges the progress of serious case
review action plans. Ten serious case reviews have been published since 2012
in addition to a number of single and multi-agency learning reviews of cases
that do not meet the criteria for a serious case review. Current action plans are
in the main complete, with only a very small minority of actions outstanding.
The process for undertaking reviews is set out in a clear learning and
improvement framework. Key principles such as transparency, independence
and continuous learning are articulated clearly. The document has not been
updated to include changes to statutory guidance from March 2015. Learning
from serious case reviews is widely disseminated through e-bulletins, training
events, practitioner workshops, sub-group members and the childrens services
management team. It has directly influenced the shaping of LSCBs escalation
policy, which has had a positive impact on practice. A good example of the
evaluation of learning is the 2014 deep dive audit of 18 cases conducted by
nine health service providers, specifically addressing key messages from serious
case reviews. The impact of direct learning from reviews is demonstrated by
positive changes to practice within health settings, in particular through a
protocol providing procedures and practice guidance for professionals in
situations where there is bruising to non-mobile infants.
links with the LSCB. It is sufficiently resourced and works effectively. The panel
has made considerable improvement since the appointments of its new chair
and specialist nurse for child death reviews. A previous backlog of child deaths
requiring review is now cleared and every child death is reviewed soon after it
happens. Each family is contacted within 48 hours. A protocol has been agreed
with the coroner which supports prompt information-sharing and sampletaking. This means that early case discussions are facilitated and post-mortem
findings can be shared with the designated doctor. The specialist nurse
provides a valued service to bereaved families where the police are involved,
and an updated and accessible child death information booklet and other
appropriate booklets are available for families and bereaved children. Learning
from CDOP activity, both local and national, is disseminated through the LSCB
newsletter, the LSCB operations group, and by email newsletter to all partner
agencies. Recent advice and awareness-raising notes have covered safe
sleeping, head injuries and fever.


their statutory duties to children under section 11 of the Children Act 2004. The
LSCB was successful in involving 35 of 37 agencies invited, including 10 out of
involved the LSCB in working alongside agencies or reviewing self-assessments.
This limits its impact in improving services for children. To redress this, a
number of LSCB workshops to discuss self-assessments with agencies are
underway. In addition to this an enhanced approach to section 11 auditing is
planned for 2015, although this is yet to have an impact. The LSCBs 2015 audit
of schools compliance with statutory guidance to safeguard children was a
significantly stronger process. It was successful in engaging 69% of schools
and has received positive feedback. Schools describe the self-assessment
process as not just a form-filling exercise but a helpful tool for improving their
safeguarding practice.
that clearly outlines expectations for those providing either single or multiagency training. Feedback from participants about training is largely positive.
Training courses have been cross-referenced to individual serious case reviews
to ensure that the learning from these is reflected in the training provided. This
is an effective measure to ensure learning is disseminated to staff from all
agencies. However, courses are not cross-referenced with learning from audits
and performance information in the same way. For example the learning from
three LSCB audits that highlighted poor working practices by professionals
involved in child protection core groups has not been used to inform either the
volume or content of training provided in this area of practice. This is a missed
opportunity. There is no process in place for assessing the medium and long
term impact of training on the quality of practice. This makes it difficult for the
LSCB to know whether it is providing the right training and how the current
training programme should be developed.
appropriate areas but is not sufficiently rigorous or transparent in its
assessment of the performance and effectiveness of local services. The
priorities and challenges identified for 201415 within the report are however
broadly appropriate and inform a revised and updated 201215 business plan.
However, this plan is not sufficiently focused and lacks progress measures that
would enable the board to evaluate the quality of services. It has not been
linked to the boards own audit and performance information. The LSCB is
aware of these deficits and aims to remedy them within the 201415 annual
report and 201518 business plan, both of which were in preparation at the
time of the review.


accessible to staff from all agencies via its website. These are provided through
a contract with a private company and are updated six-monthly to ensure that
they remain compliant with statutory guidance and developments in practice.
Between updates the LSCB supplements them by adding relevant local and
national information to its website to keep practitioners abreast of new
expectations. Recent additions to the website have included information on
female genital mutilation and the local agency response to the national Prevent
agenda.


Information about this review
Inspectors have looked at how successfully the LSCB is achieving its statutory
objectives and functions of coordinating and ensuring the effectiveness of how
agencies provide services to safeguard and promote the welfare of children.
Inspectors have tried to understand what the LSCB knows about how well it is
performing and what difference it is making for children, young people and their
families. To do this inspectors have looked closely at the work of the board, its
structure, policies, procedures and the training it provides to staff from agencies who
work with children. Particular attention has been paid to how well the LSCB monitors,
scrutinises and challenges agencies and how successfully it keeps children at the
heart of all that it does. Inspectors have met with and interviewed not only those
employed directly by the LSCB but professionals from across a full range of relevant
agencies.
This review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
The inspection team consisted of two of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Dominic Stevens, HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Lynn Radley, HMI
Quality assurance manager: Simon Rushall, Senior Her Majestys Inspector


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015

