Swindon Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 11 March  2 April 2014
Report published: 23 May 2014
The overall judgement is requires improvement
There are no widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being
harmed or at risk of harm. The welfare of children in care is safeguarded and
promoted. However, the authority is not yet delivering good help, protection and
care for children, young people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement


Good


Requires
improvement


Requires
improvement

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is good
The LSCB coordinates the activity of statutory partners and has mechanisms in
place to monitor the effectiveness of local arrangements.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


This Local Authority requires improvement and is not yet good because


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the local safeguarding children board


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This Local Authority requires improvement and is not yet good because

Although no children were found to be at immediate risk during the period of
inspection, in a small minority of cases selected for audit, some serious practice
concerns needed to be addressed. In two of these cases, the local authority
had recognised the need to make court applications to secure the safety of the
children.


In response to a significant increase in contacts and referrals, combined with a
resultant increase in assessments and child protection enquiries, and children
and young people becoming subject to child protection plans, the local
authority has reconfigured front door services. This has led to the
establishment of Family Contact Point (FCP), who receive all contacts relating to
children, young people and their families. The assessment and child protection
service (ACP) receives referrals from FCP, and undertakes assessments and
child protection enquiries. Neither team is yet fully staffed and for this reason
the social workers in ACP have higher caseloads and are unable to give priority
to all child in need cases. This means that some children, young people and
their families have to wait for an assessment of their needs and for service
provision.


Strategy discussions between agencies where there are child protection
concerns are held mainly between childrens services and the police only. The
named nurse for child protection is co-located in ACP and is consulted on cases,
but her input is not formally recorded. Other agencies are not routinely
involved, and information is not always available from them to inform decision
making. The records of strategy meetings are not always clear about decisions
and actions to be taken.


Written plans for children who need help and protection are not always
individualised to consider their specific needs. Some do not specify what needs
to be done, when, or by whom. Some plans do not clearly explain what will
happen if the parents do not comply with the plan.


In a small number of cases, Independent Review Managers (IRMs) are not
rigorous or challenging enough in reducing delay and escalating issues in order
to safeguard children and young people or robustly progress permanency
planning.


The quality of social work practice is too variable. Assessments are generally
comprehensive and the childs voice is well recorded and considered. However,
the quality of analysis, and the use of research to inform analysis, is
inconsistent. Assessments are not routinely reviewed and updated by social
workers at important points in the lives of children and young people such as


episodes of care or disruption. This fails to ensure that there is
contemporaneous assessment of childrens and young peoples needs to inform
planning and support to them.

The information system that tells senior leaders, social workers and their
managers what they are doing well and what they need to do better is not
being used effectively to improve services to children and young people.


The Corporate Parenting Board (CPB) is not yet providing effective oversight of
children in care and care leavers. The revised strategy, which has been
endorsed by the CPB, shows that the local authority recognises this and has
responded to the need to strengthen the CPB.


The strategic overview of child sexual exploitation (CSE) is robust. However this
is not yet translated into consistently high quality and timely practice by staff
working within childrens services.

within it that there are not enough placements to meet demand and choice,
particularly for older children. This can mean that a minority of young people
are in placements that initially do not fully meet their often complex needs,
requiring further placement moves to achieve this.
enough. Children who are looked after do less well than children in Swindon
who are not looked after.
sure services are constantly getting better for care leavers.
The local authority has the following strengths
children and their families. This work is supported by the co-location of staff in
multi-disciplinary teams accessible to service users. Swindon has recently
sought to improve the help children, young people and their families receive as
soon as they need help. The creation of the early help record and plan (EHRP)
in place of the common assessment framework has re-energised work in this
area. Children, young people and their families, as well as agencies and schools
have welcomed this initiative. The early help record gives greater focus on the
childs voice and experiences, and early evidence is encouraging that the model
is being used increasingly to help and support children and young people.
thresholds for services are well understood. There is good use of a range of
support services, including effective work through the targeted adolescent
mental health service (TAMHS), Families First and the Family Nurse Partnership
(FNP).


able to build positive and trusting relationships with professionals they know
and who get to know them. When inspectors spoke to social workers, they had
a good understanding of the children they work with, and the voice of the child
was evident in case recording.
advice to families, to enable them to care safely for children and young people.
These support foster care placements and also promote return home plans
when children have been looked after.
protection procedures, with 98% of children over eight years old receiving
independent advocacy services.
children. Social work staff in adult services are based in the disabled childrens
team. This ensures that needs and issues are identified at an early stage and
plans made for successful transitions to adult services.
taken to protect children and young people, including removal from parental
care. Although the three year average timescale for care proceedings is higher
than both statistical neighbour and national averages, effective joint working
with the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and
the Family Justice Council has reduced court timescales to below 30 weeks.
This good practice ensures children and young peoples longer term
permanency options can be secured with minimal delay.
that support them well. The local authority has introduced a number of
initiatives to make sure such placements can be permanent.
a comprehensive suite of formal agreements under section 75 of the National
Health Services Act 2006, enable fully integrated leadership under a single
Service Director of health, education and social care services. These
arrangements lead to secure integration and enhanced outcomes, particularly
for younger children.
excluded from school or who are in danger of being excluded. The local
authority is successful in preventing disruption to the education of looked after
children.
increased demand. Senior managers continue to provide consistent and visible
leadership for childrens services. Most social workers met during the inspection


reported that they were proud to be working in Swindon, and could describe
effective work to improve childrens lives.
who work permanently for the borough and have good knowledge of the
children and families they are supporting.
significant strength in Swindon, based on strong relationships between the
adoption service and adoptive families.

What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
Areas for improvement
measurable and timely plan to improve operational recognition of sexual abuse
and CSE across the Borough of Swindon.
workers caseloads, particularly in the FCP and ACP teams, are manageable and
regularly reviewed. This will enable children, young people and their families to
receive services to meet assessed need in a timely manner.
local authority designated officer (LADO), clearly record actions, responsibilities
and timescales and are reviewed to ensure their completion. Children and
young people on a child protection plan should have a clearly individualised and
separate plan to any other child in the family.
enables social workers to reflect on their practice. Ensure that management
oversight and case work decisions, including the rationale for such, are clearly
recorded.
with Wiltshire police, that there is a process for ensuring notification to social
care within 24 hours of all relevant domestic violence incidents.
hours.
notifications from their current low number.


into account in assessment of needs, planning and the provision of services.
planning to raise the proportion of care leavers who are in education,
employment or training.
sufficient skills, such as managing money, to help them to live independently.
improve services for the benefit of children, young people and their families.
This will require investment to improve the current electronic record in order to
deliver more trusted and accurate quantitative and qualitative information.
addressed to so that health outcomes for all children in care can be improved.
leavers are closely monitored, and that this information is used to set ambitious
targets in order to drive up their attainment and progress.
available who can offer stable homes to older children and young people,
including those with complex emotional and behavioural needs.
enter care, including a rigorous approach to training for all social workers based
on recently revised procedures.
possible opportunity


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted
and one additional contracted inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Sean Tarpey
Team inspectors: Helen Cawston, Peter McEntee, Graham Tilby, Debora BarazettiScott, Aelwyn Pugh, Dominic Porter Moore.


Children living in this area
 Approximately 47,100 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Swindon. This is 22.5% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 17% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 13.2% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 13.8% (the national average is 15.1%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 14.5%
of all children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a
whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are Asian or Asian British at 7.8% and Mixed at 4.5%.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 13.9% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 11.8% (the national average is 13.6%).
Child protection in this area
 At the end of February 2014, 1,470 children who were open to childrens
social care (this includes children who are currently being assessed) had
been identified through assessment as being formally in need of a specialist
childrens service. This is an increase from 1,205 at 31 March 2013
 At the end of February 2014, 217 children and young people were the
subject of a child protection plan. This is an increase from 147 at 31 March
 At the end of March 2013, seven children lived in a privately arranged
fostering placement. This is a reduction from eight in 201112.
Children looked after in this area
 At the end of February 2014, 246 children were being looked after by the LA
(a rate of 52.2 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 250 (53 per


 there is one child currently living in a residential special school2
area
 seven live with parents, none of whom are out of the authority area
 four are children who are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 19 adoptions
 six children became subject of special guardianship orders
subsequently returned to be looked after
 three children and young people have ceased to be looked after and
moved on to independent living
 two children and young people have ceased to be looked after and
are now living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority does not operate any childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of Swindon Borough Councils safeguarding
arrangements was in November 2009. The local authority was judged to be
good.
 The previous inspection of Swindon Borough Councils services for children
in care was in November 2009. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The most recent inspection of adoption services was in 2009. The services
overall quality was judged to be outstanding.
 The most recent inspection of fostering services was in 2012. The service
was judged to be good for overall effectiveness.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since March 2008. He
assumed responsibility for adult services in July 2011.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since April 2010.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
require improvement.
social care, are fully integrated with community health services through a
National Health Services Act Section 75 agreement. 200 health staff (health
visitors, school nurses, speech and language therapists, paediatric therapists
and nursing for children with complex needs) were transferred to the Local
Authority in 2011 as part of the establishment of Early Help Teams.
used in the Borough as it was reported by families and agencies that it had
become over bureaucratic. Despite this finding, at the end of December 2013,
any point (the same as in 201112). With a higher rate of CAF activity in 2011
position of ensuring children and families receive early help before entering
statutory services.
Board audit, Swindon has recently re-focused the way it identifies early help
needs through the creation of an early help record and plan. Agencies and
schools have welcomed this initiative, which ensures a greater focus on the
childs voice and experiences. Early indications are that there will be increased
usage of the record and as a result more children, young people and their
families will receive timely help.
understood by agencies and staff and there is effective use of a wide range of
support services such as targeted mental health services (TAMHS). A key
element in the local authoritys early help offer is the provision of places for
two-year-olds at childrens centres. Swindon is the third best performing local
authority in the country in terms of the number of children benefitting from this
offer. Work seen during this inspection showed that the childrens centres work
very closely with a range of agencies to provide early help. When this has not
brought about sufficient improvement, timely referral is made to childrens
social care services. Early help records seen are of good quality, with evidence
of the family and young person being well engaged with offers of services as a
result.
agencies is also ensuring that almost 300 troubled families receive effective
help to tackle the problems that they encounter. Two claims have been made
to date for the payment by results element of the programme for 34 families
who achieved and sustained the outcomes for a minimum of six months.


parents and their babies. 220 clients have been assisted on the Programme
which is currently working with 94 families. The team have strong links with
social care, other partners and the named nurse for child protection. This
promotes a culture of information sharing and opportunities for discussing
concerns as well as joint working.
numbers of contacts and referrals. The service provides an effective triage
service dealing with up to 600 contacts a month. Referrals made to the service
are appropriate and show a borough-wide understanding of thresholds. There is
appropriate sign-posting to early help and clear identification of statutory child
protection work. Good use is made of co-located health and police staff to
ensure that decisions on further actions are made using as much information as
possible. Parental consent is routinely obtained and well recorded.
about no further action without qualified social worker or managerial
oversight. In samples of work dealt with in this way no detriment to children
and families was seen; the local authority audits the appropriateness of this
work and has established low thresholds for case consultations.
ACP team within 24 hours. However, not all contacts are closed, referred
elsewhere or progressed to referral in this timescale, remaining in the FCP for
longer periods. This delays decisions, assessment of need and potentially the
provision of services to children and young people at the earliest opportunity.
evidence of the use of research despite staff having access to research
resources. Most assessments take account of the history of involvement of
services. Children who have a social worker are mostly seen at regular intervals
and, where appropriate, seen alone. There is good evidence in case files that
bedrooms and living areas are seen by workers. The voice of the child is clearly
evident in case files and social workers understand the importance of hearing a
childs wishes and feelings, which are taken into account in planning. A range of
tools are used to gather young peoples feelings and views to inform
assessments. For example, the use of three houses, which is an activity that
helps children to describe their current concerns and what they want to happen
in the future.
are not subject unnecessarily to child protection procedures. Strategy
discussions are routinely held although often with only the police. Although the
named nurse for child protection is co-located in ACP and informs decision
making, her input is not formally recorded, which is a deficit. Recording of
strategy discussions is variable with some examples seen where decisions and
timescales were unclear. This reflects a general finding that practice is better


than that which is recorded. As the emergency duty service (EDS) rely on these
records to inform their work, it is important that records are both accessible
and clear.
are timely. The local authority has improved performance in this area and now
compares favourably with statistical neighbours. Swindon has adopted the
Signs of Safety methodology, which is a strengths-based, safety-organised
approach to child protection casework. This approach has secured parents
engagement, giving them a clear understanding of harm and safety goals linked
to a plan. Parents with learning disabilities confirm (through the advocacy
service) that they have a clearer understanding of what people are concerned
about and what needs to change. There is good evidence of effective safety
planning with families using the Signs of Safety model, although not all child
protection plans are sufficiently well developed by core groups. Conference
chairs need to improve focus on the effectiveness of core groups to strengthen
the effectiveness of child protection plans.
examples seen lack focus on the child protection plan and were poorly
recorded, with actions and timescales unclear. Contingency planning is not well
articulated, and in some cases it was unclear what the plan was. Different
children who are on child protection plans in the same family do not always
have an individual plan. This means that their individual needs are not explicitly
identified and taken into account in work to minimise risk and measure
progress.
young people are clearly identified. In a small minority of cases, however, plans
are less clear, lacking timescales and clearly defined actions. Through a lack of
management oversight, authoritative action has not always been taken in a
timely manner to ensure that a small minority of children on children in need
plans become subject to child protection plans or enter care at the right time.
This has inhibited robust planning for a small minority of children and young
people as it delays the addressing of risk for a longer period than is necessary.
During the inspection, recent practice demonstrated a more rigorous approach
and oversight.
conferences (MARAC) chaired by a senior police officer, and a multi-agency risk
panel (MARP) which seeks to identify and protect young people deemed to be
very vulnerable.
and pass all high and medium risk notifications to the FCP within 24 hours.
However, other notifications assessed as low risk are not passed to childrens
social care services in this timescale. In a small minority of cases, it can be
several weeks before these notifications are received by the childrens social


care service. This practice does not enable the local authority to adequately
assess overall risk within a reasonable timescale. A proposal to remedy this with
the introduction of a daily contact process with the police has been delayed on
a number of occasions as police configure resources.
sufficient expertise and capacity to work effectively. EDS undertakes welfare
checks and unannounced visits out of hours and at weekends to families of
concern. The service has good access to senior managers to aid decision
making but does not have a facility for seeking legal advice out of hours.
with children and young people considered high risk. The panel meets monthly
and cases are referred using the Swindon Vulnerability Checklist. The Panel
develops detailed multi-agency risk management plans for each young person
at risk of sexual exploitation or other risks such as missing. Plans are subject to
regular review. The Panel has met nine times from May 2013 to January 2014
and has discussed 20 young people. While the risks to young people of child
sexual abuse and exploitation are understood by staff, in some cases seen,
interventions have been ineffective and plans not changed when concerns
remained or increased. The panel is more effective in maintaining an
operational overview of issues such as the sharing of information on alleged
perpetrators of sexual exploitation.
requirements. Most recording is good quality, with detailed information relating
to the childs current experiences. However recording does not routinely
demonstrate that visits were undertaken with a clear purpose related to the
childs plan.
that do not reach the threshold for a social care initial assessment are referred
to early help services within the integrated locality teams. The social care lead
for missing children meets each month with the Police Missing Persons
Coordinator to monitor and review the data and ensure that actions have been
put in place, including return interviews for each child where appropriate. Those
at the highest risk are also reviewed at the Multi-Agency Risk Panel. The LSCB
funds an advocacy service to provide independent return home interviews for
missing children. The combination of these services is having a beneficial
impact on reducing the number of young people going missing by 22% and a
significant reduction by 50% of children in care going missing.
excluded from school or who are in danger of being excluded. The criteria are
clear for determining access to the different types of provision and for
monitoring the progress of young people within each placement. The local
authority also commissions imaginative additional services to provide further
support for children who find it difficult to engage in mainstream educational


provision. There are good systems for tracking and monitoring the impact of
provision and considerable focus is placed on enabling young people within
alternative provision to gain accredited qualifications.
use of managed moves, has been successful in reducing the number of
permanent exclusions by half (26 to 13). Over the same period, the rates of reintegration into mainstream education have more than doubled (8 to 17).
educate their children at home. Good use is made of monitoring data. The local
authority has not hesitated to tackle situations where the quality of education
provided has been inadequate.
people who are privately fostered are identified, assessed and offered support.
Numbers of such arrangements identified in Swindon is low. While there are a
number of publicity initiatives, the quality of private fostering work is variable,
with examples seen where visits are not within timescales. There is a lack of
senior management oversight of this area of work to drive required
improvements, not least to increase recognition.
always demonstrate rigour in assessment and conclusions. The annual report
does not provide adequate information to enable an informed analysis of work
undertaken and its impact. For example, the report does not detail types of
allegation made and does not link these to agency, services and outcomes. This
impedes the identification of trends and service planning or training.
protection procedures, with a figure of 98% of children over eight years old
receiving advocacy services. The advocacy service is provided by an
independent agency and is an opt out rather than opt in service. Children,
young people and their families report favourably on the support of the service.
Good examples have been seen of the use of advocacy in case conferences.
Parents and carers with learning disabilities also benefit from access to
advocacy through the Swindon Advocacy Movement (SAM).
and ethnic background issues. This means that planning in these cases is not
fully informed about a childs needs. There are good transitional arrangements
with adult services for children with disabilities. Adults services social work staff
based in the disabled childrens team ensure that needs and issues are
identified at an early stage and plans made for service continuation.
The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence require improvement.


about when children should become looked after. These include the recent
review of the Placement Panel. The Panel has a wide membership of relevant
professionals, including the designated looked after childrens nurse, an
education representative, early help and family placement team managers as
well as a care package co-ordinator. The panel meets to consider whether entry
to care is the best pathway for a child or young person, or whether there are
other ways they may be supported to remain at home or with their family
members.
of the child or young person are not fully known at the time of the first
placement. Most children and young people placed on an emergency basis are
placed with in-house foster carers where assessments of their needs can
continue more easily. However there is not always a choice of placement for
children and young people who are admitted into care in this manner.
placements approved by the authority, with 89% living within 20 miles of their
family home. This is a good example of the local authoritys determination to
place children and young people within their local area. This represents good
practice as it ensures there is minimal disruption to existing family, education
and community networks for children and young people who enter care.
through trusted providers where due regard is given to the latest Ofsted
inspection judgement. If judgements decline, consideration is given to a
placement move if this is in accordance with the wishes of the child and
deemed in their best interests. As at the end of March, there were 20 children
in residential care and 27 in independent fostering placements, of which 39 are
in good or outstanding provision. The remaining eight are in adequate provision
and no child is currently placed in a setting that is judged to be inadequate.
Providers spoken to during the inspection were generally complimentary of the
work of the local authority and felt social workers supported children and young
people well.
to ensure foster carers develop knowledge and skills to assist them in their
work. The fostering panel provides a good level of scrutiny in considering
applications from prospective carers, and challenges applications where
appropriate. Foster carers state that they feel well supported by their
supervising social workers and have confidence that they will get the help they
need from people who know them well at any time of day or night, as there is
always someone from the family placement team on call.
statistical neighbour averages. However, a lack of choice, particularly in
teenage placements, means that a very small minority of young people are


placed at least initially in homes or settings which are not able to meet their
sometimes complex emotional or behavioural needs. This makes placement
breakdown more likely in this cohort. Although the local authority recognises
this deficiency, there is currently no targeted recruitment of foster carers with
skills in working with teenagers.
enable families to care safely for children and young people and support
planned reunification when children have been looked after.
average timescale for care proceedings is higher than both the statistical
neighbour and national average, effective joint working with Cafcass and the
Family Justice Council has had the impact of reducing court timescales to below
people are safeguarded by court orders and enables the local authority to
consider the range of permanency options most suited to the needs of each
child or young person in a timely manner.
seen alone by their social workers who, in most cases, know them very well
and work hard to understand their needs. Where there is an up to date core
assessment, this helps to guide effective planning, but core assessments are
not routinely updated where there are changes in childrens lives. Care plans
are not always robust, and permanence plans at the second review are not
always in place. All these factors contribute incrementally to delay and
insufficiently robust planning that is both avoidable and potentially detrimental
to children and young people.
seven years of age. This is an opt in service and not all choose to take up the
service (81 out of 250), which means that some children and young people are
not having their views independently represented at decision-making meetings.
Limited links with independent visitors were seen, even where contact with
parents is not in place. The potential need for an independent visitor is not
always recorded in review discussions. Children and young people coming into
care for the first time are given a helpful pack of information with details of
how to access advocacy, and how to complain. For younger children in
particular, the information is not presented in a very child-friendly manner, so
they may not always understand it.
group of children in care (some of whom are care leavers) who enjoy spending
time together and working on questions from or feedback to elected members
and officers on specific issues. Participation workers support the children in care
council well and it is actively helping to improve services. For example, profiles
of foster carers have been created that can be shared with children and young
people in order that they have some knowledge of the carers and their families


with whom they may be placed. However, the group is not representative of all
children in care in Swindon as they do not consult more widely in making
suggestions or responding to questions from elected members or officers. At
present there is not an established group for under 12s or for children with
disabilities, although some bespoke events are held to engage them.
pledges to which the local authority has committed. Representatives of the
CICC who met with inspectors were unclear and confused about the pledge
although, when prompted by support workers, remembered to contributing to
its development some time ago. A comprehensive Swindon Plan for Children in
Care and Care Leavers is being developed and a draft is due to be taken to the
Corporate Parenting Board in March 2014.
people who are missing, and to identify and protect those who are at risk of
sexual exploitation, it is not clear that social workers always recognise the risks
and know what to do to safeguard children. In a small minority of cases seen
by inspectors, looked after young people had clearly been exposed to sexual
harm which was not recognised quickly enough. The local authority has since
taken decisive and robust actions to safeguard these young people and is
currently auditing all cases across the Borough where sexual abuse or
exploitation may be a feature.
education, and offending rates are monitored by the looked after childrens
nurse, the looked after children educational service (LACES) and the youth
offending team (YOT) respectively. Further work is required to secure
improvements in practice through setting targets and more robust tracking of
children in care. Whether children are placed within or outside Swindon, there
are effective arrangements to ensure their basic health and education needs
are met in most instances. However, there are too many children and young
people over 10 who have been in care for more than a year who have a caution
or conviction (10% of the care population compared to 6% of national LAC
average). The comparatively low number of children in care (CIC) in Swindon
coupled with the over-representation of teenagers amongst CIC affect this
statistic. However, taken alongside other indicators, this contributes to poorer
outcomes for young people who have a care history.
people in care, and the completion rates of strengths and difficulties
questionnaires (SDQ), can be improved. SDQs are reported, but are not
robustly analysed. The most recent report (March 2013) does not make
suggestions as to how outcomes could be improved. For example, it is
acknowledged that the number of young people in care who are known to have
a substance use problem is likely to be an underestimate, but there are no
actions with timescales for addressing this and ensuring that help is available to
all who may need it. Some services are effective, such as the joint working with


CAMHS. Foster carers report that access to CAMHS for consultations and initial
assessments is fast tracked, and helpful in understanding childrens needs and
approaches to best meet these.
looked after children. Sustained measures to ensure that no looked after child is
permanently excluded have been in place for the past ten years. The most
recent figures also show that attendance at school by children in care of
primary age is above average (97%). At secondary level, however, at 93.3% it
is below the national average of 95.4%. Although very few change schools
more than once, even when they move home several times, not all of them
attend a good school (82% LAC of primary age and 65% of those of secondary
age attend a school that is good or better).
small to allow for detailed comparisons between their educational performance
and that of children in care across the country. The most recent report gives a
detailed analysis of why children in particular year groups have not achieved
well but suggests that too little has been expected of them. Senior managers
have recognised this and the virtual school and educational support team are
now being aligned more closely to school improvement services in order to
provide greater challenge to improve educational outcomes.
pupil premium to attend a range of extra-curricular activities including sport,
dance, and music lessons. However while foster carers have discounted access,
children and young people do not have an automatic entitlement to a free
leisure pass. This might encourage a higher take-up of leisure services,
enabling them to develop wider interests, increase friendship circles and
improve health outcomes, all of which help to develop resilience.
maintaining contact with parents, brothers and sisters. For some children, this
has resulted in long-term fostering and special guardianship arrangements
achieving permanence. Effective parallel adoption planning is increasingly in
place, which means that the search for potential adopters can begin while
assessments of the birth family are taking place during legal proceedings. The
use of parallel planning has enabled some young children to be placed for
adoption in accordance with recommended timescales.
are put in place for all children at the earliest opportunity is yet to be
embedded. The current draft permanency policy does not clearly identify the
approach that is necessary to achieve this, and would benefit from being
updated. There is insufficient rigour and challenge from Independent Review
Managers (IRM) in reducing delay and escalating issues in order to progress
permanency plans in a timely manner. The IRM service has only recently


developed a quality assurance framework to monitor and track quality and
performance for all children and young people who are looked after.
system, and tends to be progressed when children have a permanent plan that
does not involve returning to their birth family. There are some good examples
of life story work being undertaken by foster carers and social workers, but this
is not consistent throughout the childs journey in care.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is good.
the vast majority of children where a return home to their birth family would be
unsafe or would not satisfactorily meet their needs. The use of the PLO and
effective collaboration through the local pre-proceedings protocol has resulted
in significant improvements to concluding care proceedings in a timely way.
Consequently there is an improving trend in terms of the average time between
a child entering care and moving in with an adoptive family. The newly
established court team is an example of the local authoritys determination to
further improve the timeliness and consistency of court work and the use of
parallel planning for children.
but case tracking is weakened by the lack of effective and robust electronic
systems. This inhibits the service managers ability to fully analyse any potential
delays and target action as part of a whole systems approach to permanence
planning. To compensate for this, the service has adopted alternative systems
to ensure that childrens progress is individually tracked. The local authoritys
intention to re-define the role of the Permanency Panel aims to further improve
management oversight and accelerate progress in respect of permanence
options for children.
within 12 months of the adoption order being made. The local authority has
been successful in enabling older children to be adopted, with 25% of those
adopted during 201314 aged between 10 and 17 years. Matching is effective
and there have been no adoption disruptions involving Swindon children in the
last three years.
capacity of a well-established and highly experienced adoption service.
Adoption social workers provide a generic service responding to initial enquiries,
undertaking assessments and training of prospective adopters. They act as links
to matching and provide post-adoption support. This promotes continuity and
means that adoptive families feel comfortable in approaching different
members of the team for advice and support. The team receives informal
support and regular supervision from an experienced manager. There is a
strong commitment to improve the service based on feedback from adoptive


families and professionals which, for example, has contributed to the training
programme.
were assessed and approved during 201314, compared to 19 in 201213,
which represents a 52% increase. The number of children and young people
placed for adoption is less than the number of adopters approved, and for
issues of safety some children and young people are placed for adoption out of
the Borough. For this reason Swindon contributes very effectively to enlarging
the national pool of adopters. Good support is provided to adoptive families
where other local authorities have placed children with adopters approved by
Swindon.
initial enquiry and the preparation and training they have received prior to
being approved. Prospective adopters routinely highlight the professionalism,
knowledge and support of the team, underpinned by comprehensive and clear
information throughout the process. Events involve adopters, extended family
members and referees to ensure that adoption is understood by all those
involved in the process.
supporting the authority in responding to and completing family assessments in
a more timely way. Whilst the current population of Swindon is not particularly
diverse, which is reflected in the profile of children who have been adopted in
the last 12 months, managers are aware of the need to recruit adopters from a
range of backgrounds. This is reflected in the diverse background of the current
cohort of prospective adopters who are completing the current assessment
process. A range of effective recruitment methods are used to recruit adopters
and foster carers, including the use of local media and promotional videos.
Panel by adoption workers is good and they comprehensively identify the issues
to be considered by the panel. However, the quality of Child Permanence
Reports (CPR) presented to the panel by the childs social worker is more
variable. This means that the Adoption Panel may not always be presented with
the most up-to-date information about the childs circumstances. Adoption
procedures have been revised recently and these present an opportunity to
deliver a comprehensive training programme to fieldwork social workers,
utilising the expertise within the adoption service about what works well for
children who have been adopted. This will support social workers in preparing
more effective permanency reports.
an experienced independent chairperson. The panel demonstrates strong
challenge in forming recommendations about whether prospective adopters
should be approved and in matching children with adoptive families. Panel
minutes are comprehensive and provide a summary of the strengths of the


prospective adoptive family as well as areas for discussion. Adopters who
reflect on their experience of attending the panel consistently describe this as
well informed, relevant to their circumstances and thorough.
outcomes for children or prospective adopters following their consideration at
the panel. The panel and agency decision maker ensure that the right children
are matched with appropriate adoptive families, with good support from
medical and legal advisors. The service should consider more regular meetings
between the independent adoption panel chairperson and the agency decision
maker to enable a more strategic oversight of adoption performance and
outcomes for children.
scheme, it has been successful in securing permanency for some children by
approving their foster carers as adoptive parents. Of the 16 children adopted
during 201314, four were adopted by their foster carers. Local un-validated
data indicates that 75% of children adopted in 201314 waited less than 20
months from entering care to being placed with their adoptive family, which
indicates an improving trend from the 201012 average of 51% (Department of
Education Adoption Scorecard, January 2014). Of the 10 children subject to
placement orders who have yet to be matched at the time of the inspection,
seven are subject to active family-finding. The vast majority of decisions to
place these children for adoption have taken place within the eight months
preceding this inspection.
undertaken by foster carers and social workers is good. The quality of life story
books seen is good. However, this is not routinely in place for all children
entering care and tends to be undertaken when a child is made subject to a
permanence plan that does not involve returning home. Consequently, some
children who are adopted may not have access in later life to all information
about their earlier experiences in care. The recently revised adoption
procedures include good practice templates for later life letters to assist social
workers with this task.
undertaken using a range of options such as the South-West Adoption
Consortium, National Adoption Register and Adoptions UKs family finding
service Children Who Wait. When separation of brothers and sisters is
considered, this is underpinned by good specialist assessments. As well as
promoting the attendance of approved adopters at regionally organised
adoption activity events, local adoption parties are being piloted in Swindon and
there is some early indication of this leading to improved matching with
children.
benefitting from the opportunity to share and receive information from their


birth families during 201314. A review of these arrangements to seek
feedback from adopters and birth families is planned to enable the local
authority to learn and implement further improvements to the service.
developed out of strong relationships that have been fostered with adoptive
families. Individually tailored packages of support are developed well in
response to need. The team has developed strong links with CAMHS and the
children in care education service (the virtual school), which work closely with
schools to enable them to provide good support to children prior to and after
being adopted. Individual sessions on attachment are provided by a child
psychologist to support families. The Children & Families Intervention Team
(CFIT) and the work of the care package facilitator have contributed to
preventing adoption breakdowns. Good training is also available for adoptive
families and foster carers and evaluations of these are positive in terms of
impacting on the care of adopted children and those who are moving on to
adoption.
and a regular newsletter keeping them up-to-date with national and local
developments, for example advising adopters about the new pupil premium for
adopted children. Adoptive families benefit from opportunities to network and
this promotes access to individual post-adoption support. There are groups for
teenage girls and an Adoptive Parents Group which contribute to improving the
service. The local authority commissions the South West Adoption Network and
Adoption UK to provide help and support to adopted children and their families,
and to birth families. Adoptive families feel well supported to achieve good
outcomes for children who have been placed with them.
The graded judgment for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
requires improvement.
improvement. An audit is currently being conducted to identify ways to ensure
greater continuity for young people as they move from being in care to taking
increasing responsibility for themselves as care leavers. Among the changes
being explored are improved processes to ensure more timely transfer of
information from the children in care service to the Care Leaving Team (Route
order to contribute more effectively to care and pathway plans. However, at
present there is no overall action plan to indicate precisely how such changes
will be achieved, by whom and in what time frame.
plan. The pathway plans that have been completed vary in the depth and
usefulness of the information they include. Due to the systems used for record
keeping, it is not easy for young people to trace the history of their care
episode(s), nor for those who are supporting them into adulthood. Not all


young people are directly involved in pathway planning meetings and the plans
seen did not always include the views of those to whom they related.
help they had received from their social workers and personal advisers
although, in some cases, changes of worker meant that support had not always
been consistent. A good range of initiatives are in place to support young
people to move into adulthood with support. These include the staying put
policy where young people are encouraged to remain with their foster carers
beyond the age of 18 years. Similarly, those who attend higher education are
supported by personal advisers until they reach the age of 25. The local
authority has also ensured that there is an increasing number of foster carers
who can provide supported lodgings for young people in the year before their
including supported lodgings, hostels, emergency accommodation and
accommodation specifically intended for those with special needs and
disabilities. The local authority does make a limited use of bed and breakfast
accommodation within and outside the borough. These placements are used for
a maximum of eight weeks. The local authority checks that such
accommodation is suitable. In the case of new landlords, checks are also
informed by police records. At the time of the inspection, there were two care
leavers in bed and breakfast accommodation for emergency reasons.
lived and said that they felt safe, although several were in private tenancies
that they had found for themselves. Some described limited contact with their
neighbours but did not feel isolated where they were living. Their social care
workers had visited them at the required times to check on the quality of the
accommodation. Where this was not considered to be of sufficiently high
standard, the young people concerned had been re-housed.
to live alone or had received sufficient support in developing skills of cooking,
cleaning and financial management. This was despite the fact that the local
authority employs outreach workers to support the development of independent
living. Young people interviewed reported that they had been provided with
help and the care leavers grant to which they were entitled in setting up home.
processes for making a complaint if they were unhappy with the support they
were receiving.
and dental practice but they did not always choose to make best use of these
services or access them as required. This was also the case for the young
people whose pathway plans were examined. The local authority recognises the


need to improve the quality of health services, including mental health services,
for care leavers, particularly those who are most difficult to reach.
ways through regular high profile events which are appreciated by the young
people concerned. However, not all the young people are nominated for awards
at such events which precludes their invitation. A more innovative approach by
social workers and others may provide further opportunities for increased
inclusivity.
training increases as they get older so that, at the age of 18, it is over twice the
figure for all the young people locally. The local authority has been slow to
tackle this issue. A recently produced Skills and Employment Strategy has been
developed and adopted by the authority in which it commits to ensure
supported routes into employment for care leavers to maximise their potential
to successfully enter the job market. The strategy recognises that more care
leavers need to be supported to maximise the opportunities to take up and
successfully sustain an apprenticeship if that is the best route for them. The
impact of this strategy is yet to be seen.
not monitor the progress of care leavers in further and higher education. Those
young people who stay in full-time education beyond the age of 16 or who go
on to university or higher education receive the bursaries to which they are
entitled. They also have appropriate support from a personal adviser.
Leadership, management and governance requires improvement.
collective statutory responsibilities well, with safeguarding of children and
young people a key priority. The authority has committed significant additional
resources to increase capacity within childrens services. There have been
significant changes to the senior management structure following the
retirement and promotion of key personnel. This has enabled existing and
newer managers to better understand the service. Where there is weakness in
service delivery robust action is being taken to improve practice and
performance. For example, a significant increase in referrals to childrens
services and delays in completing initial assessments prompted a swift response
by senior managers, who brought forward the restructure and implementation
of a new front door service as a single point of access for all contacts and
referrals to childrens services.
influential contributors to the authoritys strategic direction established through
One Swindon and underpinned by its Stronger Together vision. The Director
has been instrumental in securing the continued commitment of partner
agencies for financial investment in childrens services. The belief and


enthusiasm for effective joint commissioning arrangements has, over the last
two years, led to an effective and integrated Health and Social Care Service.
There is more work to do to ensure that the partnership is fully committed to
meeting the needs of the most vulnerable children and young people in the
borough. For example, the authority must encourage local business partners to
be more ambitious and to support the authority in securing work-based
placements and apprenticeships for CIC and care leavers.
and partner agencies current assessments of a childs journey through Swindon
from universal services, early help to specialist services. This statement is well
known and understood, recognising areas for improvement that are ongoing or
planned. The statement acts as a barometer to assess how effective the
authority will be in meeting the needs of children at every stage of their
journey.
Member, the DCS and SSCB Chair. Arrangements work well to ensure that the
messages from front line practice are known across all the different governance
arrangements in place. However, deficiencies in the current electronic recording
system, including the distrust and non-compliance of some social workers, act
as a barrier to an effective performance management framework. Information
is not sufficiently robust to ensure that an accurate picture is gained, in
particular qualitative outcomes for children and young people. A corporate
strategy with committed funding is in place to address this local authority
priority.
independently chaired. It receives appropriate reports, and minutes show that
there is sufficient challenge to senior managers. The Childrens Overview and
Scrutiny Committee focuses well on key areas, and planned work streams for
review of the Trouble Families Programme.
high level of confidence in the DCS and the senior management team in
delivering effective services for children and families. She has high aspirations
for all children and young people and knows there is more work to do to ensure
the authority achieves improved outcomes for all children. She shares with the
DCS the belief that the very recent appointment of a new Head of Service
aligned to the finding of this inspection report will provide the blueprint for the
authority in prioritising areas for challenge and improvement going forward.
Assessment currently being refreshed. Robust analysis in 2011 of children,
children in care and children in need has led to an improvement in the way
services are effectively delivered through the joint commissioning
arrangements. Services are integrated and the co-location of health, education


and social care staff within childrens services means there is less duplication in
the delivery of services to children and families and more opportunities for
collaboration, for example joint training. The decision to transfer health care
professionals across to social care illustrates the partnerships confidence in
providing an integrated health and social care service through section 75
agreements. A range of effective commissioned services support the local
authority in providing targeted early help to children. These enable families to
build resilience and work towards less dependency on the use of statutory
services. The Strengthening Families programme supports professionals to
identify potential problems early, seek alternative options to care, and to
manage risk more effectively in the community. This approach to working with
families at an early stage when needs are identified is effectively embedded in
practice. Where commissioned services have fallen short in delivering good
outcomes for children and young people, the local authority has been robust in
their approach to re-commissioning a service from a more suitable provider
who can meet their needs and provide a more timely service to children and
families.
create bespoke care arrangements for children on the cusp of care and at risk
of needing statutory services. The impact of the role on helping to keep
children safe within their own families and reduce the financial burden of using
costly statutory services is currently being evaluated. Senior managers are
confident it is a step in the right direction and will reduce the overall looked
after population in the long term.
and care leavers remains a challenge for the local authority. Work on CSE has
heightened awareness across the system and the preponderance of teenage
care entrants are 16-year-old white girls. The rising number of older children
needing care means that this is now a priority and requires robust targeted
recruitment activity.
provides effective challenge to childrens services and other partner agencies
for children in care and care leavers. The Corporate Parenting Strategy
establishes key principles and recognises the crucial role the local authority has
as corporate parents. It provides a clear link to the priorities set out in the
Health and Wellbeing strategy to ensure that all children in Swindon have the
best start in life. Senior officers in childrens services act as advisors and attend
the quarterly meetings. However, the Boards current understanding of the key
strengths and challenges faced by children in care and the services provided for
them is limited. A shortfall in adequate preparation and training for the role as
a corporate parent is severely restricting the capacity for board members to
contribute effectively to the looked after agenda. As a consequence they are
not able to monitor the delivery of some key aspects of the service, for example
the permanency arrangements for children and young people, and to provide
effective challenge.


Presentations to strategic boards by Members of the Youth Parliament and by
young people who access commissioned services ensure that the voice of
children and young people are an integral part of service development. For
example, building on the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic legacy, a number of
young people attended a recent Childrens Trust meeting to raise awareness of
how, by attending locally organised sport clubs, children and young people can
help reduce obesity and improve their health by increasing their levels of
activity. This serves to support the authoritys Strengthening Families
programme.
Borough, has supported the development of the Children and Young Peoples
Early Support Strategy 201316 ensuring the presentation and language used
was child and young person friendly. The forum has previously considered
bullying a priority. Children in care were able to articulate the services
commitment to keeping them safe and to tackling bullying and discrimination.
further development. Although a suite of performance information is collated
and reported at all levels of the service it fails to robustly support improvements
in performance and practice. The electronic information system does not
support data collection effectively, and is dependent on a significant staffing
resource to update and cleanse data to ensure that it is accurate. Some
managers distrust the systems in place and are seen to track the quality of
practice and decision making using manual processes. For example, the
adoption service tracks family finding activity using a visual board placed on the
office wall. There is a lack of confidence in the electronic systems that are
designed to support managers in performance managing staff and monitoring
outcomes for children and young people. Plans are in place and investment has
been secured to address the technical issues corporately, while the second
phase of the Strengthening Families initiative seeks to ensure routine
compliance with system requirements.
some effective practices taking place to share information about vulnerable
young people and disrupt patterns of activities. A dedicated post within
childrens services links directly with other agencies and service providers to
support a coherent approach to the CSE strategy. Awareness raising of CSE is
on-going across the partnership, including amongst hoteliers and other
providers of night time services such as taxi drivers and takeaway outlets.
monthly Multi-Agency Risk Panel (MARP). Through the dedicated CSE worker,
social workers will discuss referrals they will present at the panel so that action
plans are established and the level of risk is appropriately identified and shared
with all agencies. Whilst there is confidence in the strategic overview of CSE, it
is less clear how social workers respond to referrals where CSE is an emerging


factor and connected friends and groups of children are implicated in the
information. In response to concerns expressed by inspectors in relation to a
small minority of cases where it was identified that children and young people
may be at risk, the local authority commissioned an audit of current casework.
This scoping audit confirms a current disconnect between strategy and practice.
The findings highlighted a need to accelerate practice developments in this and
the local authority has appropriately revised the initial terms of reference of the
CSE audit to extend more widely across all of the provision of childrens social
care.
have commissioned a theatre company to present a play called Chelsea's
Choice to help professionals and carers to understand the issues more clearly
and support the early identification of risk. The play will also be shown to most
Year 8 pupils in the borough, with nine of 11 secondary schools hosting the
play and associated workshops.
development programme. However, the impact of the role in driving
improvement and achieving a consistent approach to social work practice is yet
to be seen. Routine case file audits, practice observations learning from
complaints and thematic deep dives alongside the implementation of the Signs
of Safety are helping to support improvement in social work practice. However,
the quality of practice, in particular written assessments and plans, remains too
variable.
ensure that decisions made are robust and support social worker practice to
safeguard children and young people. The regularity, recording and quality of
supervision is inconsistent. Where it is good and well evidenced, it informs
practice and is highly valued by social workers.
Neither team is yet fully staffed and for this reason the social workers in ACP
have higher caseloads and are unable to give priority to all child in need cases.
Some social workers consistently informed inspectors that they carried
responsibility for between 33 and 39 children and families with varying degrees
of complexity. While senior managers recognise this impacts on the ability of
the service to ensure all children receive a timely response, it also explains why
the quality of social worker practice can at times be adversely affected.
Reducing caseloads in a service that is seeing a higher number of referrals and
a workforce that is stretched remains a critical challenge for managers going
forward. The local authority has made significant additional investment to meet
increasing demand. This includes an increase in social work posts, but some of
these remain vacant.
bespoke management training for team managers. However, the programme is


undermined by managers and social workers who advised inspectors that time
to access training is compromised due to the heavy demands of case work.
qualified social workers (NQSWs), however during the period of inspection this
was not always met. Managers recognise the need to enhance NQSWs
experiences in complex case work whilst balancing the need to ensure they
learn at a pace that suits them. Newly qualified social workers were in general
very complimentary about the support they received.
confidence in the senior management team and the steps being taken to reorganise and strengthen services including building capacity in teams,
reinforcing management oversight and improving the routine use of
performance data.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of children in care is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum requirements are
in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good protection, help and care
for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the local safeguarding
children board
The effectiveness of the Swindon Safeguarding Children Board (SSCB) is
good.
Areas for improvement:
monitoring of performance contains sufficient qualitative information and
analysis in order that the Board can build up a picture of effectiveness and
quality of services for children, young people and their families
agencies where poor practice is identified. SSCB should seek assurances that
there are action plans and timescales in place for improvement.
the childs journey and experiences of safeguarding services.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the SSCB
complies with its statutory responsibilities. The Board is appropriately
constituted and well attended by members including two lay members who
independently challenge the work of the Board and its priorities for
safeguarding children in Swindon. The SSCB is financially sound with members
supporting the work of the Board proportionately. Further income is generated
through training revenues.
Childrens Trust and has built up effective working links with the Health and
Well-being Board and the Adult Safeguarding Board. The chair has been able to
influence the direction of work and priority setting, including the development
of the early help record to replace the CAF in Swindon.
challenge include undertaking a test of assurance in relation to proposed senior
management changes in Swindon and challenging health services on provision
of suitable accommodation for young people with serious mental health issues.
In both examples change occurred to support safeguarding practice, the former
through a streamlining of the Directors roles and responsibilities. In the latter,
a secure bed has been commissioned within a secure facility outside the
Borough. This will curtail the unsuitable use of police custody for such
vulnerable young people.
other and to allow at each Board meeting an opportunity for workshops


enabling members to have a very effective learning environment. The chair also
ensures that he and sub-group chairs meet regularly to ensure that suitable
progress is being made on working priorities.
including further development of assessment and practice in relation to
domestic violence and child sexual exploitation (CSE). The business plan
acknowledges a continued need to identify gaps in service and to manage these
as a risk. This ensures challenge to agencies which continue to need to have a
better understanding of the childs journey in order to improve practice. It
appropriately identifies actions and timescales.
dives on domestic violence and neglect and children subject to child protection
plans for a second or subsequent time. Although there have been no recent
serious case reviews in Swindon the SSCB has commissioned two local case
reviews, including a SCIE review deep dive on neglect which resulted in
comprehensive action plans and dissemination to a wide range of staff across
agencies. Pocket guides to these issues have been developed and circulated to
staff. Staff commented favourably on their usefulness and were familiar with
the messages contained within them.
adults over mental health and alcohol and drug dependency are aware of
safeguarding issues, and contribute to the recognition of risk and its
minimisation by attendance at the Board and involvement in key forums such
as the multi-agency risk panel (MARP).
analysis of performance or weaknesses, for example private fostering, LADO
activity or CSE practice at the front-line. This inhibits sufficient challenge to
practice or enabling a clear picture of the childs experiences of services.
performance data. While there is some analysis of risk in relation to the
effectiveness of work with young people there is an over reliance on data and
targets and less focus on qualitative information from agencies, including social
care, which means that the Board and members are less aware of and able to
challenge day to day practice.
in October 2013 into the multi-agency responses to work to protect children
living with domestic violence. The Board also audited six cases of children
subject to a child protection plan for a second or subsequent time, published in
February 2014, with associated learning and action points captured in an
overview report. Such activity yielded learning issues and action points. The
domestic violence audit recognised the complexity of working with families in


this area and the need for staff to have time to work with such families.
However, this work has not yet been translated into a dialogue with the local
authority about high caseloads and social work capacity, thus reducing the
impact of the audit.
including initiating an annual snapshot audit of children at risk. However,
information produced from the audit and presented to the SSCB is data led and
lacks analysis of the quality of work being undertaken with children and young
people and whether the risk to them is being reduced as a result. Lack of
information to the Board on practice in relation to CSE and other areas of work
with young people means that the Board is not monitoring the effectiveness of
local arrangements as well as it should. For example, the Board has not
recognised that there are elements of poor performance in ensuring that all
young people at risk in relation to CSE receive timely support and the right level
of intervention to keep them safe.
and procedures in place and in raising awareness of key areas of concern and
risk to young people. These include a multi-agency threshold for services
document, work with the Childrens Trust on the early help record as a
replacement for the common assessment framework, and the development of
the SSCB framework for neglect. The Board has also contributed well to the
development of the multi-agency risk panel in relation to child sexual
exploitation. Such work is very effectively supported by the recent
commissioning of the Chelseas choice play for young people. The play
examines issues of sexual exploitation and abusive relationships and has been
performed to professional groups and young people in schools. The Board
supported updates and revisions to the domestic violence strategy and needs
assessment. A well-developed cyber-bullying strategy, including on-line safety
modules, has been a further successful strand of work in keeping children and
young people safer.
as child protection, domestic violence and CSE. Training is evaluated at delivery
and longitudinally at four weeks after course attendance. Professional
attendance is monitored and reported on. Evaluation returns indicate that the
training is valued and the quality is felt by staff attending to be high. Such
findings were reflected in conversations with practitioners during the period of
inspection.


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work based
learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and
other secure establishments. It inspects services for children in care and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


