Thurrock Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 22 February 2016 to 17 March 2016
Report published: 24 May 2016

Childrens services in Thurrock Council require improvement to
be good

Require improvement

permanence

Require improvement


Require improvement


Require improvement


Require improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Services to children, young people and families in Thurrock require improvement.
Children and young people were found to be safe in Thurrock during this inspection,
with none identified who were at immediate risk of significant harm without plans
and services being in place to reduce these risks and to meet their needs.
While there are pockets of good practice across all areas of childrens social care, the
majority of practice is less than good, specifically much of the core business
regarding assessment and planning for children, securing a stable workforce,
supervision and management oversight. In the last inspection of safeguarding and
looked after children services in 2012, the local authority was judged to be good.
Following this inspection, senior officers and leaders did not continue to ensure that
children and families received consistently good services.
The local authority has addressed effectively almost all areas for improvement that
were identified at its last inspection, including its response to referrers, access to a
range of leisure activities for children looked after and implementation of early help
assessments. However, the quality of assessments and plans for children in need,
including children with a disability, those in need of protection, children looked after
and care leavers, requires improvement.
The local authority appointed a new permanent head of childrens social care in
October 2014, a new chief executive in September 2015 and an interim director of
childrens services (DCS) in late January 2016, pending the swift appointment of their
new DCS who is due to start in May this year. These appointments have been of
highly skilled professionals who have demonstrated their positive impact on services
in a relatively short time.
Most children benefit from early help provided by a range of strong commissioned
services. Children who have more complex needs and require a coordinated response
do not always receive such effective early help and support. The local authority does
not ensure that all children who have been missing from home or care benefit from a
return home interview after they have been missing. Children in need of protection
receive a swift and appropriate service, but children in need often experience delay
in seeing their social worker for an assessment of their needs. Children are not
effectively supported to attend and participate in their formal review meetings. When
these meetings take place, reports and minutes from previous meetings are often
shared too late to be fully considered.


Children looked after do not receive a consistently good service, and too many
become looked after in an emergency. The recruitment of foster carers is not
resulting in an appropriate range of local placement options, and too many children
live outside the borough, away from their communities, families and friends. Children
looked after achieve well relative to their peers in the early years. Outcomes for
children looked after at the end of key stage 2 have improved significantly, but are
still below outcomes for all children. However, educational outcomes for children
looked after who are taking GCSE examinations are poor. Personal education plans
are not sufficiently detailed. The virtual school does not effectively monitor the
educational progress and outcomes for the majority of children looked after who live
outside the borough.
Waiting times for children with a plan for adoption are reducing. However, workers
within mainstream social work teams do not consistently consider adoption for all
children who cannot return home. Post-adoption support is insufficient for children
and families who are entitled to this service. Care leavers receive good day-to-day
support, but not enough young people are benefiting from staying put arrangements
after they turn 18 years, and they do not all receive effective support to transition
into adulthood. Pathway reviews are not being undertaken within timescales.
The local authoritys use of performance management and quality assurance
information across all areas of the service is poor, and impedes any improvement
needed. Use of feedback from children and families to inform service development is
underutilised. Accurate data regarding performance is collated, but managers do not
analyse this data in order to inform service developments. There are weaknesses in
the analysis of social workers activity in relation to timeliness (for example, of multiagency safeguarding hub (MASH) processes and assessments), the consideration of
trends from return home interviews and children missing education information, the
overview and analysis of findings from audit, and the full analysis of key factors
affecting services for children in need of protection and children looked after.
The instability of the workforce leaves services vulnerable. The local authority is fully
aware of the workforce challenges and has a range of creative initiatives in place to
address this in the longer term. Management oversight of frontline practice is
inconsistent, with too many areas of weakness, and results in a lack of effective
challenge to progress childrens plans and effect change for children. Currently, the
local authority does not systematically ensure that the workforce receives supervision
of sufficient quality and frequency.
Some elements of services to children and their families have improved. The local


authoritys Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH), for example, is securing strong
information sharing between professionals and robust decision making regarding
appropriate services for children and their families. Management oversight within the
MASH is very strong. Other improvements include the response for children who are
at risk of child sexual exploitation, which reduces their risks. The authority has also
substantially improved its offer to teenagers, the vast majority of whom receive a
good service from the adolescents team.
Despite changes of key personnel, the local authority has greatly improved its
corporate and cross-party political support for childrens services. The local authority
had a recent peer review of its corporate arrangements by the Local Government
Association, which endorsed the strong working relationships seen during this
inspection. Effective support from the political leadership is evident through the
challenging overview and scrutiny function, and in the proactive Health and
Wellbeing Board.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)



Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections


The local authority operates no childrens homes.



The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
June 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.



The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in June 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.

Local leadership


The interim director of childrens services has been in post since January 2016.



The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since
August 2012.

Children living in this area


Approximately 40,093 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Thurrock. This is 25% of the total population in the area.



Approximately 21% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.



The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 14% (the national average is 16%)
 in secondary schools is 14% (the national average is 14%).



Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 22% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.



The largest minority ethnic group of children and young people in the area is
Black or Black British.



The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 17% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 10% (the national average is 15%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data, where this was available.




Thurrock has the highest rate of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children
(UASC) in the eastern region: 20.7 children per 10,000 population. The number
of UASC has doubled in the last 12 months. In December 2015, one in four
children looked after was a UASC.

Child protection in this area


At 22 February 2016, 1,609 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from



At 22 February 2016, 263 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 201 at 31 March 2015.



At 22 February 2016, two children live in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from seven at 31 March 2015.



Since the last inspection, four serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted and five serious case reviews have been completed or are
ongoing at the time of the inspection.

Children looked after in this area


At 22 February 2016, 336 children are being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 87.2 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 280 (70 per
 of this number, 245 (or 72.9%) live outside the local authority area
authority area
 one lives in a residential special school3 outside the authority area
area
 five live with parents, of whom two live outside the authority area



In the last 12 months:
 there have been 18 adoptions


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


returned to be looked after
independent living
 no children or young people ceased to be looked after and are now living
in houses of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that accurate performance data is analysed and that this leads to
specific actions for improvement.


Strengthen oversight, coordination and quality assurance of early help services
to ensure that children and families are receiving the right support at the right
time.


Ensure that assessments and plans for children are of a consistently high
quality.


Improve the offer of return home interviews to children and young people who
have been missing from home or care to increase take-up of these interviews.


Ensure that more children are supported to participate in, and contribute to,
their meetings, conferences and reviews, that they and their parents have
access to reports beforehand, and that meeting minutes are circulated
promptly.


Ensure that robust arrangements are in place to reduce the need for children
and young people to become looked after in an emergency.


Ensure that the recruitment of foster carers is appropriately targeted, better to
meet the current and future demand for foster placements, and to reduce the
number of children looked after who have to be placed out of the borough.


Ensure that personal education plans are of a consistently high standard and
that the virtual school monitors and analyses effectively the progress of all
children looked after, including those who attend schools outside of Thurrock.


Ensure that managers oversee and drive forward permanence plans for children
effectively.

families who are eligible have access to an appropriate service.
people to live with their former foster carers beyond the age of 18 years.
leavers effectively, and that care leavers benefit from regular reviews.


including through the setting of aspirational targets to help them to achieve
educational and employment goals.
enduring relationships with social workers and to enable the local authority to
drive through improvement to services, such as increasing early planning for
permanence for children that starts at the front door.
used well to shape service developments.
supervision are resulting in improved practice.


Summary for children and young people


Services to children and families in Thurrock require improvement. This means
that the local authority has not maintained the quality of services since its last
inspection in 2012, when services were judged to be good.



Managers do not effectively use the information that they have about the
performance of childrens social care to understand what is going well or less
well, or to help them to plan relevant improvements to services.



Early help to children and their families is often helpful when only one service is
involved. However, when childrens needs are more complex and several
services need to be involved to help them, these services do not always work
well together to provide effective help to children.



Most children who need a social worker are properly referred for this service.
However, there are a small number of children who experience increasing levels
of need and risk, and are not referred for a social work service quickly enough.



The council set up a new team in 2014 to manage referrals for children: the
multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH). This team is doing some very good
work. There is a range of professionals from different agencies within this team
and they work closely together to share information and make good decisions
about who should be working with children and families to meet their needs.



Children who need immediate protection are seen quickly, and professionals
work well together to make sure that any immediate risk is reduced. For those
children who are in need, there is often a delay in seeing their social worker.



The quality of assessments and plans for children, including those in need of
protection, those who are looked after and care leavers, are not good enough.
Managers do not monitor social workers and the progress of plans well enough,
which means that there is sometimes a delay in things changing for the better
for children and their families.



The vast majority of teenagers receive a good service from the adolescents
team. They have detailed assessments of need and effective plans.



Younger children looked after are doing better at school, but most teenagers
looked after are not supported to achieve good grades in their GCSEs.



Although improving, there is still some delay for children who are being
adopted.



Managers have worked well to make sure that children who are at risk of child
sexual exploitation receive a good service that reduces their risk.



When children have been missing, return home interviews help them to talk
through any issues. However, not all children receive an interview.



There is a Children in Care Council, but managers and politicians need to do
more to make sure they listen to the children and care leavers of this council.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Early help commissioned services are effective and underpinned by a
comprehensive early help commissioning strategy. However, oversight and
monitoring of early help is not fully developed, so not all children and families
receive early intervention and coordinated services at the time that they need it.
Thresholds across early help and childrens social care are not always applied
appropriately, leading to delays in a small number of children and families
receiving timely support.
Strong multi-agency partnership working ensures that urgent responses to protect
children are established through the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH).
Contacts are progressed quickly and receive effective management oversight, and
appropriate consent is obtained from families.
The majority of social work intervention for children in need requires improvement.
There are some examples of more positive practice, but this is inconsistent across
the service. Weaker practice is particularly evident in assessments, planning and
driving change for children. High caseloads and frequent changes in staff in some
teams have had an impact upon relationships with children and families. For a
minority of children, this means that change to meet their needs or reduce risk is
not always timely or sustained.
A few children experience delays in being seen for an assessment of their needs.
Feedback and advocacy for children and young people are not routinely used, and
not enough children are supported to attend meetings. Plans are neither
proactively driven forward to improve outcomes nor specific enough for families to
know how to improve their circumstances.
Risks relating to child sexual exploitation are responded to well, and risk
assessments tools are used effectively to reduce risks to children. Responses to
children missing are inconsistent. Not all children receive a return home interview,
and records from these are not always uploaded into childrens records. When
completed, return home interviews are of good quality.
While there is detailed oversight of individual children missing education and
children electively home educated, the local authority does not routinely analyse and
evaluate the data on them to respond to trends or to inform service development.


Inspection findings
early support is available for most children and families. This includes an
effective range of commissioned services which are leading to improved
outcomes for children and their families. Although all universal services are
signed up to the offer of early help across the local authority area, childrens
centres and health visitors currently underuse early help assessments to inform
their work with children and families. This means that they are not effectively
coordinating early support for children and their families with other agencies.
early help response by more than one agency, there is some variability in
practice. For most children, the local authoritys early help team oversees these
cases effectively, providing support to lead professionals, and makes good use
of the multi-agency group (MAG) panels in the locality to clarify additional
support needs for children and their families, and to signpost relevant services.
For a small minority of children, there is insufficient monitoring and quality
assurance of the early help offer, which results in a lack of assessment and a
lack of a successful offer of help. The local authority recognises that
coordination and oversight of early help are an area for improvement. It is
currently exploring relevant options to achieve this (Recommendation).
majority of cases, which means that childrens and young peoples needs are
effectively risk assessed and their cases stepped up to childrens social care
when required. However, a small number of children do not receive the right
help at the right time, or help that is proportionate to their needs and risks.
During this inspection, a small number of cases were raised where children
would have benefited from receiving a social work service rather than early
help. The local authority responded swiftly and robustly to ensure that these
childrens needs and risks were being appropriately recognised and addressed.
Parents spoken to by inspectors shared their frustration at not receiving support
in a timely way. Conversely, some children who could have received
appropriate support though provision of early help have received a statutory
service.
are not consistently in place. A lack of continuing oversight of childrens cases
that have been stepped down means that the local authority cannot be assured
that all children continue to receive services that promote their welfare via early
help after closure to childrens social care. During this inspection, no children


were identified to be at immediate risk of significant harm without services in
place to reduce risk and meet their needs.
families and childrens social care. Contacts made using early help assessments
are variable in quality, with a minority lacking basic information that is needed
to inform decisions fully regarding the most appropriate response. For children
in need of protection, strategy meetings are identified swiftly and prioritised for
urgent action.
phase one were helped to turn around much earlier than the target deadline.
Managers have set a target to build upon existing success, with a further 1,160
families being helped by 2020. Recently, a frontline troubled families worker
has been based in the MASH to identify eligible families actively and to make
sure that they receive a timely response. The proactive way in which the local
programme is prioritising children with child protection and child in need plans
is providing additional practical support to these most complex families.
MASH to respond to 96% of contacts within 24 hours over the past six months.
Good use is made of risk assessment tools and childrens family history,
alongside clear management oversight and direction in all cases. Professionals
obtain appropriate consent from families and, where the need for consent is
overruled for the protection of children, the reasons for this are clearly
recorded. Appropriate feedback following contact is provided to referrers in
order to share the actions taken to promote childrens welfare. An experienced
and stable emergency duty team ensures that immediate responses to
safeguard children out of office hours are effective. The MASH has a good
reputation with professionals, who praise the holistic approach taken in
responding to childrens needs, the advice available to professionals and the
range of information collated to help inform decisions to safeguard children.
professionals from an appropriate range of agencies. Development of the MASH
has helped to secure routine engagement from health and police professionals
in strategy meetings. This means that intelligence about risks to children is
shared effectively, and demonstrates a real shared ownership of decisions to
keep children safe. In a small number of cases, not all key professionals
participated in strategy discussion to inform decision making, although minimal
impact on decision making for individual children was seen during this
inspection. However, the large majority of children in need experience a delay


in being seen after allocation by childrens social care, including after a step up
from early help. Additionally, some teams have high caseloads and have had
many changes of staff, which means that not all children and families were able
to develop trusting relationships with workers.
informed by information gathered from relevant professionals and childrens
histories. Children are seen, and parental involvement and views are
appropriately obtained. Responses to safeguard children are proportionate to
risks identified, and effective actions are taken to ensure their safety and
welfare.
of a Department for Education-funded innovation project, are beginning to
improve awareness of this safeguarding issue across agencies. Referrals to the
MASH have increased since December 2015, but further awareness raising is
needed to ensure that all children who may be at risk of female genital
mutilation in the local authority area are identified and appropriately supported.
and quality. Most assessments do not identify the impact of risks or family
history for children well, and only a minority fully explore the childs experience.
Consideration of identity, diversity and cultural needs, or how these can
increase childrens vulnerability, is inconsistent, and these needs are identified
only in a small minority of assessments. These include assessments completed
for children with disabilities, where evidence that social workers know the
children well is not always clear and the impact of disability on childrens
identity is not fully addressed. Too few assessments contain the views of
children. Their experiences do not routinely inform decisions made for them.
Although there are systems in place to review the progress of assessments,
these are not robust. A lack of management oversight contributes to drift in
achieving change for a minority of children (Recommendation).
positive multi-agency engagement. Families do not always receive child
protection reports in time to be able to prepare adequately for meetings, and
advocacy is not routinely accessed for those families that would benefit from
additional support. Childrens assessments are used for initial and review
conference reports, but do not always clearly record what changes and actions
have been taken or progressed to safeguard children. The local authority is
reviewing this, but a new process is not yet in place (Recommendation).


needs and are variable in detail. Half the plans seen require improvement to
ensure that clear outcomes are identified and specific outcome targets set for
individual children. In a small minority of cases, poor management oversight
has led to drift in plans being progressed, and they are not updated following
reviews. Few plans seen by inspectors showed evidence of strong management
oversight and direction. However, core groups are held regularly, and are
appropriately attended by parents and the relevant professionals in order to
review and progress plans. When cases transfer between teams, risk
assessment tools are appropriately used to identify actions, and appropriate
challenge by managers is evident (Recommendation).
by the adolescents team. This includes effective use of the child sexual
exploitation risk assessment and adolescent neglect tool, when relevant, to
support young people in need, including those in need of protection. Clear,
directive and creative plans help professionals to prevent family breakdown and
provide effective direct work with young people.
which is a substantial increase from the 201 who were subject to a plan at 31
March 2015. Managers have explored the reasons for this increase and
appropriately identify that it is in response to stepping-up cases where no
meaningful change or reduction of risk for children was being achieved at the
child in need level. During this inspection, no children were found to be subject
to child protection plans who did not require this level of statutory intervention.
protection plans due to risk of emotional abuse, 120 due to neglect, six due to
risk of physical abuse and 12 due to risk of sexual abuse. The local authority
removed the category of multiple abuse by the end of January 2016 after a
review revealed that the category was masking information regarding the risk
of sexual abuse. This led to an increase in children who were subject to child
protection plans for risk of sexual abuse, from 1% to 5%, since March 2015.
There has also been an increase in the use of the category of emotional abuse,
from 26% to 48% in the same period. The local authority is appropriately
reviewing this in order to gain a fuller understanding of the issues leading to
this increase. Effective child protection surgeries with senior managers are held
in order to review progress and to reduce risk for children who have been
subject to child protection plans for a nine-month period or longer. The
additional oversight provided by these surgeries has helped the local authority


safely to manage down the number of children remaining on child protection
plans for over two years.
exploitation. Good use is made of the pan-Essex risk assessment tool to identify
those who are most at risk. This leads to strategy meetings for those with
complex needs to share information and to develop a strong, coordinated,
multi-agency response for individual children. The child sexual exploitation
coordinator provides social workers and managers with effective challenge,
advice and guidance. Although the local authority currently keeps separate data
in respect of children missing from home, school or care, and those at risk of
child sexual exploitation, the operational risk assessment group rigorously
cross-checks data against the most recent list of children reported as missing to
the police to ensure that individual children are safeguarded and protected.
However, the group is not using data collected from return home interviews to
inform planning for these vulnerable children.
home interviews, but the large majority of children decline the offer of a return
home interview after they have been missing. When they are completed, the
return home interviews are rich in information about the childs life, home
circumstances, who their friends are and places where they like to go.
However, these records are not reliably uploaded to childrens local authority
records. This limits the potential use of this information to plan actively to
reduce risk for children and young people (Recommendation).
and young people, including children looked after, to keep themselves and
others safe from issues such as from bullying and online grooming. Successful
projects such as Show racism the red card are used in schools to deliver key
messages about hate crime and Prevent. An e-safety project has reached a
number of troubled families, helping to make parents aware of potential
dangers online.
children and families where parental substance misuse or mental health issues
are a feature. This includes advice on hair strand tests and reports for court
processes, to ensure that all risks to children are appropriately identified.
domestic abuse within their families have access to domestic abuse support
groups that are innovative, fun and creative. These groups support children to
understand their rights, protect themselves and learn new skills. Appropriate


referrals are made to the multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC),
where positive attendance, engagement from a range of agencies and clearly
recorded safety plans ensure that effective actions are in place to protect
children and adults.
unsuitable accommodation are effectively assessed, and provided with
accommodation if they are found to be in need. Those young people who do
not wish to become looked after are appropriately supported through a joint
protocol between housing and childrens social care for homeless young people.
They are provided with expert mediation from the homeless intervention
project to assist them to return home, or they are provided with hostel
accommodation with additional support from a commissioned provider. Bed and
breakfast accommodation has not been used for the past two years.
education but not receiving their full 25 hours per week offer, with the number
being reduced each month. A rigorous system is in place to monitor children
missing education, and effective monthly strategic meetings on children missing
education involve key professionals and their managers to focus on all children
missing education. The local authority assures itself that children have a
suitable school place and are confirmed as attending before it ceases its
monitoring. Vulnerable children, including unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children and those in Years 10 and 11, are discussed at detailed monthly
inclusion panels. Here, the headteachers of secondary schools explore who can
provide the best place for each individual child.
The local authority actively reviews all children who are electively home
educated at the monthly strategic meetings on children missing education. This
includes checking the information that they hold to ensure that children are not
at risk and that they have been seen, and to identify when a conflict with
school can be resolved. A traffic light system is used to flag families on this list
that may need additional support. The local authority does not sufficiently
analyse and evaluate the data about children missing from education and those
who are electively home educated to find out if there are particular trends, for
example if numbers are increasing or decreasing, or to consider fully why this
may be (Recommendation).
statutory timescales and, in the large majority of cases, are subject to robust
scrutiny to ensure that children are safe. Children are seen and visited


frequently, with their views and wishes recorded in private fostering
assessments. Neither proactive engagement with community faith groups nor
awareness raising with professionals and the public have increased
notifications. These are very low, and only two children are currently being
supported as privately fostered children.
children are effective and timely. Referrals and management planning meeting
minutes clearly record risks to children and the actions to be taken. All planning
meetings are well attended by appropriate agencies in order to share relevant
intelligence and information, and to ensure that children are protected. Officers
efficiently track the progress of investigations and plans.
working relationships through the community safety partnership. Multi-agency
working is supported by a clear Prevent strategy and a thorough action plan
that has recently been refreshed. A helpful practitioner guide for direct work
with young people was used well with 14 young people in the past year. An
excellent equality impact assessment underpins the Prevent agenda. There is
strong collaboration between agencies, including the Local Safeguarding
Children Board (LSCB).


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Greater persistence is required to translate senior managers goals into improved
outcomes for all children looked after. Most become looked after in an emergency,
including unaccompanied asylum-seeking children (UASC). The recruitment of
foster carers needs to be better targeted. The fact that most children looked after
live outside of the borough is having a significant impact on social work time,
energy and resources. This is contributing to the generally poor quality of
assessments and plans. Childrens electronic case files are often incomplete. Family
group conferences are not used fully, and the use of the public law outline is not
consistently well recorded. The quality of pre-proceedings letters is variable.
Assessments completed in support of care or adoption proceedings are generally of
a good standard. The length of care proceedings has been reduced, and most are
completed within 26 weeks. Good use of special guardianship is providing longterm stability for children and young people.
Most children live in settled and stable placements, but the staying put policy is not
yet successful in achieving stability for young people post-18. Good attention is
paid to childrens health and emotional well-being. Reviews are regular, but
children and families do not routinely see social workers reports beforehand, and
there are significant delays in distributing review meeting minutes. Not enough is
done to support children to contribute to and participate in their reviews. Children
looked after who are at risk of sexual exploitation receive effective help. The
response for children who have been missing is inconsistent, and one in five are
not offered an interview to explore their issues. The virtual school is not effectively
evaluating the educational progress of children looked after. While the gap in
attainment between younger children looked after and their peers is narrowing,
very few young people looked after achieve five good GCSEs.
Adoption is not routinely considered at the earliest opportunity for all children who
cannot safely return home. Once children have a plan for adoption, timely progress
is made in recruiting and matching them with adoptive families. Further work is
required to improve the volume and range of post-adoption support.
Assessments of care leavers needs and subsequent plans are not sufficiently
detailed and their style does not engage young people. Not all care leavers are
supported to gain relevant independence skills. Care leavers do benefit from good
day-to-day support, live in safe and suitable accommodation and the number of
care leavers engaged in education, employment or training has increased.


Inspection findings
safeguarded and protected. The local authority responds positively to the needs
of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children (UASC), who currently account for
into care in an emergency. These include UASC, for whom it is often not
possible to forward plan. However, emergency placements are potentially
traumatic for children and undermine the local authoritys ability to match them
with suitable placements (Recommendation).
to 336 at the time of this inspection. In a small number of cases, inspectors
saw evidence of the local authority having missed the opportunity to prevent
family breakdown because it had been slow to intervene. However, when the
vast majority of children return home, robust arrangements are put in place to
ensure that they are appropriately safeguarded and protected.
not always well recorded, and the quality of pre-proceedings letters is variable.
Some letters identify issues and concerns clearly and concisely, and explain in
plain and simple language what needs to change. Others are over-complicated
and include jargon and acronyms, which makes them less easy for parents to
understand.
develop family-based solutions is not being fully realised. FGCs are only used in
cases where the public law outline has commenced, and there is a waiting list
for this service. As a result, when cases come to court the local authority
frequently finds itself under pressure to complete multiple viability assessments.
influential in overseeing potential placement decisions for children looked after.
However, it does not retrospectively review all emergency placements, and this
limits the local authoritys ability to learn from these cases in order to reduce
the number of children who become looked after in an unplanned way
(Recommendation).
in starting assessments, particularly in the case of UASC and older assessments
that had not been updated. Assessments completed in support of care or
adoption proceedings are generally of a much better standard. Almost all are


timely, take good account of historical issues and concerns, and are strong on
analysis (Recommendation).
views and experiences of the child are well recorded, and there is good
observation and analysis of childrens behaviour and interactions, and
purposeful direct work. In a minority of cases, there is evidence of poor
recording, lack of focus, historic gaps in the pattern of regular statutory visits
and, in the case of UASC, delays between children becoming looked after and
being seen by a social worker. In 2015, high staff turnover made it difficult for
children and young people to build and maintain meaningful relationships with
their social workers, and this contributed to drift and delay. According to foster
carers, since then the appointment of a number of newly qualified social
workers with protected caseloads has made a significant difference. Improved
stability of social workers within the children looked after social care teams now
means that frequent changes of social workers are now the exception rather
than the norm.
identifying children, particularly those who are estranged from their families,
including UASC, who would benefit from having an independent visitor to
befriend, advise and support them during their time in care. Between April and
December last year there were 106 requests for advocacy support, all of which
were met. Currently, however, nearly half of children looked after who are old
enough to do so do not participate in or contribute to their reviews. The local
authority has also recognised that further work is required to ensure that
children and young people know how, and feel confident to, provide feedback
on the services that they receive (Recommendation).
need to safeguard and protect children who go missing from care, ensure that
risks are identified and assessed, one in five children looked after who go
missing are not offered a return interview. The local authority recognises that
this is not good enough and is appropriately planning to address the problem
(Recommendation).
looked after, as evidenced by improved performance figures. For example,
dental checks are up from 84% in 201314 to 93% in 201415, and in 2014
compared to only 57.8% the year before. However, confusion about referral
pathways and delays in completing the necessary paperwork mean that the


timeliness of initial health assessments (IHA) is still a cause for concern. While
the issue is being actively addressed, as of 1 March 2016 approximately 20% of
children looked after who were eligible for an IHA assessment were waiting for
an appointment and a further 20% were waiting for the necessary paperwork
to be completed. This is not acceptable, particularly given the high number of
UASC who may not have had their health needs assessed for some time.
approach to the emotional well-being and mental health of children and young
people, including children looked after. Since 1 November 2015, children and
families are able to self-refer to a single point of contact. Here, they are offered
an effective weekday triage service resulting, for the most vulnerable, in an
immediate response from the crisis team, or, in the case of those whose needs
are less urgent, in timely clinic-based appointments. Six-weekly looked after
children surgeries, chaired by the head of service, make sure that, after initial
health assessments have been completed, the education and health needs of
children looked after are met.
does not consistently analyse and evaluate the information that it collects on
the educational progress of children looked after, particularly the 73% of
children looked after who attend schools outside of Thurrock
(Recommendation).
at the end of the early years foundation stage (EYFS) and performed better
than their peers overall. During the same period, the number of children looked
after who attained a level 2B+ at key stage 1 in reading dropped to 70% and in
writing to 50%. However, the most recent, unvalidated data suggests an
improving picture at the end of key stage 2 with 89% of children looked after
making the expected two levels of progress between key stage 1 and key stage
attainment in reading, writing and mathematics at the end of key stage 2 is
closing. The corporate parenting committee has identified the attainment of
young people looked after at the end of key stage 4 as a cause for concern.
Very few young people achieve five A* to C grades, including maths and
English, at GCSE. The prediction that 15% of Thurrock young people looked
after would achieve five A* to C grades in 2015/16 has been reduced to a
prediction of 10%.
ones include clear targets with measurable success criteria, and capture the


childs voice and foster carers views well. The minority that are less good lack
key information, include targets that are general rather than specific, and are
not always sufficiently individualised for brothers and sisters. While 90% of
compulsory school-aged children have a PEP, only 76% of those in Year 12,
and 69% in Year 13, have one (Recommendation).
find a suitable school place for them. Currently, four school-aged children
looked after are missing education. Two of these are not in receipt of full-time
education and are accessing suitable alternative part-time provision or tutoring,
as part of agreed plans to support them back into full-time education as soon
as possible. For the remaining two children, the local authority is working
proactively to identify an appropriate education place.
care. A service level agreement with Essex County Council increases access to
foster placements within a reasonable distance of Thurrock. The local authority
is aware that it needs to improve long-term stability for children looked after,
but inspectors found that most children are living in settled placements.
childrens needs. Good communication and liaison between carers, placements,
schools and social workers ensure that packages of support, sometimes
involving a range of different agencies, are well coordinated. Children looked
after are encouraged and supported to maintain contact with their birth
families, where applicable. In most cases, contact arrangements are clear,
appropriate and well recorded. Children looked after are encouraged and
supported to participate in social and leisure activities. However, while the local
authority has a formal scheme of delegation, it is not being used. In practice,
foster carers contact social workers for permission for children to participate in
everyday activities. This is wasteful of social workers time, unhelpful for carers
and potentially intrusive for children.
outcomes, the majority are over-lengthy and are neither sufficiently specific nor
measurable. This makes it difficult for children looked after to understand or
own their plans and, in some cases, contributes to drift (Recommendation).
recorded. Independent reviewing officers (IROs) are knowledgeable and
experienced, and know the children well. They are concerned by and continue
to challenge the fact that children and families do not routinely have the
opportunity to read social workers reports or view proposed changes to their


care plans before their looked after reviews. This is disempowering as well as
disrespectful for children. Delays in circulating review meeting minutes are
contributing to drift and delay. They also mean that children looked after, and
those who are caring for them, do not have ready access to the decisions taken
and actions agreed at their reviews. The backlog, which is substantial, is due to
a combination of relatively high IRO caseloads and a lack of administrative
support, exacerbated by the number of children who are living out of borough
(Recommendation).
recently renewed its efforts to attract potential foster carers. In the absence of
any specific recruitment targets, the general focus is on increasing the number
of in-house foster carers who are able to foster older children, and brothers and
sisters together. It is too early to evaluate the full impact of the recruitment
campaign, but there is evidence of some success in recruiting new carers. The
number of expressions of interest in fostering have increased and, in October
(Recommendation).
well supported, have good access to training and are subject to rigorous annual
household reviews. With training accredited by the University of Essex and
support from a clinical psychologist, a skilled group of therapeutic foster carers
provide high-quality placements for children who might otherwise need
residential care.
working relationships with the Child and Family Court Advisory and Support
Service (Cafcass) and the judiciary are helping to drive down the average
length of care proceedings, which has fallen significantly. The large majority are
now completed within 26 weeks. This means that children do not have to wait
longer than necessary for key decisions to be made about their futures.
evidence of delays in some cases and plans being changed significantly in
others. In the absence of full engagement from the frontline teams to achieve
earlier permanence, the drive and ambition evidenced by middle and senior
managers is not yet consistently evident. Inspectors observed a lack of urgency
in some cases. The local authority continues to make good and effective use of
special guardianship orders (SGOs) to make it possible for children to live with
extended family members when it is not safe for them to return to live with


their birth parents. In the last 12 months, 25 children became the subject of an
SGO.
continue to live with their former foster carers, are not yet fully developed. Only
seven young people are living with their former foster carers as part of a
staying put arrangement. Lack of certainty about their future is a potential
source of anxiety for young people and their carers (Recommendation).
young people to understand their life stories. The quality of case records is
variable. Key documents including, for example, threshold panel minutes,
return home interviews and pre-proceedings letters are not consistently being
uploaded to the electronic case record system. This has significant implications
for children, if and when they choose to access their records.
members of the council have been involved in the recruitment of social
workers, and in reviewing and refreshing the pledge. They are particularly
proud of having managed to secure a commitment from senior managers to
include passports, savings accounts and life story work within the new pledge.
However, disillusion has led to some young people leaving the Children in Care
Council. Currently, the council has very little contact with the many children
looked after who are living more than 20 miles outside the borough.
sensitive to their individual needs and unique identities. However, social
workers are not always sufficiently creative or imaginative in overcoming
barriers to communicating with children with disabilities.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
to return home. There are initial delays in progressing plans, and early
opportunities to secure the childs permanency arrangements have been
missed. Consequently, some children have lived with uncertainty for too long.
However, it is evident that permanency arrangements for children, either
through adoption or SGO, are progressed with a greater degree of urgency
once the case is transferred to the permanency team (Recommendation).
Thurrock, from 13 in 201415 to 18 in the year to date. Managers are actively
working to raise the profile and consideration of adoption and permanence in
frontline teams through training, inter-team seminars and case tracking.
However, it is too early to see the impact. An adoption and permanency casetracking tool is also used to improve timely progression through childrens social
care to adoption. Its effectiveness is limited, as dates and details are not
included or updated for all children on the tracker to enable them to benefit
from this extra scrutiny.
with complex needs, and has successfully secured adoptive placements for
children with disabilities or who have special needs, brother and sister
placements, and a young person in their teens. In the last year, the local
authority appropriately rescinded the decision of placement for adoption for one
child.
the date at which they enter care to when they are placed for adoption. For the
the 201114 period (710 days). However, this figure, while showing a speedier
process, is greater than both the national average of 593 days and the
government target of 487 days. Similarly, after the court makes an order for a
child to be placed for adoption, the local authority now takes less time to place
the child in an adoptive family. For 201215, this was 186 days, which was 58
days shorter than the 201114 period. This is shorter than the national average
of 223 days, but longer than the government target of 121 days.
team has strengthened parallel planning. A greater sense of urgency is now


being applied to reduce the time that children have to wait before being
matched with a suitable family. The local authority has been proactive, and
currently 10 children are subject to placement orders and waiting for adoption.
One is still in the family-finding stage, six have already moved in with families
and three children are linked to prospective adopters, awaiting panel decisions
regarding the match.
views and needs are captured well in child placement reports in order to
facilitate a positive match with prospective adopters. Detailed introduction
plans, although intense for carers, maintain a clear focus on the child. Wellmanaged arrangements achieve a seamless transition for children into their
adoptive families. However, the lack of timeliness in completion of childrens life
story work in 2015 limited the effectiveness of this work.
and adheres to national regulations. All assessments, including prospective
adopter reports, are of a good standard, sufficiently detailed and informative.
Adopters spoken to described their experiences as stressful, rewarding and
challenging. However, prospective adopters waited between seven and 10
months for approval. There has been a lack of clear feedback to adopters
across all stages of the recruitment and assessment process, and adopters said
that this caused them unnecessary anxiety and stress.
professional experience of adoption. The panel has appropriately identified
areas for improvement in relation to the quality of the medical contribution,
quality assurance and support. Improvements in these areas would help to
ensure that cases were better prepared for panel and avoid unnecessary delay.
The head of service, in his role as agency decision maker, provides oversight
and examination of panel information, and his decision-making is clear, concise
and timely.
services for children and has established a detailed action plan to address the
challenges for the service. For example, weaknesses include a lack of foster to
adopt and concurrent placements, and the requirement of placements for
brothers and sisters and older children who do not match many of the
prospective adopters profiles. As a result, the recruitment, assessment and
approval of prospective adopters moved to a commissioned service in October
two, three at stage one and 27 enquiries) have moved to the commissioned


provider, and this transition has been well managed. There is emerging
evidence of these new arrangements making a difference, with two children
and their prospective carers soon to be presented to panel for matching.
are first placed. However, once an adoption order has been secured, support is
less developed and the range of services are limited. Adoptive parents are not
clear about their future entitlements or what support could be available. Over
the past year, only 11 families have received post-adoption support, with eight
to 10 adults (total 20) attending bi-monthly group support sessions. Support
offered includes bereavement support, direct work with children, life story and
therapeutic play/work. The quality of this work is valued by the children and
adults, but the number receiving support is too low. Thurrock is not meeting its
responsibility to ensure that adoption support is available to all adoptive
children and their parents living in their area. Inspectors were informed of
seven adoption breakdowns for children who were previously adopted through
other local authorities but who now live in the borough and are the
responsibility of Thurrock. Workers with these young people failed to recognise
the need to refer them to the adoption support service or to offer specialist
adoption support, which they are entitled to (Recommendation).
This gives them the opportunity to meet regularly, share experiences, gain
confidence and learn from each other. Letterbox arrangements for 152 children
are in place and effective; birth parents and adoptive parents are supported to
maintain agreed levels of contact. Specialist support is also beginning to be
secured through good use of the adoption support fund. Since November 2015,
for therapeutic counselling support. Five further requests are awaiting an
outcome. Adoption support for new carers will be provided by the new
commissioned provider. It is too early to evidence the impact of this new offer.
support to 133 childrens special guardians at the same level as its foster
carers. Following the commissioned provider taking over the support of
adoptive carers, the adoption support service now has some capacity and has
extended its support offer to special guardianship carers and their families.
While it is still an emerging offer, the local authority successfully engaged 28
special guardians in a three-day workshop in March 2015, and it has a plan in
place to provide regular support groups for adult carers, children and young
people.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
four were over 21. Of these, 68 (43%) are unaccompanied young asylumseekers (UASC), which is a greater proportion than in previous years.
targeted youth service, where their line manager and colleagues have great
experience of engaging young people in purposeful activities. This has led to a
significant improvement in the number of care leavers staying in education, or
entering employment or training. Currently, 62% of care leavers aged 19 to 21
are in employment, education or training, compared to 41% in March 2015
(which was lower than statistical neighbours at 51% and the England average
of 48%). Effective links have also been established with the local careers
centre. Care leavers state that the drop-in sessions at the local careers office
give them an insight into writing CVs and getting a job, which is very helpful.
However, the take-up and impact of this service is not monitored to evaluate
benefit and outcomes.
number of care leavers engaged in education, employment and training,
through work with the Duke of Edinburghs Award scheme and Princes Trust.
To date, 10 care leavers have participated in a Duke of Edinburghs Award
scheme programme and just one in the Princes Trust, so this is still at an early
stage of development.
whom they support. They frequently go beyond what they need to do in order
to support them. As a result, the local authority is regularly in touch with 89
(97%) of its current care leavers aged 19 to 21, a significant improvement from
at the time of inspection. The local authority maintains regular contact with
these young people to ensure that appropriate plans can be made for their
release.
know where and how to get help if they need it. They feel safe, and any
concerns or issues about their safety or well-being are taken seriously. All care
leavers who were spoken with as part of this inspection were aware of the risks


associated with sexual exploitation. Their workers know about their situations
and act promptly when required, such as in helping their care leaver when
faced with a situation of domestic violence or abuse.
format. The majority of pathway plans do not use the views of care leavers in
planning targeted next steps or to suggest how improvements can be made.
Young people told inspectors that they lose interest when developing and
reviewing their plans, saying that they stay involved in meetings because they
like, and do not want to offend, their workers (Recommendation).
the after-care team. Crucially, plans and reviews neither record longer-term
aspirations nor adequately capture educational achievements and next steps
that might encourage or motivate young people to attain qualifications or to
broaden their horizons. For example, reviews are not suggesting possibilities for
apprenticeships at different levels and where these can lead. Information about
staying-on rates in school sixth forms and the numbers of those who enter
further education or training are not systematically collected. This limits further
planning and improvement to help young people make effective transitions
through adulthood (Recommendation).
needs, and they know how to access medical help. They receive effective help
from a range of services such as counselling, and mental health and sexual
health services. They receive good personal support at times of need, and their
workers encourage and coax them to persevere. The local authority has
invested in a health app to give care leavers access to their health histories.
Although this is a promising development, it is not known how many care
leavers are using this new technology.
levels of independence. There are currently no groups for care leavers to
support them in developing their independent living skills, although work is
undertaken on an individual basis. Care leavers are provided with appropriate
information, for example when applying for driving licences or passports. The
progress in implementing the staying put policy to maintain stability of
accommodation and care has been too slow (Recommendation).
educational needs or a disability, live in suitable accommodation. Full checks
are made to ensure that accommodation is safe and that young people feel
secure. Additionally, managers carry out spot checks effectively to be assured


that agreed measures are being followed by accommodation providers. Close
attention is paid to making sure that UASC are housed where they are safe and
can access services to help them, such as proximity to colleges to learn English.
they seek their own accommodation. However, further work is required to
ensure that the process for securing local authority tenancies becomes more
young person friendly. If issues arise over tenancies, such as rent arrears or
unsocial behaviour, workers promptly intervene to minimise disruption, and to
make sure that the care leaver learns from the error or misbehaviour and can
be rehoused promptly.
have clear pathway assessments and plans, and benefit from much stability. All
are in suitable accommodation, with nine in residential accommodation and
nine in foster care. The majority have high needs and attend two local special
schools graded as outstanding by Ofsted.
they can expect from their workers. They told inspectors that this is achieved
more successfully through personal contact with their workers than through the
written information available about their entitlements, which they described as
uninteresting and not engaging. Care leavers, including those with special
educational needs or who have a disability, receive a care-leaving grant which
helps them to settle into living more independently. The local authority
celebrates the achievements of care leavers positively at an annual awards
ceremony.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Leadership, management and governance require improvement in Thurrock, because
many elements of core business do not deliver consistently good services to children,
young people and families. Performance management is unsophisticated. Key data is
not sufficiently analysed to provide leaders and managers with a narrative to
understand the underlying issues or trends over time, and thereby develop relevant
action plans. Of note is the absence of regular case audit analysis. This gap means
that an accurate understanding of the quality of practice and any differences
between teams or particular aspects of work is missed, and improvements over time
cannot be monitored.
The effectiveness of management oversight varies between teams, and this is an
area for improvement recognised by the local authority. Steps are being taken to
address this, with a number of panels and surgeries set up to ensure that cases are
kept on track, alongside the development of management training and initiatives.
However, the quality of supervision is not routinely scrutinised.
Strong partnership working is evident, alongside effective corporate and cross-party
support for the maintenance and development of services. Swift action has taken
place when improvements were identified. This is evident in the response to issues
raised during this inspection and the recent appointment of a new DCS.
Commissioning arrangements are robust, and based on a comprehensive analysis
and understanding of local needs. This has led to joint commissioning of new
services, and detailed scrutiny and evaluation of the effectiveness of services already
commissioned. Further work is needed by the local authority to ensure that there is a
sufficient range and choice of placements for children and young people, and that
specific targets are in place for the recruitment and retention of foster carers.
The local authority uses learning from a range of sources to develop practice, but it
does not gather feedback from children and families sufficiently or demonstrate how
it has been used to improve services.
The high number of agency staff and vacancy rates within the workforce have
prompted the local authority to set up a retention and recruitment board to give this
issue continued attention. The local authority is appropriately working with
neighbouring authorities to develop joint strategies to reduce instability in the
workforce, and has achieved some success in the longer-term teams.


Inspection findings
underdeveloped. As a result, the local authority lacks a full understanding of the
effectiveness of its services to children and families. A range of performance
data is available, including a daily snapshot providing basic information such as
numbers of children subject to plans and a corporate scorecard, which provides
more detailed recording of monthly activity. However, while some documents
offer a narrative and analysis, there are too many key areas, such as return
home interviews for children who have been missing, in which data is not
analysed to consider the key themes behind the figures. The newly appointed
interim DCS quickly identified performance reporting and analysis as an area of
weakness, and is working with colleagues to develop a strategic model to
strengthen this critical area. Despite a regular programme of case auditing
within the local authority, the information from these audits has not been
evaluated and does not form the backdrop for an action plan. This means that
there is an overall lack of clarity about the quality of practice, or improvement
and trends over time (Recommendation).
inconsistent service delivery. The local authority found that management
oversight was less than good in 85% of its own case audits for this inspection.
The majority of case supervision records are poor, where actions agreed are
not specific enough and workers are not challenged. This contributes to poor
quality assessments and delays in progressing plans for children. In the
minority of cases that were better, clear decision making is seen, which leads to
decisive actions to protect and promote the welfare of children and young
people, and to progress plans. When cases were referred by inspectors to the
local authority for a review of decision making and actions, these were dealt
with thoroughly and swiftly, and detailed action plans were immediately put in
place to meet childrens needs.
taking steps to address this. Senior managers are chairing a number of panels
and surgeries to regain management grip, and to ensure that casework is
progressed. The local authority also provides specific management training
courses for new managers, and during 2015 three new managers received
mentoring. A managers forum is in place, and a new aspiring managers
scheme is being developed to provide training and support for those moving
into management roles. This scheme is under development and its impact
cannot yet be seen. Staff spoken with during the inspection stated that their


managers are supportive, know about the work they do, and are available to
offer advice and guidance when needed.
together to promote services for children and families in Thurrock. Very clear
governance arrangements are established between the key committees and
groups, and there is active communication between board chairs, leaders and
officers of the council. There is full corporate support for the work of childrens
services, and this critical function is receiving appropriate focus and
prioritisation across the council. For example, through budget setting, leaders
have maintained funding for childrens services, and the local authoritys
planning department plays an active part in the Health and Wellbeing Board,
helping to promote healthy lifestyles for children.
members. This engagement is enhanced through monthly meetings between
the chief executive and the lead for each political group to ensure that they are
informed of current issues. Senior leaders and officers engage in regular
discussions and meetings to ensure that key issues are communicated in a
timely manner. For example, the head of care and targeted outcomes meets
fortnightly with the lead member for childrens services to provide an overview
of key issues and progress of work undertaken. These meetings are
supplemented by more informal discussions when critical incidents occur
regarding the welfare of children or staff.
past six months to hold the chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board
(LSCB) directly to account. However, this gap in meetings has had limited
impact during what has been a busy time for the LSCB, as there have been
numerous discussions between the LSCB chair, council leaders and officers
regarding the publication of the recent serious case review, and the DCS and
lead member regularly attends the LSCB. These activities have ensured
effective scrutiny and oversight of the work of the LSCB and the chair.
authoritys work with children, with its strategy providing the overarching
framework for the children and young people plan (CYPP). This plan sets out
four clear aims, priorities and actions, and gives direction to the Children
Partnership Board in promoting and securing childrens welfare. Although the
Children Partnership Board could evidence its activity in a number of areas, it
was not able to show readily the impact of its work or how this linked to the
CYPP.


joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA), which provides a detailed analysis of
local needs. This has led to a clear commissioning strategy with seven priorities
linked to the CYPP. Joint commissioning between Thurrock, Southend and
Essex, alongside the seven Essex Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCGs), has
been effective, for example with the recent commissioning of a childrens and
young peoples emotional well-being and mental health service. In addition,
examples of commissioned services within the early offer of help show these
services to be making a real difference to the lives of children and families.
Services such as those for alcohol and substance misuse, a domestic violence
perpetrator programme and a sexual violence service are well evaluated, and
contracts are regularly and robustly monitored. Monitoring arrangements
consider how far services are meeting performance indicators and improving
outcomes, whether they are achieving value for money and whether their work
is preventing statutory involvement for children. Service user feedback about
these services gives clear indications that individuals feel safer as a result of the
help that they have received, and that they better understand the impact that
their behaviours have on their children and young people.
the needs of the children looked after population and the availability of suitable
placements to meet these needs. The sufficiency statement does not
adequately address this gap and does not contain an updated action plan. This
means that there are no set targets for the recruitment and retention of a
specific number and type of foster carers to meet the needs of children looked
after in Thurrock. Too many children are looked after in placements outside the
borough (Recommendation).
driving improvements on a number of fronts, as evidenced by improved
performance figures on immunisations, health assessments, dental checks and
return home interviews, and better marketing and recruitment of foster carers.
Not afraid to challenge senior managers and leaders, the committee has also
listened to the Children in Care Council and is taking action on passports and
savings accounts for children looked after. The committee has further work to
do to ensure that members of the Children in Care Council feel valued for their
contributions, and also to continue to improve timeliness of initial health
assessments.
corporate parenting role. However, this is limited due to the poor quality of
strategic analysis of performance information. All 49 councillors in Thurrock


have successfully completed induction training to aid their understanding of
childrens social care, and 17 have attended corporate training courses. In
addition, the lead member meets with the Children in Care Council, and elected
members sit on the fostering and adoption panels. However, councillors do not
ensure that they regularly engage with children and families to seek their views
to inform service development. A recent report to the corporate parenting
committee noted that opportunities for senior officers and councillors to attend
meetings have not been used, which means that chances to hear childrens
views have been missed (Recommendation).
its workload in order to consider a wide range of issues affecting children and
families. The chair ensures that meetings consider a broad spectrum of reports
and activities, while maintaining an open slot for the LSCB, Youth Cabinet or
health services to bring any matters requiring immediate attention. The group
is mindful of local authority spending and has sought evaluations of services
and reasons for the development of particular packages of care. It has
demonstrated its tenacity by repeatedly raising issues of concern arising from a
serious case review.
services strengths and weaknesses. Their self-assessment demonstrates a
good understanding of the quality of their services to children and families. The
local authority shows a willingness to assess its own performance and to bring
in external agencies to advise or take on improvement work to augment its
work. It has used independent scrutiny, such as a review of the MASH in 2015,
and has recently commissioned an external provider to help it to strengthen its
edge of care and early help services to seek to reduce the number of children
becoming looked after. The local authority demonstrates that it can be swift in
responding when change is identified. This was seen during the inspection in
the effective response to cases requiring review and the response to a question
from an inspector which led to the development of a leaflet for young people to
explain the troubled families programme.
information about practice developments and national research through easyto-read monthly blogs by the principal social worker. The local authority
evidences learning from complaints, with clearly recorded learning logs which
set out lessons learned and recommended actions. These have been effective
and led to changes in practice, such as better arrangements for transporting
children with disabilities, and identification of managers actions to ensure that
work is completed when staff are off sick. Childrens and families views and


feedback are not routinely sought, limiting opportunities for them to inform
service development (Recommendation).
recruitment board, the high number of agency staff in Thurrock leaves the local
authority vulnerable to staff churn. Currently, half of the social workers
employed in Thurrock are agency staff (49 of 98 registered social workers).
Some children have experienced delay in progressing their assessments and
plans as a result of changes in their social worker. The vacancy rate at the time
of the inspection was 21%, which is a slight improvement from 25% at
December 2015. Some teams such as the MASH and Children Family and
Assessment Teams are predominantly staffed by agency workers, and the past
nine appointments have been agency staff. Staff changes mean that teams lack
cohesion, identity and resilience when challenges occur. Although this leaves
the local authority potentially vulnerable, 22% of agency staff have been in
post for over two years, and 51% between six months and one year, which
does provide some stability. Conversely, staffing stability has improved within
the longer-term teams, with the successful recruitment of a number of newly
qualified social workers. Thurrock is taking action and working collaboratively
with the 10 other local authorities in the eastern region in an attempt to limit
the number of agency staff by managing pay rates, and terms and conditions.
The impact of this measure is yet to be seen.
They have risen from an average of 16 cases for a full-time worker in 2014 to
which is too high. This will need further monitoring by the local authority, as it
will not assist the recruitment of permanent staff.
clear pathways established from the assessed and supported year in
employment (ASYE) social workers through to management level. This focus on
staff development is a strength of the local authority. The ASYE academy is
reported by staff as attractive to newly qualified social workers and, to date, is
showing signs of success. An increasing number of newly qualified social
workers are joining the local authority (19 this year and 12 last year). They
receive relevant training through an increasingly effective academy, and they
receive valued individual and group support. Successful use is being made of
additional agency social work staff to ensure that caseloads for ASYEs remain
low during their first year. Succession planning is being well considered, with
the development of mentoring, senior practitioners as practice educators and
the current development of an aspiring managers scheme.


months 390 days training have been presented across a range of relevant
subjects. Figures are collated for the number of staff attending, but the impact
of the training is not fully evaluated over time. Specific management training
courses are available, such as a management essentials course with a focus on
leadership style and priority setting. However, this area of training provision
requires additional focus, as management oversight and supervision of staff
remains too variable. Of 14 supervision files audited by inspectors, none were
judged good, only four demonstrated reflective supervision and only one
demonstrated follow up on previous actions. Despite the local authoritys
awareness of the variability of management oversight and the poor quality of
supervision, it is not completing a regular audit of the frequency and quality of
supervision. This leaves the local authority unclear about the performance of
individual managers and the impact of management training
(Recommendation).


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good

Executive summary
The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) in Thurrock is effective and
innovative, and has a clear understanding of the key safeguarding priorities across
partner agencies. A renewal of governance and terms of reference in 2015 has
brought helpful clarity and demonstrates continued progress, following a review of
the board in 2013. There is a clear collective ownership of safeguarding across all
partners, who are positively engaged in action and reflection to support children,
young people and their families. The board is chaired well by an influential chair who
both supports and challenges partners, and accountability is high. Strong and
efficient support is offered by a committed business team. Partners report clear and
collective responsibility, and a high degree of challenge, scrutiny and accountability.
This was described by one board member as good transparency and honesty.
Child sexual exploitation, female genital mutilation and Prevent duty have a high
profile, with key leads from relevant agencies working effectively with the LSCB.
Elements of the work of the LSCB, such as the Walk on line roadshows, are
outstanding, ensuring that over 10,000 schoolchildren will have received interactive
safeguarding workshops of a high quality. The children most at risk of going missing,
sexual exploitation, gang involvement and online exploitation are given
comprehensive multi-agency consideration. The effective risk assessment group
(RAG) demonstrates added safeguarding value. Capitalising on the high degree of
multi-agency commitment, it leads case discussion using live access to a range of
databases and expertise.
The board considers the range of experiences for children, young people and their
families. It has influenced the development of the MASH, the use of appropriate
categories for child protection plans and deep-dive audits. These have evaluated the
experiences of the most vulnerable, including those who have been on a child
protection plan for more than 12 months and children looked after. The chair has
challenged MARAC about the lack of a MARAC report to the LSCB for the past two
years. This limits the boards ability to monitor the work of this critical multi-agency
safeguarding group effectively. The quality of the audits undertaken individually is
high, but they lack overarching analysis. The take-up of multi-agency training offered
is good, and participants and partners speak positively about the benefits. More
analysis is required to enable full understanding of the impact of the training offer.


Recommendations
through overarching evaluation and analysis of outcomes and impact.
demonstrate the impact on frontline practice.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
arrangements were refreshed in 2015, leading to new terms of reference which
provide a strong framework for the work of the board. This is also supported by
a helpful protocol between the Health and Wellbeing Board, and both the
children and adult safeguarding boards.
that it has access, either as a member or through an open offer of attendance,
at the appropriate groups in order to influence planning. This includes either
the LSCB chair or business manager sitting on the Health and Wellbeing Board
and the separate health and well-being strategic group, and the community
safety partnership group where the Prevent duty is considered, the Children
Partnership Board and the early offer of help, MASH and troubled families
groups. The LSCB business team apprentice sits on the Youth Cabinet. This
enables fully integrated planning and detailed links back to the LSCB executive
group and the LSCB full board. A positive action that came from the Children
Partnership Board ensured that each school was provided with a height and
weight profile to address childhood obesity.
and in the last 12 months has shown impact through increasing the police
attendance at child protection conferences. Between April and November 2015,
police attended 18 out of 87 initial case conferences. At the time of this
inspection, this had increased to attendance at 96% from April 2015 for all
conferences. Other recent challenging conversations have focused on the need
for equity of funding and an overall increase in funding to manage the increase
in serious case reviews (SCRs), oversight of the development of the child sexual
exploitation local strategy and action plan, and ensuring the boards proactive
involvement in the development and analysis of the MASH. There is a clear
business plan for the work of the board, and an action plan appropriately


reflects key local priorities, including missing children, protection from abuse
and exploitation, and the early offer of help.
main board, and the chair demonstrating a strong and assertive style. Partners
are challenged collectively through themed discussions at the full board, for
example each agencys performance relating to listening to the voice of the
child, and the impact of funding constraints and restructuring in individual
organisations. This was particularly helpful in enabling probation to explain the
transformation of their agency. The police identified a gap in following up with
comprehensive victim support in the discussion about the voice of the child.
agencies, and the chair demonstrates a strong challenge to the performance of
partners. One partner agency described this as open, honest. We can fight,
disagree and still be okay with each other. There have been recent challenges
to the police, for example, on the speed of their response to actions required by
agency-specific inspections. The chair has also challenged when there has been
poor attendance at subgroups and the lack of a report from MARAC for the past
two years. This has still not been produced. The board challenged childrens
social care on the low use of sexual abuse as a category in child protection
plans and on whether this fitted the anecdotal knowledge of risks to
adolescents. This has resulted in an increase in the age profile of child
protection plans to safeguard those at risk of child sexual exploitation. The
number of 10 to 15 year olds on a child protection plan has risen from 24% to
sexual abuse. Numbers were previously suppressed, due to the low figure.
group, where the detail of operational issues and concerns is appropriately
considered. As an example, the November 2015 meeting considered the
decrease in private fostering figures, the multi-agency review of child sexual
exploitation, a report from the youth offending service, risks of legal highs and
the planning for feedback from the new child protection level 3 pilot training
programme.
agency to attend and present data on the safeguarding work of their agency.
This is scrutinised by other board members, including the LSCB chair. This has
provided in-depth information on the broad range of functions of each agency.
This has led to peer challenge and an opportunity for detailed questioning,
including, for example the caseloads of midwives, and training on child sexual


exploitation and female genital mutilation for fire, rescue and ambulance
services. Board members spoke highly of the learning afforded by the
performance board, the impact on understanding partner functions and the
rigour of challenge.
the different formats used by agencies in acknowledgement that many agencies
report to three LSCBs within the pan-Essex arrangements. Compliance is high,
with very good progress made at the time of this inspection for the end-of-year
submission. The board maximises the potential from the returns, and recently
(spring term 2016) added a Prevent audit to the school returns. This has
enabled specific data to be extracted and used to inform the Prevent duty
action plan. A gap in training for school governors was identified and is now
being met, with some training having already taken place and more planned.
statutory partners. The LSCB carefully considers whether a SCR is required, and
demonstrates a strong commitment to learn and improve practice. Over the
past three years, this has resulted in the board completing two SCRs, and it is
currently in the process of completing a further three. Correct decisions have
been made to explore learning through the rigorous SCR journey, resulting in
added value to the understanding of safeguarding practice.
national panel to reach decisions to proceed when there has been a split
decision among the subgroup members. The SCRs are undertaken thoroughly
and published on the website, and learning is disseminated widely. All of the
SCRs and the one individual management review showed appropriate learning
and led to a reconsideration of risk. For example, the adolescent neglect tool
came from this learning, as did the reconsideration of child sexual exploitation
as an increased area for a child protection plan for adolescents. It is clear from
this inspection that support to adolescents from the local authority has
improved. The majority of social workers are aware of the key issues from the
most recent published SCRs. The board also produces excellent summary
booklets to maximise learning, with a well-presented high-quality product.
single agency, then the board undertakes a management review. One such
review has appropriately been undertaken and published in relation to
fabricated illness, showing openness in the learning for health partners. All
action plans are thoroughly followed up through an action matrix, and the chair
presented one SCR to the local authoritys overview and scrutiny committee.


ensure an equitable contribution from one pan-Essex partner and, additionally,
to meet the need for SCRs. The number of SCRs has put added pressure on
time and resources. The majority of partner agencies make a proportionate
financial contribution overall, and the chair requested a review with one agency
when this was not the case, and a constructive solution was found. All agencies
have agreed to add finance to the board to meet the demands of the SCRs.
resources to ensure that it functions effectively. The chair is very clear with
partners that board business is part of everyones work. Suitably senior and
influential partner representatives attend the board, and are able to take back
lessons and challenges to their individual agencies. This has been challenged by
the chair previously to ensure that appropriate membership is now in place.
Subgroups are chaired across a range of partner agencies, reflecting the
collective ownership of the work of the board.
Thurrock (SET) shared arrangements, including shared policies and procedures
updated and available on the Thurrock LSCB website. Policies and procedures
are clear, accessible and easy to understand. Shared resources offer an
economy of scale between the three LSCBs as shown through the recent I
didnt know child sexual exploitation awareness campaign and sharing of local
expertise, including the strategic SET child sexual exploitation group and a
strategic SET child death review overview panel (CDOP) group. Child death
overview arrangements are effective, and there are strong rapid response
protocols in place. The number of notifications in Thurrock have remained
consistent over the last three years (10 in 20132014, nine in 20142015 and
nine in the year to date).
to be analysed for appropriately focused awareness-raising campaigns. These
have included safer sleeping, furniture safety and water safety. The current
pan-Essex focus is on suicide prevention, with relevant planning underway
using specialist mental health practitioners. There is a very strong commitment
and attention to detail in the work undertaken by CDOP. For example, the safer
sleeping campaign is launched every holiday with helpful information sent to
holiday parks, where usual sleeping arrangements will be different. This is a
highly efficient pan-Essex service with a strong commitment to prevention,
understanding and to support for families.


through the developing multi-agency sexual exploitation group (MASE). This
subgroup has equipped itself for its task through exploration of the Ofsted child
sexual exploitation thematic study and is ambitious to understand the local
landscape more fully. This has included, for example, challenging each agency
to identify its 10 most vulnerable children or young people, an exercise which
revealed a gap in health data. It has also identified the five boys most at risk of
child sexual exploitation.
developed, and these are rigorously overseen through the work of the LSCB.
The strategy has been tested during 2015 through both internal and peer
review, which showed good steady progress, and the board has further
developed the child sexual exploitation action plan in response. Further work
will be undertaken, including the prosecution of perpetrators and increased
awareness raising. The I didnt know child sexual exploitation awarenessraising campaign was launched during this inspection, and the board works
closely with the police. The MASE group has a good understanding of what
more needs to be done and this is informed by the detail of the experiences of
children through the risk assessment group (RAG). The plan for data analysis
will address the need for a more sophisticated heat map of local risks.
panels that looked at risk (child sexual exploitation, online exploitation and
missing children). This effective group has offered a real-time live multi-agency
discussion for the most vulnerable children, with immediate access to the range
of different agency databases. This approach has enabled a more sophisticated
understanding to emerge of the complex overlap between different types of
risk. This has resulted, for example, in coordinated intervention when children
are referred as being at risk, and also then found to be a risk to others. It has
started to reveal more detail on the prevalence of underlying risk, such as
children going missing and then found to be affected by gang involvement. A
clear action matrix ensures that all actions for each child are followed up
effectively. The RAG is chaired by the local authority and is an operational
service, sitting under the auspices of the LSCB. This unusual positioning allows
the broadest opportunity for referrals from all partners, and harnesses all
knowledge and investment from partner agencies in Thurrock to consider and
safeguard children. It is working well, with evidence of reduced risk for children
who are particularly vulnerable. However, it does not currently consider
information from return home interviews.


resulting in clear action plans that are effectively followed up. These audits
consider a broad range of relevant safeguarding issues across the partnership.
These include audits regarding children and young people who have been on a
child protection plan for more than 12 months and attendance at child
protection conferences. Issues considered demonstrate that the board is aware
of key issues across the local authority, and the findings from the audits
regarding areas for development are reflective of some of the findings from this
inspection, for example management oversight and life story work. Despite
good-quality detailed work, the audit subgroup is without a consistent chair and
attendance has not been strong. In its role of overseeing the multi-agency audit
programme in Thurrock, it has analysed and disseminated learning from the
audit programme through a recent learning and improvement booklet, but
requires regular multi-agency attendance to ensure a sustained higher degree
of overarching analysis and evaluation (Recommendation).
views and experiences influence the work of the board. The board is creative
and innovative in how it does this, including holding a voice of the child
conference in 201314 and ensuring that children actively participated in the
boards conference in 201415. The board, working jointly with the Community
Safety Partnership, has recruited 12 safeguarding ambassadors aged 13 to 16,
including a hate crime and a youth crime ambassador through the Youth
Cabinet.
roadshows called Walk on line in 2014. These covered the broadest range of
risks to children and young people, including child sexual exploitation,
grooming, sexting, going missing, cyber-bullying, female genital mutilation and
Prevent from a childs perspective. Initially offered to Years 5 and 6 pupils,
they were extended to Years 10 and 11 pupils at the request of the Youth
Cabinet. 10,000 children and young people have attended, and impact has
been shown through changed behaviours such as amending privacy settings, as
measured through anonymous child-friendly questionnaires. Walk on line
demonstrates a creative and comprehensive understanding of risks to children
and young people. This outstanding piece of practice demonstrates a strong
partnership approach between the LSCB, education, parents and the specialist
police knowledge by the child exploitation online service.
engaged well with non-statutory partners, including faith groups, and meets


regularly as a member of Thurrock Faith Forum. It has good relationships with
local voluntary organisations that access training through the board and are
represented on subgroups of the board. Each course is evaluated by the
individual participant, and the learning and development subgroup evaluates
the effectiveness of specific training through feedback forms. Training is also
observed to evaluate its effectiveness directly. Partners are held to account for
both their attendance at multi-agency training and the training that each
agency offers on safeguarding, but there is no overall evaluation of the impact
of the full training offer. This means that the board cannot assure itself that the
training offer is having sufficient impact on frontline practice
(Recommendation).
understanding of the strengths and achievements of the board, together with
work still to be done. Strengths include improved engagement of all types of
educational establishments, close partnership work with the Youth Cabinet and
the overall steady progress made since the review of the board in 2013.
Evidence of impact includes the monitoring of child protection plans and the
challenge to increase consideration of sexual abuse, which had been an area
for improvement. All agencies contribute their own end-of-year evaluation,
including data, to the annual report so that their voices are heard, and they are
held to account for the difference that they have made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Jansy Kelly
Deputy lead inspector: Karen Wareing
Team inspectors: Julie Knight, Nigel Parkes, Margaret Burke, Louise Hocking, Peter
Green, Wendy Ratcliff
Senior data analyst: Judith Swindell
Shadow senior data analyst: Alison Edwards
Quality assurance manager: John Mitchell


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


