Wakefield Metropolitan District Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 05 July 201627 July 2016
Report published: 20 September 2016

Childrens services in Wakefield Metropolitan District Council
require improvement to be good.

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Good


Requires improvement

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Wakefield District Council has made some progress since the last inspection in 2012.
The appointment of the current director of childrens services (DCS) in 2013, led the
way for significant cultural change in childrens services and, following a restructuring
of the senior management team and implementation of a refreshed vision and
strategy, services to children and families are now improving. More recently,
improvement has accelerated, following the introduction of a nationally recognised
model of social work practice. Positive changes can be seen in how families are
better engaged and how children are listened to and have their views taken account
of. However, a shortfall in the local authoritys capacity to use data to produce a
suite of accurate performance reports means that managers spend too much time
developing bespoke performance management systems, which are too reliant on
memory to be effective. The lack of a general overview of performance over time
and against comparators is hampering senior leaders ability to drive forward further
improvement. This is compounded by the electronic recording system, which makes
recording and extracting information problematic. Difficulties using the electronic
recording system were an issue identified in previous inspections, and there is still no
clear plan in place to resolve this.
The DCS and senior management team have worked hard to implement a number of
key strategic priorities successfully, and these are now starting to have a positive
impact on improved outcomes for children. For example, this positive leadership
means that children who go missing or who are at risk from being sexually exploited
are identified and responded to swiftly. Another key area of improvement has been
the development of effective multi-agency early help services.
Strong political involvement means that there are clear lines of accountability and
scrutiny. The DCS and senior management team recognise that some key issues
have not been addressed quickly enough, such as ensuring that clear and deliberate
decision-making underpins social work practice, and that consistent management
oversight leads to good and timely social work. While these weaknesses are being
systematically addressed, and inspectors saw no children at risk of immediate harm,
they remain areas for improvement.
While there is strong strategic vision, this is not yet fully implemented operationally,
and the consistency of practice is not yet assured. Social workers caseloads are too
high in some teams, and this has an impact on their capacity to provide a
consistently good-quality service. Frontline managers ability to challenge is hindered
in some teams by the lack of reliable performance information and the workload
created by the number of social workers that they have oversight of.
Arrangements for the management of contacts and referrals are generally of good
quality, and cases are assessed and responded to swiftly. However, a consultation
line to advise agencies on action to be taken at an early stage is not monitored
effectively, and some cases seen should have been referred to childrens social care
for further checks and information gathering. A high proportion of child protection
enquiries do not lead to an initial child protection conference (ICPC), although all


child protection enquiries sampled during the inspection met the threshold for an
investigation. The local authority has not fully explored the reasons for this and
therefore does not know what action may be needed to address this.
Most assessments are completed within the target set as standard by the local
authority but are not yet being completed within the timescales of the child.
The use of safety plans as tools to help social workers to identify risk factors and
intervention is not yet fully embedded. In a small number of cases, safety plans are
being implemented alongside children in need or child protection plans, and this does
not provide a consistent message about what needs to change.
When young people present as homeless, too many of them are placed in bed and
breakfast accommodation. While this provision is not used for care leavers or for
young people considered vulnerable, this is not conducive to ensuring a safe
environment for young people who are homeless.
Children looked after are generally well supported, particularly in relation to the
educational opportunities afforded to them, and academic results are good. They are
encouraged to contribute to their care plans, and advocates are widely used to
support this. However, assessments and plans for children looked after are not
regularly updated to reflect their progress.
Professionals involved in reviewing plans for children looked after do not always
provide sufficient challenge to ensure that progress is made and tasks are completed
in a timely way. Although the views of children are sought and recorded in many
cases, and this has increased, particularly in the past six months since the
introduction of the new social work model, not all children contribute to or are
involved in decisions and plans made for them.
There are not a sufficient number of carers to meet childrens needs in the local
area. This has recently resulted in a decline in placement stability for children. The
sufficiency strategy is being refreshed to address this, as the current plan does not
meet local needs or take account of future demand. Challenges in relation to
ensuring accurate performance information are detracting from the local authoritys
ability to identify service needs and areas for further improvement.
Good practice in the adoption service means that children are placed for adoption
with their brothers and sisters in the vast majority of cases, and children considered
difficult to match are adopted.
When life story work is completed, it is of good quality but, in many cases, it is not
started early enough or finished in a timely way.
Care leavers are supported to make the transition to living independently by workers
who go the extra mile to keep in touch with them. However, the range of suitable
housing solutions for care leavers is limited, and they are not prioritised for housing
by local providers.


Contents
The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. All were judged to be good or
outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in October 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was
in December 2010. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The DCS has been in post since July 2013.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since January 2010.
 The local authority has commissioned out six services.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 69,136 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Wakefield. This is 20.9% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 20.6% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 15.2% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 13.5% (the national average is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 7.4% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British and Mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 9.1% (the national average is 19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 5.5% (the national average is 15.0%).

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2016, 2,108 children (DfE definition) had been identified through
assessment as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a
reduction from 2,588 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 March 2016, 193 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 287 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 March 2016, nine children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from seven at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, five serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and two serious case reviews (SCRs) have been completed at the time
of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2016, 480 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 71 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 495 (72 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015. Of this number:
local authority area
authority area
authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 51 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
in houses in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Accelerate plans to improve the full utilisation of the electronic recording
system, so that accurate data informs performance management reports
to enable senior leaders to measure and improve practice and to support
frontline managers and staff in their oversight and management of work.


Carry out a review of cases that meet the threshold for section 47
investigations, but do not progress to ICPC, to understand the reasons
for this better, and to ensure that the social work response is
proportionate.


Ensure that the placement needs of children looked after are fully
explored and well understood, in order to inform the sufficiency strategy
more effectively and to improve placement stability.


Ensure that the use of bed and breakfast accommodation for young
people who are homeless ceases. When bed and breakfast is used in the
interim, ensure that robust risk assessment and risk management plans
are in place for each young person, with a view to moving them on
swiftly to suitable accommodation.


Continue to reduce the caseloads of social workers to facilitate effective
social work practice and to ensure that all frontline managers have
manageable workloads in relation to the number of social workers that
they manage.


Ensure that the consultation service for professionals provides both
consistent advice and timely completion of agreed actions, with
information being entered appropriately onto the case management
system.


Ensure that assessment timescales are set and completed in relation to
the needs of the child, that assessments consistently identify wider and
emerging risks and that they underpin outcome-focused planning
effectively.


Ensure that planned interventions and letters before proceedings are
outcome focused, with clear measures for what needs to be achieved by
whom and within what timescale, and that contingency plans are clearly
articulated.


Further embed the use of child safety plans as social work tools to inform
risk and intervention in cases and ensure that these are consistent with
child protection or child in need plans.




Ensure that independent reviewing officers (IROs) have sufficient
capacity to have an impact upon the quality of frontline practice and
planning.


Ensure that the views of all children are sought routinely and that needs
arising from diversity are identified and addressed.


Ensure the timely completion of life story work.


Ensure that senior managers establish closer and more effective working
relationships with local housing providers, to increase care leavers
access to tenancies.

Summary for children and young people
 Senior managers and social workers ensure that when children need protecting
quickly they do this straight away. However, there are sometimes delays in
providing the support that children and families need because social workers
responsible for doing this have too many cases to deal with. Managers have
started to respond to this by increasing the number of staff, but have not yet fully
solved the problem.
 When assessing and planning the support and services that children need, social
workers are not always good at taking into account childrens views or
information about their identities and family backgrounds. They do not always
keep the records of their work with children fully updated.
 Managers have improved the way that professionals work together to help
families, and this is supporting children and families to remain together when it is
safe to do so.
 When children become looked after, some of them have to move too many times
before they find a permanent home. Managers know that they need to get better
at providing the right places for children to live and are trying hard to improve
this.
 Social workers and foster carers are good at making sure that children are
healthy and develop well. However, some children and young people wait too
long to receive support for emotional well-being.
 The very experienced adoption team is successful in finding good families for
children to live with permanently, and it makes sure that children are placed with
adoptive families as soon as possible.
 The council provides plenty of support to help children to do well at school. Over
time, the children and young people whom they look after have improved their
results.
 When young people leave care, they receive good support from their personal
advisers and social workers. They are prepared well to live independently in a
safe place and are helped to continue with their education, to receive further
training or to seek employment.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
During the course of this inspection, no children have been found in situations of
unacceptable risk or in situations of unassessed or unmanaged risk of significant
harm. Improving practice was identified, but some of the good practice seen is not
yet sufficiently embedded or widespread for the judgement to be good.
Variability in the timeliness and quality of social work practice includes the core areas
of assessment, planning and reviewing. Immediate risk is promptly identified and
responded to at the services front door, with the response of the out-of-hours
service being particularly strong.
Wider and emerging risks are not regularly identified or managed in a timely way.
Challenge and decision-making at child protection conferences have not consistently
ensured that a reduction in risk has been sustained prior to children being stepped
down from a child protection plan. Some timely and effective practice has been seen,
but this is not yet sufficiently widespread.
Enquiries under section 47 of the Children Act 1989 are thorough and timely, and
cases seen on inspection met the threshold for intervention, but the relatively high
number of enquiries and the high percentage of these that do not go to child
protection conferences mean that threshold applications should be kept under
review. The local authority does not fully understand the reasons for this.
A consultation service provided for professionals as part of the front-door services is
valued by external partners. However, a lack of management oversight has not
ensured consistently appropriate responses in all cases. Senior managers responded
to this finding during the inspection, instigating a review of the service to ensure that
the advice being given to other agencies was scrutinised promptly by managers.
Variability in the frequency and effectiveness of management oversight has led to
increased caseloads and stretched capacity in the assessment service, contributing to
variability and drift in practice. Senior management responded to this finding by
increasing the capacity of the service.
The views and experiences of children are not yet consistently evident, and childrens
diverse needs are not always identified effectively, fully explored or addressed in
assessments of their needs.
Strategic focus on early help and the establishment of the early-help hubs provide a
strong foundation for delivery of the early-help offer. Practice in relation to stepping
work up to and down from social care has significantly improved, although some
developments are still very recent.


Inspection findings

A strong and effective basis for delivering the early-help offer is provided
by a clear strategic focus on early help and the implementation of the
early-help hubs. Good-quality casework was seen by inspectors, with
childrens views included effectively. There is effective monitoring of
early help by the Wakefield District Safeguarding Children Board and a
timely response to recommendations to improve practice, for example,
through multi-agency audits. Timely and thorough allocation processes
and effective case management ensure that, when risks to children
increase, their cases are escalated appropriately for a social work
response. This recently improved practice is supported by the completion
of single assessments by the early-help principal social workers based in
the early-help hubs. This is promoting a clearer identification of services
to support families at an early stage and ensuring a more consistent
response if needs or risks escalate.


Domestic abuse and preventing violent extremism are prioritised at an
early stage, with needs identified well and preventative work being
undertaken effectively. The Do it Differently girls group, run for teenage
girls with a history of violence towards others including their parents and
other young people, is well planned and run effectively by multi-agency
staff and is an example of best practice. However, the limited
performance information means that it is difficult to monitor, quality
assure and assess the impact of early-help work and to ensure
consistency between the hubs.


A telephone consultation system for agencies to seek advice from social
workers was set up in March 2016 and is viewed positively by
professionals who feel more supported. However, management oversight
of this service is not ensuring an appropriate check and balance in
relation to decision-making. Of 117 consultations up to the time of the
inspection, only 17 have become contacts (15%) and, in a sample of
these cases, half should have had some social work response, either by
way of recording as a contact or by undertaking further checks to inform
decision-making about whether cases meet the threshold for social work
intervention. During the inspection, senior managers took immediate
action to review these cases and strengthen management oversight of
the service. (Recommendation)


When cases meet the threshold for referral to childrens social care,
there is an effective, multi-agency response supported by the work of
the triage service, the Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH) and the
joint investigation team (JIT). Immediate risk is identified effectively and
responded to. Thorough, timely information gathering and analysis, with
clear management direction and oversight in the vast majority of cases,


ensure that children at risk of immediate harm are protected. Parental
consent is appropriately secured.

The front-door service is not supported by accurate and timely
performance information or system alerts. Managers have developed
their own paper-based systems to support tracking and oversight of
work, but this is time consuming and not as reliable as comprehensive
system-based alerts and reports. There is an absence of accurate
performance information to provide a detailed understanding of trends
and outcomes. For example, the absence of detailed information on the
outcomes of contacts and referrals means that an overview of current
practice is not assured. (Recommendation)


The percentage of re-referrals (44%) is higher than that of comparator
authorities (22%). Cases sampled demonstrate recently improved and
appropriate decision-making in the last six months, since the introduction
of a recognised social work model and movement of managers between
teams. However, historically decision-making has been inconsistent,
resulting in some cases being closed too soon.


Enquiries undertaken by the JIT, under section 47 of the Children Act
discussions and result in clear decision-making to secure childrens
protection through safety plans. Enquires are thorough and conducted by
competent and experienced social workers who are well supported. In a
small number of cases seen, the planning of the enquiry between the
police and social care is not coordinated effectively, which means that
work with children is not done with a shared approach.


A very high percentage (79%) of child protection enquiries undertaken
across all teams do not proceed to ICPC. The rate of enquiries initiated is
significantly above comparators and, at 283.2, is higher than 153.9 in
enquiry were met and, following an appropriate assessment, there was a
clear rationale for not progressing to ICPC. However, this is an issue that
the local authority and its partners have not fully investigated and
reviewed to ensure that families are not subject to unnecessary intrusion
and that interventions are proportionate. (Recommendation)


High-quality responses to childrens needs out of hours by the
emergency duty team ensure that childrens immediate safety is secured
and that arising needs are continually assessed. This is a particular
service strength. Experienced social workers provide a wide-ranging
service to both new and open cases, including welfare visits, follow-up
on cases that have come through the duty team and timely completion
of child protection enquiries, including strategy discussions. Co-location
with the police facilitates effective multi-agency information-sharing and


decision-making and a timely response to children and families out of
hours.

There is effective signposting to the early-help hubs for family support
when cases do not require a social work intervention and when children
and families no longer need support from childrens social care. There is
recently improved coordination of cases stepping down from locality
teams to the early-help hubs, with clear planning and appropriate
involvement of families. There are improved line management
arrangements of the early-help principal social workers, timely
constructive case discussions and early alerts about work being
considered for transfer.


When children are not at risk of immediate harm, cases are transferred
to the locality teams for an assessment of needs to be undertaken. The
quality of assessments is variable, and not all children have their needs
comprehensively identified or supported in a timely way. Historical
practice with children who have been subject to plans for neglect shows
missed opportunities to identify risk and to intervene earlier. While the
most obvious risks are identified in the majority of cases, other risks are
not addressed, for example the impact of enduring poor parental mental
health. In more recent assessments, which use safety plans and a
recognised model of assessment, neglect is better recognised and
responded to. The local authority has been slow to implement the LSCBs
strategy for neglect and to provide multi-agency training on neglect,
which has meant further delay in improving responses to children who
are neglected.


While good practice was seen in some cases, there are delays in the
allocation, progression and completion of some assessments.
Assessment timescales are not consistently set in relation to the needs of
the child, and a target of 45 days is routinely used. The authoritys
current performance in relation to assessment completion within 45 days
is 76%, which is below the latest published data for comparator
authorities at 84%. The local authority has recognised this and recently
changed practice to ensure that timescales are appropriate and are
regularly reviewed. No routine performance reports are available on this
measure, and it was therefore difficult for inspectors to assess progress
on this measure during the inspection. (Recommendation)


Assessments undertaken in the past six months use a nationally
recognised model of social work practice to give a clear picture of
strengths, vulnerabilities and risks for the child and family, taking into
account historical factors, and giving a clear view of the childs lived
experience. These assessments underpin subsequent planning
effectively. However, these are recent improvements and assessments
prior to this time have not consistently identified wider and emerging
risks. Even when the information gathered is thorough, assessments are


not always translated into clear outcome-based plans, with the proposed
plan listing a series of tasks to be completed rather than needs to be
addressed and outcomes to be achieved.

Effective systems are in place to assess and monitor arrangements when
children are placed with relatives or friends by the local authority, under
regulation 24 arrangements. There is evidence of appropriately thorough
assessments being completed and of challenge about approval of
placements. However, workers do not always recognise when children
are living in circumstances to which regulation 24 arrangements apply,
and some cases were seen which should have had an assessment
subject to regulation 24.


Caseloads of social workers in the assessment service are high, with
some carrying over 30 cases. The number of social workers managed by
the assessment team managers is also high, with one of the managers
supervising 11 staff. This compromises the ability of staff and managers
to undertake and drive timely and comprehensive social work. Senior
managers are aware of this shortfall and have put in place measures to
manage pressures in the assessment service by setting up a third
assessment team and increasing the social work and management
capacity across this service area, but action taken has not yet had
sufficient impact. (Recommendation)


Concurrent use of safety plans, child protection and child in need plans
means that in some cases more than one plan is being used, which
causes confusion for families. The majority of child protection and child
in need plans do not clearly define outcomes, measures, responsibilities
or timescales, but rather describe actions to be taken. This means that
families are not sufficiently clear about what they need to do to ensure
that childrens needs are met and that they are safe and to ascertain
how progress will be measured. This is also the case in pre-proceedings
letters to parents, which do not consistently make clear to parents what
is required of them and the action that will be taken if circumstances do
not improve. (Recommendation)


Effective planning was seen during assessments in which single safety
plans are used, which are later developed into child protection or child in
need plans. This ensures clarity, from an early stage, about what needs
to happen. Recent changes to the format of child protection plans have
supported more comprehensive, outcome-focused planning with clearly
articulated contingencies.


Timeliness for ICPCs, taking place within 15 days of the start of a child
protection enquiry, is reported by the local authority to be at 97%, which
is well above the most recent published data (DfE for 201415) showing
comparator authorities performing at 82%. The proportion of children
who have been subject to a second or subsequent child protection plan


is reported to be 25%, which is higher than comparators at 16%.
Inspectors are not confident that this data is accurate. A legacy of
ineffective challenge, poor decision-making in child protection
conferences and an insufficient focus on the childs experience, leading
to overly optimistic judgements on the likelihood of sustained
improvement, was evident in some cases. Recent decision-making has
been more focused and appropriate and ensured sustained risk
reduction. Improvements in the management of child protection
conferences, with the use of a nationally recognised model of social
work, are supporting the identification of risks and vulnerabilities and the
engagement of parents and children. Advocacy is offered to and used by
children and young people in child protection processes, enhancing and
supporting their ability to participate.

Core groups are held regularly. These meetings check progress against
actions but do not consistently evaluate risk and amend plans on an
ongoing basis. This is hindered by the lack of plans specific enough to
support effective measurement of progress and risk reduction. A lack of
challenge from core group members, when agencies are not
appropriately undertaking agreed work, means that overall risks are not
always reduced and needs are not always met in a timely way.


A focus on ensuring that the childs voice is heard has underpinned
recent improvements. Where poor practice was seen, childrens views
are not consistently recorded or evidenced, and direct work is not always
undertaken when required. In some cases involving siblings, the views
and experiences of the individual children are not clearly differentiated.
When children and young people have been engaged effectively, their
views suitably inform planning and interventions. One young person
interviewed as part of this inspection described how he trusted the social
worker, describing her as his second mum, and how he felt better in
himself as his family life had improved. When children are too young for
their views to be gained directly, observations of relationships and
presentation are evident. (Recommendation)


Childrens individualised needs arising from diversity are not fully
identified, explored or addressed in the majority of cases seen. This
includes needs arising from gender, sexual orientation and faith
(Recommendation). Understanding the impact of disability on a child is
addressed more effectively in the team that works with children who
have disabilities, and individual examples were seen in which a childs
background and heritage were positively addressed.


When children and young people are at risk of child sexual exploitation,
risks are well recognised and successful actions are taken to safeguard
them. The multi-agency assessment child sexual exploitation tool
monitors young people believed to be at risk of sexual exploitation
effectively, ensuring that risks are fully analysed and appropriate action


is taken to reduce risk and inform planning. Responses to sexual
exploitation and children who go missing from home, school or care are
well coordinated, and there is an effective multi-agency response. There
is effective management oversight of trends, which supports a timely
response, both individually and in relation to broader risks to children.
Children who are identified as frequently going missing receive effective
support to manage and reduce risks to them. Return interviews are
undertaken by an independent organisation, although notifications to
them are not always timely. Consequently, return interviews are not
consistently completed within 72 hours.

Comprehensive systems are in place for tracking and monitoring the
number of children and young people who are home educated. At the
time of inspection, there were 163 children and young people being
home educated, 59 of primary school age and 104 of secondary school
age. Staff support many home educated childrens return to the formal
education sector. In 201516, of the 60 cases of children who ceased to
be home educated, 49 returned to school, seven moved out of the area,
and four were formally referred on as children missing from education.


Too many young people (16 in six months) who present as homeless are
placed in bed and breakfast accommodation. While risk assessments of
the provision are undertaken, specific risk assessments of the
placements of individual young people are not in place, and, although
the vast majority of young people are moved on quickly, this evidences a
lack of appropriate emergency provision for this age group. Single
assessments undertaken when young people present as homeless are
thorough and compliant with case law. There is persistent work to
engage with young people even when they are reluctant to receive
support. (Recommendation)


Multi-agency risk assessment conferences have consistent attendance
from all appropriate partner agencies, and information relating to
children linked to the perpetrator is clearly evident in well-minuted
meetings. The MASH team manager appropriately represents childrens
social care and coordinates information sharing effectively to ensure a
timely multi-agency response. A wide range of services support families
in which domestic abuse has occurred, and there is a single point of
referral to ensure coherent management of cases. Services have been
subject to a recent review. No performance information is currently
available to evaluate the effectiveness of interventions, although a
performance framework has recently been introduced.


Sound processes are in place for multi-agency public protection
arrangements (MAPPA), and this results in clear assessment of any
potential risk to children. However, information from MAPPA meetings is
not consistently recorded on social care records. Consequently, risks to
children in some cases may not be sufficiently clear.



Understanding and awareness of female genital mutilation has been
disseminated effectively, evidenced by the number of cases in which
female genital mutilation has been addressed. Sensitive but tenacious
multi-agency work with families is evident from cases reviewed,
supported by the use of translators and offering appropriate challenge,
particularly to fathers.


Work to identify and prevent violent extremism is well established, with a
clear structure and action plan monitored by the Wakefield Together
Partnership. The nature of risk is well understood and is primarily linked
to far right activity. However, good links and developments with
mosques are in place, and there is proactive engagement with local
communities. Training for all designated safeguarding leads in schools
has taken place in the last year, and there is a school safeguarding policy
for the Prevent duty. Individual referrals are routed through and
screened by the designated police officer, and individual case examples
describe effective and creative work with young people.


The number of children identified in private fostering placements has
increased, following an awareness raising campaign. The completion of
private fostering assessments on current cases is timely, but this has not
always been consistently achieved, resulting in delays in assessment of
suitability for some children. In the cases sampled by inspectors, children
being cared for under these arrangements were appropriately supported,
their views were clear and outcomes for them were positive.


Robust practice by designated officers, together with timely partnership
working, ensure that children and young people are suitably protected
when allegations are made against people in positions of trust. Effective
communication between agencies and childrens social care ensures that
children and young people are safeguarded and supported. Analysis of
data informs future working, for example planned work with mosques
and decisions about where training should be targeted.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Comprehensive services to children on the edge of care assist social workers in
supporting children to remain at home. Decisions about whether a child should
become looked after are appropriate. Good relationships with the courts and the
Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) ensure that court
processes are well managed and timely.
Childrens placement needs are not always sufficiently addressed and, as a result,
some children experience a number of placement moves, and the rationale for
changes to childrens placement plans is not well recorded. The sufficiency duty is
not fully met in relation to emergency or brother and sister placements.
Assessments to identify the changing needs of children looked after are not
consistently updated to inform current planning, and the voice of the child is not
sufficiently evident. However, good priority is given to ensuring that some children
can contribute effectively to plans for their futures. The advocacy service provides
effective support to children to express their views. When children come into care,
contact with immediate family is arranged quickly and is suitably child-focused.
Children suitable for adoption receive a good service from the discrete team of
experienced professionals. Recruitment and assessment of adopters is handled well,
and dedicated and experienced family finders within the service swiftly identify
adoptive families for children. Adoption timeliness is improving, although still below
government targets, and the impact on the overall figure of unavoidable delay for a
very small number of children is well understood. Analysis of the adoption scorecard
means that the service is aware of its performance against comparators, but the
priority remains to achieve what is in the best interests of the individual child rather
than being overly focused on meeting targets to reflect a positive scorecard.
Childrens health needs are met effectively through a range of services, including the
children looked after health service. Plans to ensure that children have improved
access to universal mental health services are in place, and services are improving.
However, access to more specialist support through child and adolescent mental
health services (CAMHS) is not timely.
Children looked after are supported effectively by the virtual schools multidisciplinary team to make good progress in education from their often low starting
points. The care-leaving service is tenacious in staying in contact with all care leavers
to ensure that it continues to support them in making positive choices about their
accommodation, training and employment as they progress into adulthood.


Inspection findings

A comprehensive range of services is available to support children to
remain with their families and to prevent them from becoming looked
after. The intensive family support team and the residential family
support team are providing effective support to children on the edge of
care and their families, through the offer of planned short breaks, direct
work and training for parents in therapeutic crisis intervention.


There is improving use of family group conferences to support families.
While a sustained reduction in the number of children looked after has
not yet been achieved, there has been no increase in the number of
children looked after in the last three years. Positive impact of the
service is evidenced on an individual case basis, but the local authority
has not yet undertaken an analysis of the service and its impact.


Appropriate decisions are swiftly made by senior managers for children
to become looked after. Timeliness of care proceedings is monitored
through the Public Law Outline tracker, and this has recently been
enhanced, which has had a positive impact, for example, on ensuring
that the duration of the court process remains at approximately 28
weeks. Although not yet meeting the governments target of 26 weeks, it
is in line with other local authorities in the area, and some delays are due
to court scheduling and are not the fault of the local authority. A positive
and productive relationship with Cafcass and the courts enables court
processes to be completed effectively. The local authoritys legal service
is proactive, and it ensures that social work teams are kept well informed
of the latest guidance and good practice. In most cases, advice and
support on individual cases is clear and effective. Briefings and training
sessions on legal changes, court rulings and court skills are provided, as
well as case consultation. This is contributing to a timely resolution for
children.


Case recording and document storage for children looked after are, in
most cases, incomplete and confusing. Plans are hard to follow and are
not used as working tools to ensure that children are making progress.
They do not, therefore, ensure that children are receiving the right
support at the right time. The local authority recognises this, and has a
working group in place to move towards a model based on a nationally
recognised model of social work. Appropriate decision-making for
children at the earliest opportunity is not evident through care planning
and children looked after reviews. The second review is not used as a
milestone to provide clarity for families regarding the permanence
options that may be pursued as an alternative to children returning
home. (Recommendation)



The impact of social workers visits and direct work with children and
young people looked after is not well recorded, and valuable information
about their experiences and history could, therefore, be lost. The impact
of childrens wishes and feelings on planning and decision-making is
variable. Children are visited at least within statutory guidance but the
local authority lacks robust monitoring mechanisms for the quality and
recording of these visits.


The local authority strives to place brothers and sisters together when
this is assessed as appropriate. A recruitment strategy to attract carers
specifically for family groups is in place. However, when brothers and
sisters are not placed together, the rationale for this decision is not
clearly documented. Some consistency in worker is assured when
brothers and sisters are placed apart by the appointment of one IRO for
each family group.


An appropriate range of legal orders and placement types are sought to
ensure that children are in the best placement to meet their needs and
to help them achieve permanency. For example, the number of children
ceasing to be in care and living with their carers under special
guardianship orders (9%) is comparable with statistical neighbours (9%).
There is an improving focus on children returning home when it is safe
to do so, although this is not yet routinely reviewed as an alternative to
permanence for those children who have been looked after for some
time. However, return home plans sampled showed that decisions are
appropriate and risk assessed and that children and families are
supported.


When decisions have been made by the agency decision maker (ADM) to
place children for adoption, family finding is completely child-focused and
led by their needs. A surplus of in-house placements, strong consortium
arrangements and a familiarity with the wider market by the highly
competent and experienced family finders in the adoption team mean
that there is the minimum of delay in finding adoptive placements for
children.


Childrens placement stability and the underpinning sufficiency strategy
are poor. According to the councils own figures, the number of children
looked after who have had three placement moves or more is 17% in
neighbours being only 9%. Long-term placement stability, which covers
children in a placement for two or more years, has also recently declined
from 67% to 61%. Due to the absence of robust management data, an
effective strategy to understand and address this is lacking.
(Recommendation)


Recruitment of good-quality foster carers is managed by a stable, highly
experienced team, led by a strong and effective manager. The majority


of subsequent assessments are completed within the required timescale,
and carers report thoroughness, fairness and honesty as significant
features of the assessment process. Regular support groups enable
foster carers to meet, share expertise, build relationships and offer and
receive effective support. Foster carers report positively on their initial
contact with the team. Targeted recruitment of carers for teenagers and
brother and sister groups has been a focus this year. An increase in
viability assessments of connected persons has occurred. However, these
developments still do not meet the current demand for placements, and,
as a result, some children are placed with external providers outside the
local authority area.

Arrangements for delegated authority are becoming embedded and they
are ensuring that decisions for children are made in a timely way. This
recognition of shared responsibility sustains effective communication and
validates carers professional roles. When children are looked after with
parental consent, under section 20 of the Children Act 1989, decisionmaking for them is in some cases unclear. The allocated social worker
waits until the child has settled into the placement before ensuring that
all written agreements are in place and signed by all parties. This creates
uncertainty and a delay in decision-making for the child.


Foster carers are supported effectively and receive regular supervision
and training to ensure that quality standards are maintained. A system of
payments for skills is developing, which carers find encouraging, as this
is a recognition of their training and expertise. Training provided to
carers is increasingly making constructive use of experienced carers with
specific skill-sets, as well as advice from young people recently in the
care system.


Annual foster carer reviews provide an appropriate opportunity for the
carer and supervising social worker to reflect on challenges and to
celebrate achievements. However, in 20152016, only 77.5% of foster
carers reviews were completed on time. This does not ensure a
consistently timely review of ongoing suitability. Recent changes in IRO
roles and responsibilities have resulted in a specialist foster carer IRO to
tackle this shortfall and to address the concern effectively.


Good practice is evident in individual cases of young people staying put
with their foster carers beyond their 18th birthdays, and sensitive
consideration and handling of diversity needs is evident in individual
young peoples case recordings. However, an absence of robust data and
management information means that the overall impact of the staying
put agenda has not been evaluated.


Although the majority of children benefit from having their looked after
reviews on time, there is a reduction in timeliness on the previous years
performance (from 99.1% to 95.4%). The specialist team working with


children who have special educational needs and/or disabilities delivers a
variable quality of work to children looked after because care plans are
not consistently reviewed in a timely way. For example, in one case
seen, this shortfall has resulted in drift for a vulnerable child with some
complex needs, who had remained in an inappropriate placement for too
long.

Children are supported to attend their reviews and to contribute directly,
or are supported by an advocate, although the number of children
attending reviews has reduced this year from 95.2% to 89.6%. Parents
are less well supported, and advocacy is not used routinely to support
them. Social workers reports to reviews and the subsequent review
minutes are often late or absent.


Caseloads in the IRO service are above the recommended level (83 as
opposed to 70) because of staff vacancies. This is having an impact on
the services ability to monitor childrens plans in between reviews and to
improve the quality of social work practice. Disputes are formally raised
by IROs, and these are reported to senior managers quarterly. However,
this has not been effective in resolving the issue of missing social work
reports. (Recommendation)


Arrangements for children to see their immediate families are well
considered and timely. Contact is facilitated effectively by the contact
service, social workers and foster carers. However, contact with wider
family members, such as half brothers and sisters and step-parents, is
not consistently considered.


Children with mental health needs who require a referral to CAMHS do
not receive the service in a timely way, with some waiting over a year.
For children who are looked after, this wait is reduced to three months.
Action taken to address this will take time to have an impact, leaving
children without a sufficiently responsive service. The emotional health
and well-being team supports children, carers and professionals when
childrens needs do not meet the CAMHS threshold. This service offers
face-to-face work and consultation on a range of issues that affect
childrens mental health and emotional well-being. However, due to staff
shortages, this service also operates a waiting list. The development of
an online counselling service is one of a number of initiatives planned to
address the needs of all children and young people, including those
looked after.


The health needs of children looked after are considered and met well in
the vast majority of cases. The health team has a robust system in place
to ensure that there is no delay in initial health assessment and
subsequent reviews: 92.8 % of initial health assessments, which
represents a high rate, are completed on time, and the reasons behind
the minor shortfall are understood. For example, UASC assessments are


delayed until the young peoples age is established. The team visits all
children within a 50 mile radius, enabling children who move out of the
authority to retain the same nurse. It offers a range of preventative
health information as well as targeted support to address issues such as
sexual health, sexual exploitation, drug use and self-harm. The service
also supports young people to access universal services to ensure that
children looked after benefit from well-informed services across a range
of health needs.

When children go missing, they are offered a comprehensive return
home interview by a service independent of the council. This service
works effectively with partners and offers a valuable and child-focused
intervention. However, notification to the provider who conducts return
home interviews is not consistently timely, and visits are sometimes
delayed. A dedicated multi-disciplinary team ensures that children at risk
of child sexual exploitation receive a supportive and swift response. A
further attribute of this service is that it ensures that data is captured
and used to gather intelligence that prevents or disrupts future
incidences.


Young people who demonstrate emerging signs of offending behaviour
or have become involved with the police are offered a comprehensive
service by the youth offending team. A focus on early intervention and
prevention, as well as restorative justice, supports young people
effectively, and criminalisation is seen as a last resort. Offending rates of
children looked after are currently at 7%, which is below average, and
reoffending rates are among the lowest in the country.


UASC receive a thorough and sensitive service in most cases seen. The
social work team that offers this support is able to draw on a specialist
worker to guide members through complex immigration issues. Young
people have their cultural and heritage needs addressed through a range
of services, such as specialist foster placements, education support,
dedicated IROs and comprehensive health assessments.


The local authority has shown a strong commitment to maintaining the
size and effectiveness of its virtual school service, REACH. Managers
have invested part of the pupil premium funding to establish four
learning mentors, who provide intensive support to children looked after,
to improve their literacy and numeracy skills.


Managers rigorously monitor and track the progress of children through
a system of fortnightly meetings that risk rate children looked after,
based on their attainment, attendance and behaviour. Managers assign
follow-up interventions to specific members of staff. As a result, there
has been a steady improvement in the progress that children looked
after make, based on their often low starting points, with the great
majority (88%) expected to achieve their progress target in 201516.



Despite the steady progress in the attainment of children looked after,
there are still significant variations at different key stages and from year
to year, depending on the size of the cohort and the proportion of pupils
with special educational needs and/or disabilities. In 201415, the gap in
attainment between children looked after and their peers in the rest of
the borough widened at key stage 1, reduced at key stage 2 and
widened for those achieving five GCSEs at grades A* to C, including
English and mathematics. However, over the past five years, the gap
between children looked after and their peers has gradually closed.


The percentage of children looked after in good or better schools, as
rated by Ofsted, has steadily increased over the past few years, from
looked after are not automatically removed from schools where the
quality of provision declines, but managers put in additional support to
ensure that the impact on their progress is minimised.


The great majority of personal education plans (PEPs) provide an
effective means of planning the education of children looked after and of
setting them specific and realistic targets to enable them to progress.
There has been a significant improvement in both their coverage and the
timeliness of their completion. Currently, all children looked after have a
PEP, compared to only half of them a few years ago. The plans
successfully mobilise the interventions and resources of a broad range of
agencies to support the all-round development of children looked after.
Managers use the plans well to specify how the pupil premium should be
spent to meet the needs of individual children. In the minority of less
successful PEPs, there are gaps in information and the targets are less
than ambitious.


There are currently 20 children looked after in alternative education
provision: eight in two of the three pupil referral units, and 12 with a
range of other providers, including the local further education college
that offers general provision. All children looked after and young people
in alternative education receive at least 25 hours of education a week.
Local authority staff rigorously monitor the quality of the alternative
provision and track the progress of all students at alternative providers,
using the same systems as those used to monitor those in mainstream
provision.


A vibrant Children in Care Council promotes good participation and
represents children and young people well, including children placed out
of the area. Children and young people say that they feel listened to and
can make a good contribution to improving services for children looked
after. One young person said, I like being part of decision-making.
Those spoken to are confident that any issues raised will be addressed,
for example awareness of bullying issues. Another young person said of
the local authority, They are doing all right, so everyone is safe. The


councils website for children looked after, Care 4 Us, holds useful
information but has not been updated since 2015.

Inspectors saw many children benefiting from an effective advocacy
service. All children looked after who are aged 10 years and over, have
access to an advocate commissioned from a national voluntary
organisation. One parent spoken to by inspectors commented that this
had really helped her daughter to put forward her views. The service
visits young people when they arrive in care, to ensure that they know
why they are being looked after and what support is available to them.
Childrens views are sought to inform service developments when
placements come to an end. There is an effective independent visitor
service, providing support to 22 young people currently.


The family drug alcohol court is an exciting and proactive project, which
is in its first, pilot year. This innovative approach uses care proceedings
to motivate parents to engage with treatment for their substance misuse
and to improve their parenting. Multi-disciplinary support is provided,
with a focus on the whole family. This means that fewer cases become
contested hearings. Consequently, if a parent cannot control their
substance misuse, children are placed in a permanent alternative family
swiftly. A dedicated multi-disciplinary team works alongside two
designated judges, and, as a result, families know all of the professionals
involved in their lives, including the judiciary, extremely well. This
provides families with a sense of security within nurturing, yet firm and
consistent, boundaries. The passion and enthusiasm of all of the team is
evident. This level of commitment provides all of the participating
families with every opportunity for success.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good.

A highly experienced and dedicated adoption team delivers a good and in
parts excellent specialist social work service to children. Adoption
processes, such as ADM meetings and adoption panels, are efficiently
run. The use of the services working lists to extract data and complete
an accurate adoption scorecard means that this service has some limited
access to comparative performance information. However, the driving
force of the service is to meet the individual placement needs of children.


Adoption is appropriately considered, either as the plan for permanence
or as a parallel plan for all children of a suitable age going through care
proceedings. However, this does not happen quickly enough in some
cases. According to the latest published figures, 25% of children looked
after leave the councils care through adoption, and this is better
performance than their statistical neighbours at 23% and the all-England
average of 17%. Co-allocation, at an early stage, of experienced


adoption workers with placing social workers means that adoption
processes are rigorously adhered to. When the plan for adoption
becomes the plan for permanence it can, therefore, proceed without
delay. Co-allocation has also led to a recognised improvement in the
quality of child placement reports, as experienced adoption team
members assist and enable placing social workers to complete their
reports for panel well.

Marketing aimed at increasing the pool of in-house adopters is
undertaken effectively by a dedicated events coordinator in the adoption
team. The team works closely with a neighbouring authority in
preparation training for prospective adopters. The agencys latest figures
show that conversion rates from enquiries to placements are relatively
high, at a fifth to a quarter, and this has resulted in a surplus of adoptive
families, so that placing social workers can currently be offered a choice
of in-house adoptive families for children. The surplus adopters are
shared across the consortium. Sympathetic matching of childrens diverse
needs is assured, both by strong consortium relationships within West
Yorkshire and Humberside with authorities who have more diverse
populations, and use of the adoption register when required.


Prospective adopters are thoroughly assessed and well trained by
designated assessment workers within the adoption service, who are
highly skilled professionals. The low number of disruptions, three in five
years, demonstrates that assessment and training of adopters are
secure. Reasons for disruptions are understood well, and most commonly
occur for older children when there has been a risk of breakdown at the
time of placement. The adoption team responds early to provide a range
of support services to families at risk of disruption. According to the
latest published figures, the service for placing children over five years
old is at 10% and performs above their statistical neighbours (7%) and
the all-England average (5%). However, the service understands well
that placement for adoption of older children carries risks from their prior
parenting experiences, and this can lead directly to disruption.


The latest published figures relating to the time taken between receiving
court authority to place a child for adoption and matching them with
prospective adopters has missed government targets by 72 days. The
adoption agencys more recent figures, taken from its annual report,
show that this has reduced to 48 days in 201516, but the report
acknowledges that it has dropped from ranking first against comparators
to fifth. When delay occurs, the reason for it is well understood and is
usually outside of the adoption teams control. For instance, there are
current delays associated with a complex international adoption.


When the plan for adoption has changed to an alternative plan for
permanence, latest published figures show that the service, at 12%,
performs better than the statistical neighbour and all-England averages


of 19% and 14% respectively. Scrutiny of the two relevant cases that fall
within the scope of this inspection demonstrates that changes to the plan
have been made as a result of decisions by the court, and again these
were outside of the adoption teams control. When there was subsequent
delay in the plan for permanence, IROs were seen to challenge social
workers robustly on behalf of the children.

Placement choice has recently been further enhanced by the introduction
of fostering-to-adopt placements, although the team is aware that the
success of such placements, of which there have been four so far, has
been variable. It uses a process of team away-days to extract the
learning from specific issues, and one is planned to look at how the
consistency of fostering-to-adopt placements can be better assured.


Parental assessment reports (PAR) produced by designated and highly
skilled adoption team members can be of an excellent quality, and they
are a significant strength of the service. Adopters spoken to or surveyed
were highly satisfied with the service that they received. Under
circumstances of high demand, the assessment service is supplemented
by a contract with a private social work agency. The agency allocates
assessments to a defined group of social workers who are vetted to meet
adoption regulations, and the agency employs its own assurance
processes to ensure that the quality of the PARs presented to panel is
consistently high.


A highly competent adoption team manager, who acts as panel adviser,
very efficiently administers the ADM and panel processes. Items of
business are rigorously quality controlled, although both the panel and
the ADM can offer examples of appropriate challenge. Scrutiny of panel
minutes indicates that it is currently vigorously pursuing a priority of
improving the quality of written support plans presented to panel at
matching stage. The ADM observably acts in the best interests of the
child. For instance, in the case of an international adoption, he refused to
sign off the plan for adoption until the childs country of origin had been
contacted, notwithstanding the negative impact that this has had on
adoption timeliness overall.


Post-adoption support work is undertaken by three specialists in the
adoption team who work with adopters post order, but are visible
throughout the preparation stage. The team currently supports 35
children in 24 placements. Staff are proactive in ensuring that adopters
are aware of the support available to them and that this is provided to
individual families, when requested, at a mutually agreed level. Support
workers usually work with families for three years post adoption, but are
flexible when ongoing need is identified. Effective and imaginative use is
extensively made of the adoption support fund to reinforce post-adoption
plans. This development is drawn from the lessons learned from previous


disruptions, particularly by funding families access to therapeutic
support.

A quarterly post-adoption newsletter, with contributions from adopters,
has helpful information about the adoption support fund, training
opportunities, an adopters toddler group and the adoption peer support
group. Later-life letters of five children looked at were detailed and
suitably tailored to the childrens individual needs. Following a lapse due
to a staff vacancy, letterbox arrangements are now being appropriately
administered. Four life story books seen were of high quality, capturing
the childrens experiences in several creative ways, although they were
not always started promptly. (Recommendation)

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good.


The experience and progress of care leavers is good. Managers, social
workers and personal advisers are tenacious in staying in contact with all
care leavers, to ensure that they continue to support them in making
positive choices about their accommodation, training and employment as
they progress into adulthood. Care leavers have a strong sense of their
entitlements and participate well in shaping the future delivery of the
service. Managers and their staff engage effectively with other agencies
to plan positive outcomes for care leavers.


Managers and staff are in contact with all 225 care leavers, with the
result that they have good information on their accommodation and
progress in education, training and employment. Personal advisers and
social workers use an effective mixture of rewards, such as birthday
grants and contacts with other agencies, for example the police and the
youth offending team, and their local intelligence to locate the few care
leavers from whom they have not heard for a couple of weeks. There are
well-established relationships and information protocols with
neighbouring local authorities that swiftly alert personal advisers and
social workers when care leavers go missing.


The majority of pathway plans focus effectively on supporting care
leavers to achieve positive outcomes. Personal advisers and social
workers engage young people well in the development of their plans,
and are effective in ensuring that the relevant agencies contribute to the
process. Planning is particularly strong in supporting care leavers
progression through education and training, and in finding solutions to
their changing accommodation needs. Personal advisers and social
workers pay close attention to monitoring risky behaviours and
intervene, when necessary, to keep care leavers safe. However, due to


recent pressures on management capacity, there have been a number of
transition pathway plans that have not been completed on time.

Transition planning for young people with learning difficulties and/or
disabilities is carried out skilfully, with a good focus on the achievement
of long-term positive outcomes. Planning starts early, with the
engagement of adult services, and involves young people in all the main
decisions. Care packages are personalised to meet the specific needs of
individuals. An increasing number of young people now have education,
health and care plans, which contain specific and realistic target
outcomes that are a significant improvement on the targets contained in
the previous learning disability assessments.


The proportion of care leavers living in suitable accommodation has
increased over the past two years, with the result that it is now higher
than both statistical neighbours and the rest of the country. There are no
care leavers in bed and breakfast accommodation. However, the
situation could be further improved if the relationship between the
leaving care service and Wakefields arms-length housing provider was
more effective. Due to a lack of direct joint working, the care service has
seen the number of tenancies allocated to it drop from 10 to three over
the past few years, with the result that there has been a reduction in the
accommodation options open to care leavers. (Recommendation)


The percentage of care leavers in education, employment and training in
both statistical neighbours and the rest of the country. Care-leaving staff
work very effectively with educational providers in the area to identify
courses for care leavers and then to support them through the enrolment
process. Teaching and support staff provide regular updates on the
progress of care leavers, to inform pathway plans, and remedial actions
are agreed and implemented if care leavers do not make sufficient
progress or are at risk of dropping out. Managers in local further
education colleges provide care leavers with additional learner support
and bursaries to help them to overcome any barriers to their learning.


In 201516, there was a slight increase in the percentage of care
leavers who were not in education, employment or training due to the
withdrawal of a co-located information, advice and guidance service.
Managers have reacted quickly to establish their own weekly drop-ins to
advise care leavers about their training and employment options, and to
assist them with job search and the writing of curricula vitae.


Personal advisers successfully support many care leavers in the transition
to adulthood, through a succession of well-planned stages in the
development of their independent living skills. Care leavers progress
from taster flats in supported accommodation through shared
accommodation, where they are increasingly responsible for the payment


of rent and utility bills, until they secure their own independent
tenancies. Care leavers are given a second chance if their tenancies
break down, and receive additional support to help them to succeed the
next time.

Staff provide care leavers with summaries of their health records when
they are 16 years old, and then again when they turn 18. The great
majority of them know that they are registered with their local doctor
and dentist, and are confident about how to access other health services.
Personal advisers provide effective information and practical ideas about
how to stay healthy, such as the cook and eat sessions to promote a
good diet. There are, however, long delays in getting access to
therapeutic support and access to both adolescent and adult mental
health services.


The care leavers pledge is a strong statement of the councils
commitment to its role as a corporate parent and sets out in clear
language what care leavers can expect in terms of their entitlements and
ways in which the council will support them. However, the pledges
usefulness is seriously undermined by the promotion of a dedicated
website, where care leavers are supposed to be able to access up-todate information about what they are entitled to and events that they
can participate in, but which has not been updated for over a year.


The majority of care leavers understand what their entitlements are, and
many of them take them up, in particular the grant to help them to set
up home in new accommodation. They are aware of the continuing
support available to them if they want to stay in, or return to, education
up to the age of 25. There are currently 13 care leavers in higher
education. Although staff use a range of mechanisms to ensure that care
leavers are informed of their entitlements, the most common way that
care leavers find out about what is available is through word of mouth
from their peers.


The post-16 care leavers forum provides a useful vehicle for care leavers
to meet with managers to express their issues and concerns, and to work
on joint projects. Although attendance is variable, care leavers in the
forum have successfully put forward their ideas about the type and
range of accommodation they would like to see developed, and the
facilities they would like improved, such as access to the internet and
improvements in the security of the flats in supported accommodation.


Staff ensure that care leavers feel positive about their progress and
achievements. An annual awards night is supplemented by one-off
events to celebrate specific accomplishments, such as the awarding of a
specially commissioned medal for a care leaver with a physical disability,
who completed a local marathon.



Recent reductions in management capacity and staffing, combined with
uncertainties created by the current review of the leaving-care service,
have resulted in some deterioration in the quality of service delivery,
such as the completion of pathway plans within agreed timescales, and
the implementation of new developments, such as the new supported
accommodation and the apprenticeship programme.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Senior managers, political leaders and partner agencies are highly committed to
improving outcomes for children and they demonstrate a clear understanding and
passion for their roles.
The local authority has delivered improvements since the last Ofsted inspection in
members have worked closely with partner agencies to improve the delivery of
services for the children and young people in the authority. However, progress in
some areas has been slow and the local authority recognises that more work is
needed to ensure that practice is consistently good.
The newly established performance cycle is not yet effective because the absence
of effective performance management systems and lack of confidence in the local
authoritys own data inhibit the ability to make more significant progress. This
current key priority is impeding progress in all areas.
An appropriate focus on early help and front-door arrangements has led to
tangible improvements in service delivery, and the investment in early help means
that children and families are receiving the right level of intervention at the right
time.
Strong strategic arrangements to safeguard children and young people who go
missing or are at risk of sexual exploitation ensure that children and young people
identified as being at risk receive a swift and timely operational response.
A full quality assurance culture is not yet evident, and, although this is improving,
supervision and management oversight of social work practice does not always
help to drive improvements in practice. The childrens database is not currently
meeting performance management requirements, and the local authority is aware
that it needs to make decisions about how this can be resolved.
The workloads of some social workers, frontline managers and IROs are too high,
which is having an impact on their ability to provide a high-quality social work
service.
The local authority is not meeting its sufficiency duty, and, in the absence of
accurate data, senior managers do not have a comprehensive oversight of
placement needs, which has had an impact on placement stability.
A well-managed nationally recognised model of social work is delivered as part of
the national innovations fund project and, although practice is not yet consistent, it
is used widely across the authority.


Inspection findings

The Ofsted inspection of 2012 has been a significant driving force in a
wide range of improvement planning and activity. The appointment of
the current DCS led the way for a significant cultural change in the
children services directorate, and, following a complete restructure of the
senior management team, his vision has driven improvements in services
to children and their families effectively. The local authority is well aware
that, although action has been taken to improve services, progress in
some areas has so far been slow.


Strategic thinking in Wakefield is strong, but this has not yet been
translated into effective planning in all areas. There is a shared vision
with many partner agencies and a clear ambition for the children and
young people in the district. This ambition benefits from the full support
of the chief executive and elected members, who promote and embrace
the vision, demonstrating a real passion and knowledge about improving
outcomes for all children.


Appropriate and clear governance arrangements between key strategic
bodies, overseen and coordinated by the Wakefield Together
Partnership, including the Children and Young Peoples Partnership, the
Health and Wellbeing Board (HWB), the overview and scrutiny
committee and the LSCB, are evident. Strengthened partnership
arrangements promote the sharing of priorities and encourage helpful
communication about key issues. Relationships between the leader of
the council, the lead member, the chief executive, the DCS, the LSCB
chair and elected members enable strategic and political leaders to
maintain an overview of the effectiveness of services to children, young
people and their families.


Clear strategic connectivity is in place between the multi-agency
partnerships plans, including the childrens and young peoples plan, and
they are aligned to the priorities identified in the district outcomes
framework (DOF). The local services board, chaired by the leader of the
council, ensures that plans are progressing and appropriately holds
partnerships to account.


A dedicated childrens joint strategic needs analysis (JSNA) includes an
appropriate range and level of detail about children, including vulnerable
children. The HWB has appropriately used the JSNA to consider its
priorities, and there is a current focus on mental health, including
addressing the specific needs of children and young people. The board is
operating effectively in terms of overseeing the HWB plan but it does not
always focus on children, including children looked after. The chair is
aware of this and has recently undertaken a joint development session
with the LSCB to help to integrate the agendas.



Although the overview and scrutiny committee does not receive regular
data to help to inform its challenge, the committee is nevertheless active
in ensuring that there is regular overview and monitoring of practice
across health, education and social care. It has appropriate links with the
LSCB and, when determining the work programme, uses the DOF to
ensure that there is a focus on the partnership priorities. The board is
using its scrutiny and exerting its influence in key areas, including a
continued focus on child sexual exploitation and early-help hubs, but it
does not receive broad enough performance information to decide which
issues would benefit from additional scrutiny.


Following a directorate review, childrens performance management has
been comprehensively overhauled. Team structures have been clarified,
and there is now a designated childrens performance team. A clear
performance cycle has been established, and this is underpinned by a
satisfactory quality assurance framework that is, in turn, supported by a
range of tools, such as audit tools, to promote effective performance.
Audits are routinely undertaken, using clear methodology, and this
contributes significantly to management oversight of specific cases.
However, more could be done to capture the learning from audits as a
whole and to use it as part of the overall improvement agenda. Adoption
of the framework could potentially support the delivery of a wide-ranging
set of quality assurance processes. However, performance managers are
aware that they have not yet secured the hearts and minds of managers
to a performance culture. (Recommendation)


Absence of accurate data means that performance reporting is seriously
underdeveloped across the full range of childrens services, although
some services are more affected than others by this deficit.
Organisational commitment to improve the accuracy of staff inputting to
the electronic recording system has not yet materialised to any
significant extent, and this creates a vicious circle in which management
reports are generally mistrusted when they are produced from data input
by the members of staff who mistrust them. In addition, confidence in
the current system to deliver the requirements needed for effective
performance management is not assured. Consequently, managers have
developed their own bespoke systems to address this situation, in order
to ensure that they understand performance in their own teams. Such
circumstances lead to a situation in which managers are generally
unaware of their performance against comparators, and the capacity of
managers to drive improvement across services is seriously inhibited.
This also inhibits senior managers and elected members overview of the
services. (Recommendation)


Senior managers and political leaders demonstrate a strong commitment
to external scrutiny and challenge, shown by their engagement with a
number of external reviews in order to help to improve services. The use
of one such review to help to drive forward improvements to the


management of contact and referral processes is showing some early
signs of success, and the associated transformation plan is innovative in
relation to tackling some key issues in relation to value for money and
making improvements.

The local authority actively seeks opportunities to further develop
services and is often recognised and rewarded for such endeavours. This
includes involvement in the national pilot of a nationally recognised
model of social work, delivered as part of the innovations fund project.
The projects outcomes and progress towards them are therefore clearly
identified, and the project managers are fully aware of, and able to
articulate, the vision and current position. Their endeavours have been
recognised through an award from the trade press. A substantial training
programme has been delivered to a high number of staff. Cases offered
as good-practice examples demonstrate that, when used effectively, the
model can add significant value to assessment and planning processes
by clearly expressing concerns and solutions in a way that is accessible
and understandable to parents. However, the projects integral audit
process means that managers are aware that practice in using the model
is not yet consistent, and this is planned to be addressed by the next
phase of the project.


A history of involvement in a range of consortium initiatives means that
the region is well placed to take full advantage of the regional agenda.
Active membership of the West Yorkshire and Humberside consortium
means that Wakefields adoption service is a key participant in
forthcoming regional adoption arrangements. These are currently in
transition, with an implementation date set for 1 April 2017.


The local authority uses information, to some degree, about the needs of
local communities to inform its commissioning arrangements.
Underpinned by a commissioning strategy, the alignment of priorities
with the shared strategic objectives is evident. Accurate data would
further support this work. The local authority has clear arrangements for
commissioning external placements and is involved in the regional
framework for the monitoring of such placements, helping to ensure
high-quality placement options across the region. Despite deficiencies in
data information, the local authority has been able to identify need
based on current and predicted need and has developed a pilot 05
edge-of-care scheme to reduce the number of young children who need
to be looked after.


While there is clear commitment to corporate parenting and meeting the
needs of children looked after, the local authority has not met its
sufficiency duty. There has been no consideration of the high use of bed
and breakfast accommodation as part of the sufficiency strategy, in line
with the lack of emergency accommodation for children and young


people when they come into care, to ensure that the current
deterioration in placement stability is mitigated.

All staff spoken to during this inspection spoke very positively about
working for Wakefield and identified the visibility and support of their
senior managers as a strength. As a result, social worker turnover rates
have reduced overall in the last three years from 17% in 201314 to
initiatives have led to a decrease in the use of agency staff (67 in


Caseloads remain variable across the authority, with some workers,
particularly in the locality teams, carrying unacceptably high numbers of
cases. The local authority has taken steps to remedy this by recruiting
above establishment, with additional social workers employed to address
the pressures, particularly in the assessment teams, which means that
most cases are now allocated within a week of transfer. No children were
found to be unsafe because of high caseloads, and effective monitoring
of such cases takes place.


Capacity issues in the independent review service have led to caseloads
being above the recommended level, which has limited IROs ability to
challenge care plans effectively and to ensure that they are progressed
in a timely way. When IROs raise issues, senior managers receive reports
quarterly. However, this has been ineffective at improving performance
in relation to the continued lack of social work reports for statutory
meetings.


The learning and development strategy clearly sets out the aspiration for
the workforce and ways in which the local authority plans to achieve this.
The dedicated training team has more recently acquired responsibility for
the development and delivery of training for the entire council childrens
workforce, which enables consistency and opportunity for shared
training. Effective use of the budget ensures a sufficiency of training for
the identified training pathways of each role. The strategy offers an
appropriate focus on statutory and mandatory training, using a mix of
commissioned and in-house training as well as e-learning, but offers little
in the way of innovative and bespoke packages. The planned training
needs analysis will ensure that there is a better understanding of future
training needs and of the potential need for more specialist training. The
integrated workforce development strategy has not yet progressed. This
means that valuable opportunities for joint learning among partner
agencies have not yet happened. Close working with the LSCB training
sub-committee also ensures that there is no duplication of training and
that all safeguarding training provides consistent messages. This includes
learning from serious case reviews.



A comprehensive support package is evident for newly qualified social
workers in their first assessed and supported year in employment, which
includes dedicated support staff and regular workshops to supplement
the training programme. Policies outline appropriate caseloads and
supervision frequency, but evidence seen during case tracking identifies
that they are not always adhered to.


The role of principal social worker (PSW) adds value to improved social
work practice. For example, the PSW leads a thematic monthly meeting
of principal social work practitioners in the teams, with the aim of
improving the consistency of practice.


The local authority has invested in an innovative, corporate Performing
for Wakefield management programme, the aim of which is to assist
managers in managing performance and to provide them with the tools
to do so, in order to support staff to deliver quality practice. Although
feedback was positive, managers said that they would need more
capacity so that the impact of this targeted training can be realised and
to promote a culture of effective quality assurance further.


A comprehensive supervision policy is appropriately focused on
supporting and developing practitioners, but does not always reflect
what is happening in social work teams. Social work staff report, and
inspectors found, that supervision is regular in the majority of cases, but
the recording of sessions is poor and there is little evidence of an impact
on helping to progress plans. Managers are not consistently contributing
to raising practice standards. Cases considered by inspectors during this
inspection identified weaknesses in management oversight and decisionmaking, particularly in relation to assessments and influencing the
progression of plans for children. Senior managers are aware of these
weaknesses and are taking appropriate steps to improve practice
through training and targeted recruitment.


Positive working relationships with Cafcass include attendance at key
meetings and effective participation in the Local Family Justice Board.
Cafcass is positive about the quality and timeliness of work presented by
the local authority in court work.


Effective arrangements to address the needs of young people at risk of
child sexual exploitation are supported by the joint West Yorkshire
partnerships and at a local level through the LSCB. These arrangements
promote the coordination of a range of strategic and operational forums
that deliver the appropriately focused Wakefield multi-agency strategy
and action plan. Partners and senior and political leaders work together
well to understand the prevalence of child sexual exploitation and to
establish effective ways of overseeing and reducing local need and risk.
Operationally, joint working with the police at the front door ensures
early identification of young people who may be at risk. The use of


detailed and targeted risk assessments means that children who go
missing or are at risk of sexual exploitation receive appropriate and
timely interventions and persistent monitoring to reduce risks.


Wakefield has a high-quality and efficient complaints service where
childrens views are treated with respect, and special attention is paid to
their complaints, resulting in the vast majority being satisfactorily
resolved at the earliest stages. All complaints and their outcomes are
tracked effectively, and the officers provide strong internal challenge
through their oversight and tracking of individual complaints, leading to
learning from complaints being seen by senior managers as crucial to
improving the services offered.

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good.

Executive summary
Wakefield and District Safeguarding Children Board meets its statutory
responsibilities, and there are effective links with other local strategic bodies, with
good work undertaken to clarify respective roles and responsibilities. The boards
work is widely reported via its annual report, and driven by appropriate strategic
priorities set out in a clear business plan. Chairing of the boards sub-committees is
shared across partner agencies, demonstrating a shared commitment towards
safeguarding.
The board benefits from an effective independent chair. Regular meetings with key
senior officers, such as the chief executive and the DCS, ensure that they are kept
up to date with the boards progress, but not all meetings are currently being
minuted. The board has good support from elected members, particularly the lead
member for childrens services.
Robust challenge from the board has resulted in improved services for children, such
as the development of effective early-help services across agencies. Findings from
SCRs, critical incident reviews and case auditing are considered in depth. Agencies
action plans are overseen to ensure full implementation and maintenance of
improvements. Up-to-date safeguarding procedures are aligned across the West
Yorkshire region, when possible, and are supplemented by local protocols and
guidance, when necessary. Referral pathways and thresholds are clearly defined.
There is effective oversight and monitoring of early help. Detailed regular scrutiny of
early help arrangements ensures that board members are clear about the
development of the early-help hubs and the effectiveness of this support for families.
Thresholds between early help and statutory services have been directly tested by
board members, through visits to the hubs, meetings with families and auditing
cases. Findings and recommendations are tracked.
Oversight of arrangements to tackle child sexual exploitation and children and young
people who go missing are robust. Effective partnership working across the region is
further improving the coordination of responses, and the cross-boundary nature of
these concerns is fully recognised.
Regular scrutiny of performance data occurs, but this has been hampered by
incomplete provision of data from partner agencies. Good work has enabled a core
multi-agency dataset and reporting cycle to be developed to ensure better-quality
performance information. The board facilitates a wide range of appropriate wellattended training events.


Recommendations

Ensure that there is sufficient support provided by the boards business
unit to enable all meetings to be well recorded and progress to be set
out against actions, so that all members can be held to account for their
respective responsibilities and there are clear audit trails of subcommittee activity and impact.


Ensure that the boards business plan and challenge and risks logs are
kept up to date, so that board members always have a clear
understanding of the boards position and can measure impact, ensure
sufficient challenge, and mitigate risks when necessary.


Ensure that the board continues to make every effort to secure
representation from agencies who do not regularly attend meetings.


Improve the understanding of the effectiveness of multi-agency
safeguarding training needs, so that future training plans are able to
target training where it is needed the most and where it will have the
greatest impact. Consideration should be given to accrediting trainers
and participants in the voluntary sector to enhance their contribution.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

Wakefield and District Safeguarding Children Board is an active and
effective coordinating body. Agencies who work with children and
families come together and are committed to driving forward
improvements in services and outcomes for children and young people.
Partner agencies make appropriate financial contributions. Levels of
attendance by senior leaders are high, and the sub-committees are
active and effective. Agencies, such as Cafcass and adult criminal justice
agencies, are unable to attend board meetings, but their absence is
pursued by the chair. The board has influence beyond the local authority
area and has been a leader in coordinating matters such as
arrangements to tackle child sexual exploitation across West Yorkshire.
(Recommendation)


The board is properly constituted and is chaired by an experienced and
suitably qualified independent person. Robust contract and appraisal
arrangements are in place. The chair meets regularly with a range of
strategic leaders, including officers and elected members, in the local
authority and has regular meetings with the DCS, although it is a
shortfall that the meetings with the DCS are not minuted. An
independent audit of board functioning in October 2015 confirms that
appropriate standards are in place and that there is compliance with
statutory requirements. The board benefits from having two lay


members, each representing specific community interests.
(Recommendation)

Arrangements between the HWB, the community safety partnership, the
adult safeguarding board and this board are well established and
effective, underpinned by protocols and pathways. Good work has been
undertaken to clarify respective responsibilities and accountabilities, and
to differentiate these from challenge duties. Close liaison has led to joint
initiatives, such as training on domestic abuse, sponsored by this board
and the community safety partnership. As one of a number of joint
events, the adult safeguarding board and this board convened a
development session in June 2016 to explore areas of common interest.
There are good links with the West Yorkshire office of the police and
crime commissioner.


The annual report covers all key areas and is presented to a wide variety
of senior staff and influential bodies, including the DCS, the chief
executive of the council, the leader of the council, the police and crime
commissioner, the director of public health, the HWB, the Local Services
Board and the clinical commissioning group. Elected members are well
appraised of the work of the board, as the annual report is also shared
with the childrens and young peoples scrutiny committee, and the lead
member for childrens services observes all board meetings and attends
board events.


The boards strategic priorities, appropriately based on an up-to-date
needs analysis, are also informed by findings from SCRs and critical
incidents. Priorities are aligned with those of other strategic bodies. The
business plan is clear, but has not been updated in recent months.
Administrative difficulties have had an impact on the maintenance of
previously detailed challenge and risk logs and on the quality of the
records of some meetings. This makes it difficult to establish the content
of, and subsequent actions from, those meetings. Despite this, the
challenge log provides a good summary of matters raised up to February
raised. Challenge can be seen since February in both main board and
sub-committee minutes. (Recommendation)


Minutes of meetings demonstrate that board members routinely question
each other about their performance and functioning. The board
commissions audits and requests partners to provide assurance on
specific issues, for example requesting and receiving assurance on a
local paediatric fracture clinic. Section 11 audits, in which individual
agencies are required to provide assurance of their safeguarding
arrangements, are held annually. Self-assessments are critiqued by
multi-agency challenge panels, which include trained young people, and
this is a strength. Shortfalls are followed until satisfactory standards are
achieved. All schools have completed a section 175 survey,


demonstrating willingness to share information about safeguarding
arrangements. The safeguarding education adviser follows up when
schools have identified areas where they need to improve. For example,
some schools identified a need to support lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender (LGBT) pupils better and were given appropriate advice and
signposted to suitable resources.

Twice-yearly joint audits undertaken by the audit sub-committee have
generated learning, which is disseminated across the partnership and
used to inform future priorities. Topics have included peer-on-peer
domestic abuse and child sexual exploitation. Although the joint audit
process is good, difficulties in administrative support and some
methodological weaknesses have limited their learning, but these have
helped the board to improve its approach. Additional assurance of
practice is sought by board members visiting frontline services and
engaging in safeguarding conversations with practitioners. Visits to
social work teams, the multi-agency safeguarding hub and early help
teams have occurred, and findings have been disseminated
appropriately.


The board has undertaken SCRs in all instances where the criteria are
met and it is positive that none has been required since 2012. The board
is robust in checking that partner agencies continue to make progress
against the recommendations and makes good use of annual challenge
panels to do this. Significant improvements have occurred as a result of
SCRs, such as a new hospital childrens fracture clinic, new hospital
emergency department arrangements for identifying and responding to
pregnant women experiencing domestic abuse, the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office amending its guidance so that consular officers
respond better to situations in which children may be at risk, and there
are now good links between general practitioners and health visiting
services.


The SCR sub-committee gives careful consideration to all new referrals,
with two children considered in September 2015 and two considered in
March 2016. None of these led to SCRs, but the alternative courses of
action decided upon were appropriate. The sub-committee lacks
representation from the National Probation Service or the local
community rehabilitation company. However, some assurance that
communications channels are effective is provided, as one referral to the
sub-committee came from adult offender services as a serious further
offence notification.


The board has been proactive in inviting external scrutiny and challenge,
with the aim of improving its arrangements and effectiveness. This
includes inviting the councils audit service to review arrangements
published in October 2015, and a peer review took place earlier in the
year. These confirmed that the board was functioning well and identified


areas of improvement. Recommendations have been acted on swiftly to
further strengthen arrangements.

There is good oversight of early-help services, which have been
significantly reshaped. Early help was the topic of the boards
development session in January 2016. Further scrutiny has been
achieved by direct visits, an audit of early-help cases, and talking directly
with families in receipt of early-help services. Regular performance data
on early help will be presented to the board. However, this is currently
measuring quantitative data and does not yet include qualitative
measures.


There is strong oversight of operational responses to child sexual
exploitation and children who go missing. The child sexual exploitation
and missing sub-committee oversees multi-agency arrangements and
receives reports from the regular operational meetings. The chair, in his
substantive role, has regular meetings with other strategic leaders
involved in tackling child sexual exploitation, including the police
superintendent, the clinical commission groups safeguarding lead, the
service director for the locality hubs and a national charity. This helps to
keep the sub-committee abreast of rapidly developing issues. Members
have visited the specialist team and checked on individual case oversight
arrangements. Investigations into legacy cases which may have involved
child sexual exploitation have led to a number of perpetrators being
successfully prosecuted. There is a robust and tenacious approach to
licencing arrangements with private taxi drivers, culminating in a
significant number not having their licences renewed.


A wide variety of relevant training is provided. Its reach, in terms of the
number of practitioners who access training, is impressive and strongly
multi-agency. Training is rolled out in a variety of ways and includes
many events scheduled during the safeguarding week in February 2016.
Learning from SCRs informs the training plan appropriately. For example,
training regarding signs of injury in non-mobile infants has been
extensively rolled out to health professionals and others. The quality of
multi-agency training has been checked by direct observation from the
training coordinator. Information about partners future training needs
was gathered at a training challenge event in April 2016, to inform the
future training plan. While immediate feedback from attendees on
training courses is sought, the board recognises the need to improve its
understanding of longer-term impact. The current training strategy is
brief and lacks sufficient detail on what the desired outcomes of the
training are. Some areas have been under-developed because of lag
elsewhere. For example, training on neglect is planned, but this has not
occurred because the neglect strategy and toolkit have only recently
been agreed and finalised. Safeguarding training in the voluntary sector
does not benefit from formal accreditation for the deliverers or the


participants, and this is an area for development in the future.
(Recommendation)

The annual report (201415) is heavily orientated towards commenting
on childrens social care performance and less on partner agencies
performance. The board has suffered from a lack of regular, good-quality
performance data to measure services. Performance scorecards were
developed but these were not consistently well populated. Some data
from childrens social care is acknowledged by local authority
performance staff to be historically inaccurate because of softwaregenerated counting issues. This further undermines the confidence that
the board has had in the data it received. The board challenged agencies
about their data, but it remains a long-standing difficulty in childrens
social care. However, performance reporting arrangements have recently
improved, and there is now an agreed core multi-agency dataset, which
has been populated by all partner agencies. This is properly validated
and checked, illustrates performance over time and provides a narrative
explaining what the data means. This is a good achievement, but the
development period has been lengthy.


Young people heavily influence board activities, and this is a strength.
Examples include the production of a young person-friendly version of
the annual report, and young peoples participation on section 11
challenge panels. Board members have engaged in three listening to
you events since 2014, with a good range of young people, the vast
majority having experience of statutory services. An innovative young
people-led safeguarding charter has been developed, which sets out
clear promises about what the board will deliver for and to young people.
The charter, formally launched in May 2016, continues to be widely
disseminated, including in schools, and 21 young people have been
trained as peer facilitators to explain the charter to other young people.
Young people have been heavily involved in the design of other
important materials, such as posters and leaflets and including webbased materials targeted at young people to warn them of the dangers
inherent in social media, including sexting. Although the board has
engaged with young people well, engagement with the wider community
is less well embedded. Some work has been undertaken, for example
encouraging mosques to nominate safeguarding leads and to provide
safeguarding training. The board recognises the need to engage more
with the wider community.


Up-to-date, relevant and well-written safeguarding policies and
procedures are jointly commissioned with neighbouring boards in West
Yorkshire. They are easily accessible to professionals and the public.
Joint commissioning promotes consistency, which is particularly helpful
for agencies that work across local authority boundaries. Procedures take
account of local issues, such as the neglect strategy and toolkit, the
burns, bruises and scalds in non-mobile children protocol and guidance


for people who work with children in madrasas. Work is at an advanced
stage of development to improve the boards website further, which will
increase its accessibility and scope.

There is detailed and careful oversight of all child deaths that occur in
the local authority. The child death overview panel brings together
learning from all child deaths to inform future activities, such as safe
sleeping campaigns. The annual report is clear and detailed.


Private fostering arrangements are reported to the board. The most
recent annual report identifies strengths and weaknesses of current
arrangements and sets out appropriate improvement actions.


The board is appropriately appraised of the work being undertaken by
the designated officer, and this assures members that allegations against
those who work with children are being properly investigated. The board
receives sufficiently detailed annual reports from the designated officer.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 10 of Her Majestys Inspectors from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Susan Myers
Deputy lead inspector: Cath McEvoy/Ian Young
Team inspectors: Graham Reiter, Rachel Holden, Charles Searle, Sheena Doyle,
Ann-Marie Born, Joy Howick
Shadow inspectors: Stella Elliot
Senior data analyst: Claire Atkinson
Quality assurance manager: Sarah Urding


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


