Walsall Metropolitan Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 20 June to 13 July 2017
Report published: 4 September 2017

Childrens services in Walsall requires improvement to be good

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Services for children in Walsall are not yet good overall. Senior leaders have worked
intensely to improve the quality of childrens social care services and to ensure that
children receive the help and protection that they need. The director of childrens
services (DCS) and the senior management team provide visible leadership; they are
keenly focused on improving childrens services and the lives of vulnerable children
and families in Walsall. The local authority understands well its strengths and areas
for development. There are a number of wide-ranging initiatives, such as the
caseload promise, a comprehensive training and development offer and a clear
practice framework based on restorative practice. Progressively, this commitment is
strengthening practice and the quality of services. However, the necessary
improvements are not yet in place across all services and, as a result, some key
areas still require improvement to be good.
The local authority recognises the improvements that need to be made. Significant
corporate investment and increasing momentum are enhancing the workforce and
improving service quality through the practice uplift initiative. Restructuring to
smaller social work teams with lower supervision ratios, along with manageable
caseloads, is improving services for some children. Social workers, including newly
qualified social workers, are increasingly well trained and supported.
Embedding and sustaining positive change is undermined by the high turnover rate
of frontline social workers and first-line managers. This constant change, across
many service areas, continues to challenge the delivery of the local authoritys
ambitious improvement plan. Performance information available to frontline
managers has yet to become effective in some parts of the service. Without this level
of assurance at the front line of services, the local authority cannot be certain that it
has an accurate overview of every childs circumstances.
Good-quality staff supervision is not yet established across all teams. Inspectors saw
some case supervision records which critically evaluate progress by challenging and
providing detailed and purposeful actions. In many cases, management oversight is
too brief and the rationale for decision-making is not always evident on childrens
files. This means that it is not always possible to track key events and identify
evidence for decisions made. As a result, there is drift and delay in taking action
when risks increase or progress is limited or not sustained. This is more evident
where social workers have experienced a constant churn of team managers and have
high caseloads. In the past six months, supervision has been of a better quality.
Multidisciplinary teams across the borough deliver intensive early help services
successfully, providing support to a wide range of needs. Early help is making a
positive difference to childrens lives, but is not yet reducing the number of referrals
to childrens social care. Partners understanding of the thresholds of need is not
sufficiently established across all agencies. Although referrals from professionals are
timely, a high proportion of contacts either do not meet the threshold for statutory
intervention or are insufficiently detailed for managers to make a decision about the


next steps. Consequently, the local authority is not yet able to be effective in building
an accurate enough picture of childrens circumstances to make sure that they
always receive the right support for their needs. Social workers and managers do not
always sufficiently understand the impact of children living in situations of neglect,
domestic abuse and parental drug misuse and, in a small number of cases, children
have not received the necessary level of support. Work to protect children at risk of,
or experiencing sexual exploitation, is not rigorous enough. Risk assessments are
evident but vary in quality, and there is limited analysis. As a result, risks of sexual
exploitation to some children, including children looked after, are not responded to
effectively.
Some children who should be looked after experience delays when the threshold for
care has been met. A small number of children who are already looked after
experience delays in permanence planning. Friends and family fostering
arrangements are not always sufficiently assessed. This can leave children looked
after without the right level of support and protection. Service improvements are
clearly evident in adoption, where services are good. However, the local authority
does not yet routinely support children to live with their adopters at the earliest
opportunity through foster to adopt arrangements.
The majority of children are seen alone by their social workers and, in many cases,
social workers make the time to see children very regularly. Social work visits
routinely include direct work with children, using a range of interactive tools. Social
workers work hard to establish positive relationships with children, and for many
children, whose wishes and feelings influence their assessments and plans, this is a
strength. However, the high turnover of staff can hinder relationships, as some
children experience frequent changes of social workers and team managers.
Improvements in the role of the independent reviewing officer (IRO) add benefit for
the majority of children and assist them to understand their situations. However, not
enough children with a plan for permanence benefit from life story work.
Services for care leavers have improved significantly. However, they are not yet
good. Pathway plans do not support care leavers to develop important skills for their
independence. There have been significant gaps in the health provision for care
leavers. As a result, a high number of young people do not have a clear view of their
physical and emotional health needs or their health histories.
The scrutiny committee does not sufficiently understand and challenge the quality of
services for children effectively. Scrutiny does not challenge officers effectively about
the quality of services and the impact of social work practice. The corporate
parenting board is not yet evidencing the impact of its focus and challenge. It cannot
demonstrate how its work is influencing service delivery and outcomes for children
looked after and care leavers. The current arrangements for ensuring the
safeguarding of privately fostered children are poor; the local authority is not
meeting its statutory duties.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)



Executive summary


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. Three were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was published in August 2013. The local authority was judged to be
adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was published in July 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since September 2014.
 The chief executive has been in post since January 2008.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
September 2015.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 66,142 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Walsall. This is 24% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 30% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years old are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 20% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 19% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 31% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 24% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 18% (the national average is 16%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2017, 2,521 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 March 2017, 333 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 51 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 375
children (58 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 31 March 2017, four children lived in privately arranged fostering placements.
This is a reduction from eight at 31 March 2015.
 In the last two years prior to inspection, seven serious incident notifications have
been submitted to Ofsted and one serious case review has been completed but
not yet published.
 There were no serious case reviews ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2017, 648 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 99 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 620 (96 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016. Of this number,
authority area
 one child is placed in a residential special school which is out of the
authority area
 eight children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 in the last 12 months:
returned to be looked after
living
 no young people are living in houses of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that thresholds of need are understood and applied at every stage of
the childs journey.


Ensure that frontline management oversight of practice improves the quality of
decisions and the provision of help to children.


Improve the response to all children at risk of child sexual exploitation, making
sure that all assessments, safety plans and interventions are of a consistently
good quality.


Increase the number of care leavers who are in education, employment and
training.


Enable care leavers to have access to good physical and emotional health
services and ensure that they are able to understand their health histories.


Ensure that pathway plans set realistic targets for care leavers to support their
progress into a fulfilling life.


Ensure that managers and social workers have clear guidance and legal advice
when placing children in arrangements with friends and family, to ensure that
their needs are fully understood and met.


Ensure that managers and social workers correctly apply private fostering
regulations so that children who meet the criteria have thorough assessments
of their needs and that these include all required safeguarding checks.


Take steps to ensure that care plans for all children who have a plan for
permanence progress within the childs timescale to avoid children experiencing
delays, including the identification and support of children who could be placed
in foster to adopt arrangements.


Improve the delivery of life story work for children looked after.


Improve the functioning of both the scrutiny committee and corporate parenting
board to ensure that their work has a positive impact on improving services for
children and the outcomes that they achieve.


Ensure that frontline managers are supported to use performance information
so that they can manage and support good frontline practice effectively.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children in Walsall require improvement to be good. Sometimes,
children do not receive the support they need at the right time.
 Social workers know the children they are working with really well. They
understand childrens wishes and feelings. Sometimes, social workers take too
long to understand what children need to make things better.
 Children only come into care when they really need to. Social workers support
children by finding them homes where they can feel safe. For example,
children might go to live with their aunts, uncles or grandparents. Whenever
possible, brothers and sisters live together.
 Children who need permanent new homes, including children who have plans
for adoption, are supported well and most children live with their carers for a
long time.
 Not all children are helped to understand their situation through detailed
stories and pictures about their lives.
 Senior leaders, elected members and social workers make sure that children
and families have a say in the decisions made about them. They listen
carefully to what children say. When they can, they do things differently to
make things better.
 When children go missing from home, they have the opportunity to talk to
someone about what has happened and anything that is worrying them.
Information from these conversations is not always used to make sure that
children get the help they need.
 Managers make sure that everyone has a good understanding about children
being at risk of exploitation and why it is important to work together to keep
children safe. More needs to be done to make sure that everyone works well
together to support children.
 Most care leavers are happy and safe in their homes. Young people who have
left care do not always receive the support they need at the right time.
Managers and workers need to offer more help to young people to make sure
that they are healthy and attending training or education or have
employment.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Early help services and support to children and families in Walsall are well targeted
and coordinated effectively. Partners have worked purposefully to improve the
quality and effectiveness of early help services. Early help assessments and plans
are comprehensive. Effective services lead to improved outcomes for many
children and families.
Staff and partner agencies in the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) make
prompt and mainly appropriate decisions about the level of intervention required to
safeguard children. Nevertheless, information sharing in the MASH is not always
good enough. Although referrals from professionals are timely, a high proportion
either do not meet the threshold for statutory intervention or are insufficiently
detailed for managers to make a decision about the next steps.
Children who have the greatest welfare and safeguarding concerns generally
receive a service that meets their needs. Strategy meetings in the MASH are timely
and make good decisions. These lead to comprehensive child protection enquiries
and, when necessary, child protection conferences. However, situations of
unassessed risk, due to an absence of professional curiosity and over-reliance on
parental self-reporting, are common features in a small number of childrens cases.
Managers and social workers do not consistently apply the private fostering
regulations. This means that the local authority cannot be assured that private
fostering arrangements for children are appropriate. Furthermore, a very small
number of children who are living in private fostering arrangements should be
looked after.
The response to children who are at risk of sexual exploitation is not thorough
enough. Return home interviews are taking place when children go missing.
However, they are not always timely, and the quality needs to improve to ensure
that children receive appropriate support.
Caseloads are reducing to levels that are more manageable, but they remain too
high in some teams. Social workers visit children regularly; their views are sought
and listened to. However, there is not always sufficient understanding of the lived
experiences and impact of children living in situations of neglect, domestic abuse
and parental drug misuse. A recent restructuring of the safeguarding and family
support teams and the introduction of a social work model have enhanced the
quality of work undertaken. The quality of practice, although improving, is not yet
consistent. Arrangements for protecting children outside of office hours work well.
The local authority and partners have responded proactively and effectively to
children at risk of radicalisation.


Inspection findings

The local authority has improved its early help provision significantly, following
a comprehensive review and redesign of services, to ensure that children and
families receive the right interventions at the right time. Early help services
are fully incorporated into the locality teams. Family support and youth
support workers work closely with schools and health professionals. As a
result, children and families benefit from a range of well-coordinated services
that provide effective targeted interventions, which improve outcomes for
many children.


The early help hub provides good advice and support for professionals to
complete assessments. Multidisciplinary teams across the borough deliver
successful intensive early help. During 201617, they have supported a
significant number of children and families who have a wide range of needs,
including those associated with domestic abuse, behavioural issues and
parental mental ill health. Early help assessments and plans are mostly of
good quality. Decisions to step down from statutory services to early
intervention services are largely appropriate. The local authority evaluates the
impact of early help through an effective quality assurance process informed
by feedback from children and parents. This is making a positive difference to
childrens lives, but is not yet reducing the number of referrals to childrens
social care.


When children are in need of help and protection, the MASH is the central
point of contact for members of the public and professionals. Although
prompt, the screening of contacts and referrals by managers is not
consistently thorough. Referrals are not always supported by good enough
information sharing from partners. Inspectors saw a small number of referrals
which had been closed before all relevant information to support effective
decision-making on the next steps had been gathered and analysed. Parental
consent to share information is appropriately considered and sought.


Good arrangements are in place to ensure that children are protected outside
of daytime hours. In cases sampled by inspectors, actions taken by out-ofhours staff were promptly communicated to daytime services, ensuring that
children received a seamless service.


Partners understanding of the thresholds of need is not sufficiently
established across all agencies. During 201617, contacts to the MASH
increased by 23%. Despite extensive training, many contacts do not meet the
threshold for statutory intervention. Too many multi-agency referral forms and
police notifications contain insufficient detail. All of these factors place
significant pressure on the MASH and result in staff spending unnecessary
time screening and chasing information, which blurs effective decision-making.
Consequently, some children experience an insufficient response to their
needs when they first come to the attention of childrens social care.
(Recommendation)



When child protection concerns arise, the vast majority of children, including
those who have disabilities, receive a swift service. Strategy discussions or
meetings held in the MASH are timely, with relevant multi-agency attendance,
and good decisions are made, reducing risks to children. Child protection
enquiries are, in the main, comprehensive and, when necessary, lead to initial
child protection conferences.


Inspectors identified a small number of children receiving statutory
intervention where drift and delay was evident. These children experienced
delays in the local authority taking decisive child protection action through the
use of pre-proceedings under the Public Law Outline (PLO). These deficits in
practice concur with the findings of the local authoritys review, in May 2017,
of 258 children in need who were open to the safeguarding and family support
teams. Senior leaders accepted inspectors concerns and took immediate
action to strengthen intervention, to make sure that these children received
the right level of help to meet their needs.


Social workers see children regularly and alone when appropriate. Childcentred direct work is effective. Inspectors saw some good examples of
sensitive engagement with disabled children that is ensuring that their voice,
opinions and feelings are heard. Social workers make strong efforts to build
trusting relationships with children, but the high turnover of staff makes this
difficult, as children experience frequent changes of social workers and
managers.


Inspectors saw some good examples of assessments, including pre-birth
assessments, with sound analysis of risk. Overall, assessments are timely and
completed in accordance with the needs of children, but the quality is not
consistently good. Many children have assessments that capture their voice
and history. However, they are not yet effective in gaining an accurate
enough picture of childrens circumstances, so that children receive the right
support for their needs. Weaknesses include an insufficient consideration of
the impact of culture, of equality and diversity. Assessments often lack the
views of absent fathers and other significant adults. Very few assessments are
informed by research. (Recommendation)


A high proportion of assessments (60%) lead to no further action by childrens
social care. Audit work has concluded that the thresholds to progress to
assessments are appropriate. This is in line with what inspectors found in
individual childrens cases sampled. Inspectors found that assessments that
conclude with no further action are linked to the insufficient detail found in
referrals from partner agencies.


The vast majority of partner agencies attendance at child protection and core
group meetings is good. Police attendance at initial child protection
conferences is particularly low (44%), although the police do provide written
reports. Child protection chairs use the local authoritys recently implemented
model of social work. This is helping children and family members to engage
better with professionals, to understand the seriousness of concerns and to


contribute to their own plans. However, few children attend their conferences.
Advocacy is not provided to children effectively to give them the time and
space to talk to someone about their situation, independent of their social
worker and outside of their family. Last year, only a very small number of
children benefited from advocacy support.

Overall, the quality of child protection and child in need plans requires
strengthening so that they are child-centred and have realistic and measurable
outcomes. Due to delays in the completion of child protection conference and
core group minutes, some parents do not receive a timely record of what they
need to do. In the event of circumstances changing, contingency planning is
generic, with statements of seeking legal advice, rather than being specific
about exactly what the outcome might be if a plan is not successful.


Neglect is a major factor for children in Walsall, and 70% of children are
subject to a child protection plan under this category. Social workers are not
yet intervening effectively at an early enough stage. Consequently, some
children are not getting the vital support and protection they need. Senior
leaders have recently taken action and are training staff to equip them with
the right tools to identify and respond effectively to neglect. Despite the
prevalence, the local authority and the LSCB have been slow to take decisive
action, and the draft neglect strategy is yet to be approved.


The quality of management oversight and supervision is not yet consistently
good. As a result, there is sometimes drift and delay in taking action when
risks increase or progress is limited or not sustained. This is more evident
when social workers have experienced a constant churn of team managers
and have high caseloads. The local authoritys own audits have identified this
shortfall in practice. In the past six months, supervision has been of a better
quality. (Recommendation)


Managers and social workers understanding of private fostering regulations is
inconsistent. In the cases of three of the four children deemed to be living in
private fostering arrangements, the local authority had been explicit in making
the arrangement. Therefore, the local authority should have made a decision
to look after these children. Notifications from partner agencies are low.
Safeguarding checks of identified carers are not always completed and the
quality of assessments and planning for children is weak and not compliant
with statutory guidance. (Recommendation)


Children living in families where domestic abuse is a feature are appropriately
referred to multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARACs). Partner
agencies, including a senior practitioner from childrens social care, regularly
attend MARACs to share information and consider risk. Specialist services,
such as perpetrator programmes and drug and alcohol programmes, help
parents to keep their children safe from harm. Inspectors who sampled
childrens cases where domestic abuse was a significant factor found that
some actions agreed at MARAC had not been followed up, resulting in a lessthan-good service for some children.



Work to protect children at risk of or experiencing sexual exploitation is not
rigorous enough. Risk assessments are evident but vary in quality, with limited
analysis or safety planning. An independent reviewing officer (IRO) has been
appointed to chair all multi-agency sexual exploitation (MASE) meetings, and
this is beginning to improve the quality of information sharing and action
planning. However, decisions are not always translated into written safety
plans. Consequently, risks to some children continue to increase.
(Recommendation)


When children return home having gone missing, a commissioned service
undertakes return home interviews to gain information about their reasons for
going missing. The timeliness and quality of return interviews is variable, with
only 53% of interviews completed within 72 hours (JanuaryMarch 2017).
Inspectors sampled a number of interview records and found that some
important information had not been explored sufficiently, so that subsequent
plans to reduce risks could be more effective. There are significant delays in
administrators uploading return home interviews onto the electronic social
care record. In some cases, these delays can be up to three months. This
means that information from interviews is not always readily available to social
workers and the emergency duty team. This limits subsequent planning and
risk management. Senior leaders have already taken action to remedy this,
but it is too early to demonstrate impact.


Good arrangements are in place to monitor children who are electively home
educated and those who go missing from education. The designated teacher
is in contact with all of the families of children who are electively home
educated and carries out regular and comprehensive reviews to track each
childs progress. A new Fair Access panel ensures that school placements are
found quickly and children experience smooth transitions. Children in
alternative provision are monitored effectively to ensure that they receive a
good education.


Walsall is a tier 2 Prevent duty priority area and has a full-time Prevent duty
coordinator. The local authority and partners respond well to children at risk
of radicalisation. A Prevent duty action plan is in place, and a senior officer in
the local authority oversees and chairs the Channel panel, which is well
attended by partner agencies. Awareness of, and the response to children at
risk of radicalisation are well established and effective. Inspectors saw good
examples of assessments and developing plans to respond to identified risks.
The local authority and partners respond appropriately to trafficked children.
This includes the appropriate use of the national referral mechanism to notify
the national crime agency of children at risk of trafficking.


Multi-agency awareness raising of the risk of female genital mutilation has
taken place. Increased knowledge has led to seven referrals since February
over-reliance on parents self-reporting rather than more in-depth
assessments of risk, such as the likelihood of parents returning to home
countries.



Good arrangements are in place for young people aged 16 to 17 years who
become homeless. Assessments take place swiftly and, if young people are
unable to return home, lead to appropriate accommodation, including host
family arrangements. When necessary, homeless young people become
looked after by the local authority.


The designated officer manages and responds effectively to allegations
regarding adults in a position of trust. The role of the designated officer is
understood by referring agencies and thresholds for referrals are well applied.
The designated officer coordinates investigations efficiently to make sure that
children are protected.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
The vast majority of children looked after live in good-quality foster homes. Efforts
to support children to remain with their birth families are not always successful, as
the local authority does not have an accurate overview of the effectiveness of the
edge of care service. Consequently, a small number of children remain on the edge
of care for too long, delaying their opportunities to secure timely permanence.
Some children experience delays in becoming looked after when the threshold for
care has been met. As a result, a small number of children remain living with their
birth families when they should be looked after by the local authority.
The local authority continues to work hard to ensure that children looked after
achieve permanence. Children who have a plan for adoption are swiftly identified,
matched and placed with their adoptive families. More children could benefit
through foster to adopt arrangements. Brothers and sisters live together
successfully in long-term homes.
There are continuing efforts to support foster carers to seek alternative orders,
resulting in a number of children leaving care appropriately. The local authority
needs to assure itself that all children, including children at risk of, or subject to
sexual exploitation, who should be looked after, are identified swiftly to reduce
drift and delay.
Children looked after are seen regularly and they are seen alone by their social
workers. Some children experience too many changes in social workers. These
changes do not provide children with the stability that they need to understand
their circumstances. Care plans are updated at children looked after reviews.
However, they are rarely informed by assessments. As a result, social workers and
carers cannot always be assured that childrens needs are fully understood and
met. Many children know their IROs well, and this provides valuable continuity.
Children do not always fully understand why they are looked after, as life story
work is not routinely completed.
Personal education plans are not consistently challenging, specific and understood by
children and their carers. These plans are not supporting all children to improve their
educational outcomes.
Pathway plans do not support care leavers in developing important skills for their
independence, training or employment. A high number of young people do not
have a clear view of their emotional and physical health needs or their health
histories.


Inspection findings

Some children experience delays in becoming looked after when the threshold
for care has been met. As a result, a small number of children remain living
with their birth families when they should be looked after by the local
authority. Additionally, a small number of children who are already looked
after experience drift in permanence planning due to delays in initiating care
proceedings. The recent addition of the permanence coordinator role is now
providing the local authority with an improved oversight of children who are
subject to pre-proceedings. However, a small number of children continue to
experience drift and delay, including children at risk of, or subject to, child
sexual exploitation. (Recommendation)


The edge of care service provides good support to a small number of children,
enabling them to remain with their birth families. Supported by the edge of
care service, safe and sustainable arrangements are in place for children who
return home, including those for whom care orders are discharged. This
positive work has resulted in the number of children who return to care
reducing from 9% to 4% in the last year. However, the number of children
coming into care continues to rise, and the local authority does not yet have
an accurate overview of the overall effectiveness of the edge of care service.
Consequently, the local authority cannot assure itself that all children are
benefiting as they should. Senior leaders have recognised the need for
improvements, and a new model for edge of care services is being developed.


Legal advice and support are available to practitioners. However, some social
workers and their managers are unsure of the local authoritys family and
friends policy. This means that a small number of children live in
arrangements that are insufficiently assessed and the necessary safeguarding
checks are not completed. As a result, family and friends carers do not always
have the right level of assessment and support when children first become
looked after. This leaves some children who are unable to live with their
parents without the right level of protection through a formal arrangement.
(Recommendation)


Senior leaders have established a strong culture of early permanence and
parallel planning with family and friends carers. Many are supported to apply
for alternative court orders, such as special guardianship orders. Outcomes for
children are good, and there are a very low number of disruptions. The local
authority positively supports children who become subject to special
guardianship, by securing their financial leaving care entitlements, thus
providing additional support as they enter adulthood.


Care proceedings are, on average, completed within the 26-week timeframe.
For children who have plans for adoption, timescales are often as short as 14
weeks, supporting timely adoption planning. The local authority has positive
relationships with the judiciary and the Child and Family Court Advisory and
Support Service (Cafcass). Care proceedings work is of good quality. Parenting
assessments and viability assessments are of sufficient quality to assist with


decision-making. However, for a small number of children, social work
evidence does not secure the support of the court, and this results in
unnecessary delay or changes in care plans.

The number of children looked after under section 20 of the Children Act 1989
(voluntary agreements with parents), is significantly lower than the national
average. Despite this positive position, the local authority has reviewed the
appropriateness of all section 20 arrangements. This review has resulted in
care orders being sought for a small number of children. Seven per cent of
children subject to care orders live with their parents. A strategic drive to
discharge these care orders safely is under way, and there is evidence of good
outcomes.


The permanence panel is responsible for tracking the progress for children still
waiting for permanence. For some children, permanence is achieved by
default and not as a result of care planning driven by children looked after
reviews and the permanence panel. For other children, who are living in their
permanent homes, there has been significant drift to secure formal approval
from the permanence panel. The local authority acknowledges that more
children will benefit from living in permanent care arrangements. Plans are
under way to formally match a number of children to their foster carers. This
means that a greater number of children now have the opportunity to achieve
psychological permanence.


The majority of children are seen alone by their social workers and, in many
cases, more often than statutory requirements. Social work visits routinely
include direct work with children. Social workers use a range of interactive
tools. Well-written later life letters are provided for some children in long-term
foster care. However, not enough children with a plan other than adoption
benefit from life story work, despite training for social workers being
completed. (Recommendation)


When children looked after are at risk of child sexual exploitation, the
response to risk is not always effective. For a very small minority of children in
care, arrangements to reduce the risks of sexual exploitation are not robust
enough. In a small number of examples raised with the local authority during
the inspection, children had suffered significant harm. Children who are placed
in secure accommodation respond well to the care they receive, and risks of
harm are reduced. Very few children looked after come to the attention of the
police and youth offending services.


When children go missing from care, return home interviews do not always
sufficiently consider risks. For example, when experimentation with drugs is
recorded, there is a lack of follow-up, in order to respond to, and thus seek to,
reduce the risk. The completion and impact of return home interviews for
children looked after are not sufficiently tracked by the local authority.
Consequently, risk factors are not fully understood.



Children who have specialist needs benefit from a wide range of support,
which includes interventions to tackle gang affiliation. The implementation of
the fostering, looked-after and adoption supporting hub (FLASH) is a strength.
While it is too early to identify any direct impact for children, inspectors saw
evidence of effective work with foster carers and adopters to support
placement stability. However, not all foster carers are aware of the service.
Access to other emotional health services can be delayed, and there is a
typical wait of eight weeks for an initial appointment following assessment.
This means that children are waiting too long to have their emotional health
and well-being needs assessed and met.


Appropriate arrangements are established to offer initial and review health
assessments. Improvements in timely completion of health assessments have
been sustained. Support for emotional health and well-being are not always
available. While strength and difficulties questionnaires are now completed for
most children, inspectors saw limited evidence that they are used to inform
childrens care and health reviews.


Care plans do not always reflect the current arrangements for the child, and
children are not always clear about what their care plans mean. Contingency
plans lack detail. Care plans completed in the corporate parenting service are
stronger and they are routinely updated for looked after reviews. However,
assessments are not routinely completed for children looked after to fully
understand childrens changing needs. As a result, care plans are not fully
reflective of the current situation.


The vast majority of children live in settled homes with foster carers who are
well supported and well trained. Most children live within a 20-mile radius of
their family home. Social workers consider carefully diversity issues, including
childrens culture, beliefs and backgrounds, to promote positive matches to
their foster carers. Children placed outside of the council area have access to
advocacy services but are not always able to access local mental health
services in a timely way.


Brothers and sisters live together routinely and are only placed apart when
this in their best interests. Family contact plans are carefully thought out, and
contact is a positive experience for children, who benefit greatly.


Most children experience stability with their foster carers. A very small number
of children have a number of unplanned moves. As a result, these children do
not have the opportunity to build stable and enduring relationships with their
carers. Decisions to move children are not routinely informed by assessments.
Consequently, the local authority cannot always evidence whether placement
moves are in the childs best interest.


Foster carer recruitment is a key priority for the local authority. A dedicated
recruitment manager is working hard to increase the availability of carers,
particularly for brothers and sisters, for older children and for children who
have complex needs. Foster carers receive good support and they have access


to a wide range of training. The local fostering association is very active and
contributes effectively to the development of the fostering service.

The virtual school knows its children well. The head of the virtual school
knows the current progress and achievements of each child looked after. The
pupil premium is used effectively. Teachers have funded after-school clubs,
one-to-one support and resources for use at home to help with reading.


The quality of personal education plans needs to improve to be more
consistent. Social workers, schoolteachers and the virtual school do not always
ensure that all targets in these plans are challenging, specific and understood
by the child and their carers.


The vast majority of children looked after attend schools judged to be good or
better. Decisions about moving a child whose school is judged to be less than
good are made on an individual basis with the child and carers involved.


School attendance for children looked after is good. Educational attainment at
key stage 1 has improved significantly during the last year and is better than
that of other children looked after in England. Children at key stage 2 do not
perform as well. The provisional results for this year show an improvement.
Educational attainment for children at key stage 4 needs to improve, as
children on average achieve one grade lower than expected.


Children are encouraged to access a wide range of leisure activities and they
are supported to maintain positive links with their friendship groups. No
children have changed school as a result of becoming looked after during the
last 12 months.


Children are given information about their rights and entitlements when they
become looked after, including how to make a complaint. Young people have
access to advocacy through a commissioned arrangement. Forty-four children
looked after and care leavers have accessed advocacy in the last year. This
has supported children to influence important decisions about their lives.


The vast majority of children participate in their looked-after reviews or have
their views represented. IROs maintain positive relationships with a small
number of children who have experienced a number of changes of social
worker, helping them to maintain their progress. Inspectors saw many
examples of robust challenge by IROs. However, for a small number of
children, despite challenge, there continues to be drift and delay in the
progress of their care plans. (Recommendation)


Children looked after regularly meet with elected members and senior leaders.
The chair of the corporate parenting board is ambitious for children looked
after and care leavers. There are a number of initiatives in place to champion
children looked after and care leavers. However, the corporate parenting
board has yet to demonstrate the effective challenge of partners to improve
outcomes for all children looked after and care leavers.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

Securing permanence through adoption for children in Walsall is a key priority
for the local authority. Resources have been strengthened to support this
priority by the new post of a permanence coordinator, and an additional family
finder based in the adoption service. Improved systems and processes identify
children for whom adoption might be the plan sooner; these include the
effective use of early alerts raised by IROs during initial children looked after
reviews. Additionally, the permanence coordinator attends the PLO panels to
ensure swift identification of potential adoption plans. As a result, the
adoption service has a strong oversight of children who may benefit from
permanence through adoption. Consequently, they are able to plan at an early
stage for children, prior to their placement order being granted.


The adoption managers have a good knowledge of their service. They
understand service strengths, priorities and the areas for improvement.
Managers acknowledge that permanence planning was previously not
managed with the urgency and pace required. To remedy this, the
permanence panel was introduced in January 2016. The panel has been
effective and has increased the pace of children matched to their adopters.


Social work practice in the adoption service is good. Direct work with children
is child-centred, focuses on meeting needs and is undertaken at the childs
pace. Matching considers the childs needs, age and understanding. This is
supported by a stable and knowledgeable adoption workforce, which works
hard to secure adoptive homes. Inspectors saw evidence of tenacious practice
for harder-to-place children and a clear senior leadership direction that
recognises that doing the right thing for children is a priority for the service.


Although timeliness in achieving adoption is above the government threshold,
it is an improving picture. The local authority has a strong commitment to
realising adoption plans. This can take longer to achieve for some children.
The local authority knows the reasons for these delays, and every child is
tracked closely to make sure that they do not wait longer than is necessary to
be adopted. The service has set an ambitious target of 53 adoptions for 2017


During 201516, 60 children had a plan for adoption. This is a significant
increase from 25 children in 201415. Of these, the majority were matched
and placed within six months of their adoption decision. All 60 children have
achieved adoption, and only two children waited for longer than 12 months.
This good performance demonstrates the persistence and tenacity of the local
authority to identify prospective adopters. A small number of children and
adopters are waiting for adoption. Inspectors sampled some of these cases
and confirmed that these children were not waiting unnecessarily, and that


the local authority is giving careful consideration to matching, ensuring
effective outcomes.

Children are placed successfully with their brothers and sisters where it is in
their best interests. The local authority offers a strong response to children
who have additional or complex needs. Despite this, a very small number of
disabled children have a plan of adoption. The local authority has interrogated
the reasons for this and has satisfied itself that all children, where appropriate,
are considered for adoption.


The process and systems for family finding are clear and effective. As soon as
family finding staff are made aware of a plan for adoption, the childs social
worker and the family finder meet to discuss the plan. Monthly family finding
meetings make sure that adoption social workers are provided with up-to-date
profiles of children and adopters. The local authority has systematically
considered prospective adopters for the majority of these children, including
those who have not yet completed care proceedings. The Black Country
consortium and the national register are used for those children who cannot
be suitably matched to Walsall adopters. Adopters are referred to the adoption
register within timescales.


The adoption service has targeted the recruitment of adopters specifically to
increase adopters for brothers and sisters, older children and children who
have complex needs. The local authority is becoming increasingly successful in
recruiting a range of adopters who reflect the diversity of the local community.
Black and minority ethnic adopters account for 13% of adopters recruited in


Childrens profiles are very well prepared and are used to support the
identification of adopters, providing the best opportunity for matching children
to the right adopters. Regular activity days successfully provide the adoption
services with the opportunity to match children to prospective adopters who
may not have been considered.


The local authority does not yet routinely support children to live with their
adopters at the earliest opportunity through foster to adopt arrangements.
The local authority knows that this is an area of development and
acknowledges that the option of foster to adopt should be explored in greater
detail with adopters during their assessment. (Recommendation)


Good-quality direct work prepares children well for adoption. This work is
sensitive and thoughtful. Inspectors saw good examples of children being
prepared for placement, including a child who had experienced previous
unsuccessful introductions to adopters. Children who are placed for adoption
have every opportunity to understand their family history and identity through
timely and carefully considered life story work.



Children who are adopted experience family stability. In the last three years,
there has been only one adoption disruption. This demonstrates that matching
is robust and childrens needs are very carefully considered.


Adopters told inspectors that, overall, they have, and continue to have,
positive help from the adoption service, including excellent guidance from the
adoption support service. They described timely, respectful, insightful
recruitment, training and assessment, swift matching and placing of children,
and effective move-on arrangements from foster carers.


The adoption panel is chaired well. Appropriate processes are in place to
consider recommendations for approval and matching. The panel membership
includes people from diverse sections of the community in terms of gender,
age and ethnicity, as well as adopters, adoptees and an elected member. As
part of its quality assurance remit, the panel closely scrutinises adopter
assessments and matching documents. From this scrutiny, the panel has
identified that the quality of child permanence reports needs to improve. In
response, the local authority has held child permanence training for social
workers, which has improved the quality of many child permanence reports.
Agency decisions are appropriate and timely.


Adoptive families are informed about their adoption entitlements and they are
offered an annual post-adoption review. The recommendations leading from
adoption support assessments are clear. A good range of support, including
therapeutic support, group work for teenagers and adoptive fathers, and
therapeutic life story work is available. Good use is made of the adoption
support fund. There is a wide range of timely services available to support
adoptive families, including the FLASH service both pre-placement and postadoption.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement

The vast majority of care leavers feel safe in their homes. When young people
state that they do not feel safe, the local authority takes action to ensure their
safety and well-being. Personal advisers provide good support to the small
number of care leavers who are in prison and help them to prepare for their
release. Managers and personal advisers are aware of children looked after
who may be at risk of child sexual exploitation. The local authority has
commissioned a service that offers a weekly drop-in service for care leavers to
discuss and tackle drug and alcohol concerns. Personal advisers support care
leavers who are pregnant through teenage parents services and referrals to
early help services.



Personal advisers, social workers and young people do not use pathway
planning effectively to support care leavers to develop important skills for their
independence, training or employment. Some personal advisers do not set
challenging enough targets for care leavers, and this causes them to make
slow progress. For example, an adviser will highlight a need for a young
person to improve their budgeting skills but does not set out clear actions as
to how this can be achieved. The local authority is aware that pathway plans
are not popular with young people and it is looking at alternatives that are
more appropriate. (Recommendation)


The health provision for care leavers needs to improve. Most care leavers
have a doctor, dentist and optician, but not all do. Significant gaps in the
health provision for care leavers last year, due to the health adviser not being
available, have resulted in a large number of young people who do not have a
clear view of their health needs and their health histories.


The children looked after nurse is also working with 13 care leavers in addition
to her own duties. The local authority knows that more care leavers require
health guidance and support. There are plans to open a drop-in service for
care leavers soon.


The local authority, in conjunction with the Healthcare Trust, has recently
launched a health booklet to document care leavers health histories.
However, only a few young people have these and, therefore, many do not
have a clear understanding of their health histories. Personal advisers support
young people well to obtain their passports, birth certificates and other
important documents. Young people cannot easily access mental health
services. Managers recognise a need for a more coordinated approach,
especially for care leavers who are 17 years old and over and who cannot
routinely access emotional health and well-being services. (Recommendation)


Young people have good relationships with their personal advisers, although
they have a varied experience when trying to contact them. Inspectors
highlighted this shortfall during the inspection. The local authority took
immediate action to ensure that all care leavers had the contact details of
their personal advisers. In addition, the telephone system in the care leavers
hub has been improved to ensure that care leavers receive a timely response
when they need support.


Care leavers are engaged in shaping the service through the New Belongings
group and other forums. Young people are proud of the care leavers service;
they are pleased that it is now in a new building and have plans for its
renovation. Managers and personal advisers listen and discuss ideas with their
young people, and these are resulting in positive service developments for
care leavers.


Personal advisers support young people to gain independence with varying
degrees of success. The local authority has plans to widen the skills and


knowledge base of all personal advisers, so that all young people receive a
consistent and holistic leaving care offer.

Too many care leavers are not in education, employment or training. This is
recognised by managers as an area for improvement. Impact workers have
been employed recently to support young people to make sure that they
understand the importance of being in education, employment or training. A
not in education, employment or training (NEET) action group meets monthly
to discuss each young person, to ensure that plans are in place and personal
advisers, through providing information, advice and guidance, are supporting
the young people effectively. (Recommendation)


The local authority has provided work experience placements within the
council for 20 care leavers this year. This is a good example of the corporate
commitment to care leavers. Additionally, the local authority has one
apprentice, and two care leavers are in the process of securing full-time
employment with the council. A number of local authority full-time staff are
care leavers. Managers are working hard to increase the number of work
experience and apprenticeship places for these young people in the local area,
as these are extremely low. The local authority successfully ran the annual
take-over day in 2016, providing care leavers with further opportunities to
experience the workplace.


Seven young people are at university and 10 more are hoping to start in
September. Care leavers at university receive good support. Thirty-one young
people are in further education; but more young people need to be
encouraged into education, training and employment to prepare them for their
futures.


The vast majority of care leavers live in suitable accommodation, providing
them with safe and stable homes. The care leavers service does not use
houses of multiple occupancy or bed and breakfast accommodation. Managers
and personal advisers have recruited host families from a variety of diverse
backgrounds. Personal advisers use these families effectively to ensure that
care leavers have good access to an appropriate and supportive home
environment. Twenty-one young people are living with their foster carers in
staying put arrangements, and a large majority of young people are
successfully living independently.


Personal advisers support young people effectively when their tenancies are at
risk. No care leaver has had a tenancy breakdown or eviction this year; this is
good practice.


Care leavers know about their entitlements. Personal advisers give each care
leaver a booklet, which details their entitlements. They also spend time with
them to help them to access the support they require. Young people who met
with inspectors gave examples of support, such as birthday money, startingup grants, staying-put grants and support financially when going to university.



With support from personal advisers, care leavers organise an annual
celebration event. This year, it will take place at a venue chosen by children
looked after and care leavers. Personal advisers, managers and elected
members join together to celebrate young peoples successes in academic
achievements, overcoming personal obstacles, such as taking medication
regularly, and sporting achievements. Children looked after and care leavers
value this event, and are very complimentary about the support they receive
for this.


The care leaver service has gone through significant change in the last three
months. Both of the leaving care managers know their service extremely well
and are working to a clear action plan for improvement. However, many of
these plans are new and are not yet fully established within the service.
Consequently, good services and support are not yet in place for all care
leavers.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Senior leaders and elected members have committed time, energy and investment
to improve the lives of vulnerable children and families. The DCS and the senior
management teams leadership are influencing positive services and improving
outcomes for many children. Ambitious investment in the workforce and a clear
action plan of improvement are positively influencing the quality of decisions and
provision of help to children and young people in some parts of the service.
However, there are some key areas where there is insufficient evidence of
sustained and positive change. These include the application of thresholds at every
stage of the childs journey, the understanding and use of the private fostering
regulations, the response to child sexual exploitation and the support to care
leavers who are not in education, training or employment. Although caseloads
have reduced overall, caseloads are still too high in some parts of the service.
Good-quality staff supervision is not yet consistently practised across all teams.
The local authority engages well with the Health and Wellbeing Board. This has
helped to ensure a strong focus on vulnerable children in the overarching Walsall
plan. Consequently, strategies such as the Walsall Children and Young Peoples
Mental Health and Wellbeing Strategy Transformation Action Plan for 20162021
and domestic violence services have been developed. The placement sufficiency
strategy is regularly updated to ensure sufficient resources to meet childrens
needs.
A pragmatic and concerted approach to reviewing services systematically is
resulting in positive changes. However, challenges in the turnover of social workers
and first-line managers continue to impact negatively on the continuity of services
to children. The local authority has a good understanding of this and has
comprehensive arrangements to improve the stability of its workforce. A recent
restructuring of the safeguarding and family support teams, and the introduction
of a social work model of managing risk, have enhanced the quality of work
undertaken. Plans are in place to establish the model of social work practice across
all social work services. The social work and early help academy is a notable
strength to develop social workers.
Despite having access to reports and data, elected members do not have a strong
enough understanding of service quality and the impact for children. The corporate
parenting board has been relaunched, but does not yet have sufficient overview.
Arrangements for enabling children to have an influential voice in service
development and improvement need to be strengthened.


Inspection findings

Senior leaders and elected members provide visible leadership, which is
focused on improving childrens services and the lives of vulnerable children
and families in Walsall. Good communication, supported by detailed
operational and strategic plans, feeds into the overarching strategic Walsall
plan. This plan is well coordinated, bringing together the activity of seven
boards. Together, supported by an annual partnership event, boards ensure a
well-resourced and ambitious focus on service improvement.


Improvements are clearly evident in adoption, where services are good. Other
service areas are improving. These include early help, the MASH, assessment
timeliness, children being seen and their views being understood, and reviews
of children looked after. Increasing momentum is enhancing the workforce
and improving service quality through the childrens services practice uplift
initiative. Restructuring to smaller teams with lower supervision ratios, along
with manageable caseloads, is starting to support improved social work
practice. Leaders, including elected members, are fully engaged and well
informed, sharing a strong and committed focus on prioritising services to
improve the lives of vulnerable children and families.


However, there are key areas that have not yet achieved sufficient impact on
service quality. These include the application of thresholds, private fostering,
the response to child sexual exploitation and the support to care leavers who
are not in education, training or employment.


Management oversight through supervision has improved, especially over the
past six months. Inspectors saw some case supervision which critically
evaluated progress; it was challenging and detailed, with purposeful actions.
However, in many cases, management oversight is too brief and the rationale
for decision-making is not always evident on childrens files. This means that it
is not always possible to track key events and identify evidence for decisions
made. Good-quality staff supervision is not yet consistently practised across all
teams. (Recommendation)


The local authority has made effective use of detailed information about its
local communities, including children looked after, care leavers and those in
need of help, care and protection. The DCS is well engaged with the Health
and Wellbeing Board, which has prioritised vulnerable children and families,
resulting in increased resources. Membership and governance changes have
ensured senior membership across statutory agencies as well as the voluntary
sector, resulting in commissioning plans aligning with other agency plans.


The joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA) includes detailed assessments
that are used to inform commissioning plans and priorities. For example, the
range of services has increased for those experiencing domestic violence, and
the childrens and adolescents mental health transformation strategy has
been established. Service reviews are up to date and subject to regular annual
review. The placement sufficiency strategy is updated annually. Gaps in


service are clearly identified, resulting in plans to address them, such as the
recruitment of more local foster carers.

The partnership and services are not yet delivering an effective enough
operational response to child sexual exploitation. Progress has not been
sufficient, following the July 2016 Local Government Association (LGA) child
sexual exploitation peer review. Inspectors saw a small number of children,
including children looked after, for whom risks have escalated. There is not
yet an effective visible operational lead ensuring outcomes or good practice
regarding child sexual exploitation. (Recommendation)


The scrutiny committee, while challenging of process and compliance, does
not sufficiently understand and challenge the quality of services for children
effectively. For example, scrutiny of early help focuses on service provision
rather than quality and outcomes for children. (Recommendation)

functioning, has not yet achieved its priorities. Membership is representative
of the wider partnership. Of particular note, a young person is vice-chair of
the board. Although young people are represented, their number has been
low and the local authority recognises the need to improve young peoples
participation. The board is not yet evidencing the impact of its focus and
challenge and cannot demonstrate how its work is influencing service delivery
and outcomes for children. (Recommendation)
service quality. They know where performance is meeting its standards and
where it needs to be developed. For example, the DCS recognised the need to
improve supervision and management oversight. Compliance has now
improved substantially. A monthly performance board systematically considers
data. Key themes arising from performance data are cascaded via regular
engagement with staff, using a range of communication. A triangulated
approach, which includes a comprehensive audit programme, a practice
improvement forum, learning from complaints and compliments, celebration
events and walking the floor by senior leaders, ensures an effective
understanding of service quality.
seen regularly and in accordance with their plans. Direct work with children is
a strength, and this good practice is well established in many areas. However,
performance information available to frontline managers is not yet consistently
used across the service. Without this level of assurance at the service front
line, the local authority cannot be assured that it has an accurate overview of
every childs circumstances. (Recommendation)
assessment timeliness, children seen and case supervision, the local
authoritys own audits have reflected levels of service quality found during this
inspection. Local authority audits have highlighted the need to develop


practice further, to improve management oversight and case direction, and to
understand and apply thresholds consistently. Additionally, audits have shown
that risk analysis, including child sexual exploitation and episodes of going
missing, and the quality of care planning, including planning for young people
leaving care, all need to be improved.
have been identified, undertaken a series of robust service reviews. Of
particular note is the review of 1,000 early help cases, which confirmed to the
local authority and partners that children are benefiting effectively from early
help and prevention services. There are well-advanced action plans to address
the findings of the children in need review and the review of the care leavers
service. As a result, senior leaders are well informed about areas of the
service which do not yet meet their practice standards.
action to rectify these, for example by a significant investment in more staff,
reducing caseloads, addressing individual performance issues effectively, staff
development and support, and action planning to improve practice. Further
examples include the introduction of a well-coordinated early help offer with
most children receiving the right support. Inspectors saw evidence of
outcome-based projects, which are delivering positive impact, such as the
teens and toddlers and mellow parenting offers.
and with rigour to tackle critical issues, such as the creation of an additional
social work team to respond to an increase in referrals and the creation of a
specialist team to respond to an ongoing complex investigation.
resulting in a comprehensive approach to the recruitment, development and
retention of staff. The local authority has increased the number of social work
posts to increase the sufficiency of staff. Thirty-one additional staff have been
recruited, and these are planned to take up their posts in September. In the
meantime, the local authority has a number of interim and agency staff to
help ease capacity challenges.
caseloads are still too high. Staff turnover remains a challenge, partly as a
result of the local authority positively addressing individual performance issues
and increasing staff capacity. While inspectors saw proficient social work
practice and decision-making for some children, particularly in more recent
records, the scale of change required means that some children have
experienced drift as a result of changes in social worker and an absence of
quality supervision, which has not always sufficiently progressed childrens
plans.
positive culture. Its academy of social work and early interventionis a strength


for developing its own social workers. Positive investment in evidence-based
tools, such as the graded neglect tool and analytical chronologies to support
good practice, is beginning to show impact but is not yet sufficiently applied
and practised across the service. Social workers are benefiting from highquality training, which they report is beneficial and improving the quality of
their work with children and families. While there is a clear commitment to
upskilling staff and frontline managers, staff turnover and workload priorities
mean that this is not yet fully implemented.
meetings, as well as practice forums and staff briefings. Analysis of themes
and issues identified in complaints is increasingly detailed and has led to
service improvements, such as the introduction of a pocket money and
savings policy for foster carers.
people to be heard, considered and acted on at all levels. The Respect group
for children looked after aged 11 to 18 incorporates the Children in Care
Council known as Council for Kids (C4K) and New Belongings for care
leavers over 18. While the numbers of those involved are too few, children are
starting to influence improvements to services, such as training elected
members. Additionally, the Respect and New Belongings groups have
refreshed their pledges to children looked after and care leavers. Seventyeight children looked after have responded to the consultation about the
current corporate parenting strategy, and the C4K has challenged senior
leaders about the use of jargon and complicated language in meetings.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
Walsall Safeguarding Children Board (WSCB) requires improvement to be good.
Historic underfunding, only recently resolved, has resulted in delays in completing
all of the boards required functions. The board understands its areas of
development, including a need to be able to demonstrate and understand the
impact of its work. Partners are engaged with the work of the board, including
chairing key sub-groups. This is ensuring responsibility and accountability for the
boards performance. Through the chair, the board is active in helping to deliver
the objectives of the Walsall plan in its engagement with the Health and Wellbeing
Board.
The board monitors the effectiveness of some frontline practice through a
programme of multi-agency audits. It does not yet have a systematic approach to
ensuring that it is informed by partners single-agency audit activity. The board has
been slow to ensure that all partners complete, on a timely basis, the effective
auditing of their own compliance with safeguarding processes (section 11). The
board has not been able to ensure that its child death overview group completed
all its processes relating to child deaths in Walsall during 201617.
While lessons are identified and disseminated to staff, the board has not yet
ensured that there is an agreed and published neglect strategy for all partners to
follow. The board has responded to a peer review of child sexual exploitation by
ensuring that it does now have a clear understanding of exploitation and risk
activity across Walsall, together with a child exploitation strategy. However, it does
not have a clear understanding of how effectively partners work together to
minimise risk in this area. The board does not have a comprehensive
understanding of agency application of thresholds and the operation of the local
authoritys internal thresholds. The board has not reviewed the working of its own
threshold for services document since 2015.
The board has established a comprehensive training offer, which is well thought of
by partners. However, more work is required to ensure that the impact of training
on subsequent practice is understood and taken into account in the commissioning
of further training. The 201516 annual report does not provide a rigorous
assessment of the performance and effectiveness of services. There is insufficient
analysis of the boards effectiveness and impact on keeping children safe in
Walsall.


Recommendations
 The board should ensure that it undertakes a review of partnership
understanding and operation of thresholds for services and reviews the multiagency threshold for services document as soon as possible.
 The board should ensure that it produces an annual report which analyses
progress in safeguarding children and young people in Walsall effectively.
 Proposed developments in the evaluation of training should be put into practice
as soon as possible, and learning from feedback should be used to measure
impact in improving practice and in informing the commissioning process for
further training.
 The board should ensure that a neglect strategy, agreed by partners, is in place
quickly and that the board has an overview of the impact of practice in relation to
young people at risk of child sexual exploitation and the minimisation of that risk.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
ensure that it successfully coordinates the work of partner agencies and
monitors the effectiveness of local arrangements.
appropriate membership by key agencies and, following effective action by the
chair, the board is now well attended. In addition, all board sub-groups are
chaired by board members across the partnership. This is ensuring greater
shared responsibility and accountability for the boards performance. The
board has one lay member and a member from the youth parliament, helping
to provide a young persons perspective on the working of the board.
Board. Together, the two boards are contributing well to the overarching
Walsall plan. The WSCB takes a lead in the plan to safeguard vulnerable
children and enabling young people to be better protected to keep themselves
safe. The chair of the board also chairs the Adult Safeguarding Board and
makes sure that there is a strong focus on transitional issues and joint
communication through regular adult and children heads of sub-groups
meetings.
understands its effectiveness and the risks to its ability to maintain and
enhance its overview of safeguarding in Walsall. It recognises that it does not
yet understand the impact of its work sufficiently well. The board has a
business plan which identifies key areas for development and improvement
priorities, including those identified locally. The partnership has had an


insufficient focus on the work of the WSCB. Progress to date has been slow,
particularly during 2015 and the first half of 2016. Since 2017, the WSCB has
shown an increased pace to meet its priorities.
staffed business unit, has been challenged by inadequate funding for a
significant period until the beginning of 2017. This has had a detrimental
impact on the boards ability to ensure that it is complying with all of its
required functions, including a fully working child death overview process and
timely follow-up of board responsibilities, such as multi-agency audits and
single-agency audits. Only in the last six months has the board secured
additional funding from the local authority for a further two years, and for one
year from the clinical commissioning group (CCG). This is now enabling the
board to review its business unit functioning and ensure appropriate staffing
to progress board functions.
has not until very recently made sure that there are sufficient administrative
resources so that reviews of child deaths in Walsall are completed in a timely
way. Up until May 2017, there was a deteriorating situation, which saw the
build-up of a backlog of at least 23 cases, including five from 201516, which
had not been signed off by the group. This backlog is now being addressed
and had been reduced by nine during the inspection, with anticipated sign-off
of all outstanding cases by September 2017. While the group has been able to
produce a 201516 annual report that includes key messages from deaths
reviewed in the previous year, learning from later deaths and dissemination of
that learning has been compromised by these delays. However, learning from
premature deaths in 201516 has resulted in health programmes, such as the
Walsall Big Mommas and the Health in Pregnancy service.
sexual exploitation, section 47 child protection enquiry and assessment
decision-making, and domestic abuse and MASH effectiveness in the last year.
These have identified action plans, which are regularly monitored for progress
by the quality assurance sub-group. This programme of auditing gives the
WSCB insight into the quality of practice and areas of weakness where
improvement is required.
assurance workshops on a number of topics, including the Prevent duty,
intra-familial sexual abuse, safeguarding of disabled children, and female
genital mutilation. However, neither the board nor the quality assurance subgroup have established a process for being informed systematically of findings
from single-agency audit activity. The board receives some agency audits on
an ad hoc basis, but this is insufficient to ensure that it has a complete
overview of agency performance on safeguarding practice, and this affects its
ability to identify gaps in single-agency audit activity.


schools, section 157/175 audits, designed to ensure that individual agencies
audit their own safeguarding processes. However, the board has struggled to
ensure timely completion from all agencies. More positively, the board has
identified that agencies assertions of compliance are not always supported by
clear evidence. Consequently, the board has initiated challenge meetings
where agencies have to present evidence to support audits. There has been a
similarly slower response from schools, with 78% of schools having completed
their safeguarding audits within timescales. The board is ensuring appropriate
follow-up with those schools yet to comply.
ensuring that there are clear processes for identifying and undertaking serious
case reviews and management reviews, where greater understanding of
practice concerning the safeguarding of children is required. The serious case
review sub-group has ensured that there is appropriate analysis of issues
arising, including action plans and progress on those plans. Learning from
serious case and management reviews is disseminated across agencies. This
includes a range of learning events and table-top exercises. The WSCB has
worked to make sure that there is a level of awareness of the board and its
role from local authority staff, including messages from these cases. It has not
yet been able to demonstrate impact from these learning points. However,
despite neglect being a central feature of a number of serious case reviews
nationally, and although some agencies, including the local authority, are
using neglect tools to identify risk, the board is only just developing a neglect
strategy. (Recommendation)
that the WSCB needed to have a greater focus on the management of risk, by
ensuring effective performance management, challenge and accountability
across the partnership. The board has responded to these recommendations
with the creation of a Walsall problem profile. This helps the board to identify
problem areas, including offences, perpetrator and victim profiles and
hotspots of activity. It has also developed and agreed a child sexual
exploitation strategy with partners setting out a coordinated approach to how
partners across Walsall will address exploitation. However, a child sexual
exploitation scorecard to help evidence impact and progress in reducing risk to
individual children, while under development, is not yet in place. There has
been good work with faith communities, hotels and taxis on awareness raising
and, in schools, the use of See me, Hear me and emotional well-being and
sexual health courses for young people. Take-up by schools of some of these
opportunities has been low. (Recommendation)
application of thresholds and the operation of the local authoritys internal
thresholds. The boards multi-agency threshold document has not been
reviewed since 2015, despite the intention to do so annually. The threshold
document blurs boundaries between levels three and four. Consequently, the


social care boundary for services is potentially confusing for partner agencies.
The document has no direct reference to female genital mutilation and only a
brief mention of radicalisation. (Recommendation)
with a focus on the toxic trio of alcohol and substance misuse, mental health
and domestic abuse, through a dedicated sub-group. This group focuses on
evidence of impact and outcomes of three commissioned services. Although a
strategic partnership plan is yet to be put in place, work is being done on
targeted therapeutic counselling services for children and families within the
early help and social care system. The board has recognised a need to ensure
appropriate skills for multi-agency staff through a commissioned best practice
evidence-based training programme.
identify areas of strong performance and those areas where it is weaker. As a
result, the board has, for example, been aware of poor practice relating to
local authority private fostering, including visits that are not timely and low
numbers of identified cases. The board has been active in encouraging a
number of awareness-raising initiatives, including a question about potential
private fostering arrangements on school admission forms. However, these
developments have had little impact on partners and the public, and the
number of referrals and arrangements has remained low.
where the board has sought explanation and changes of practice. It records
actions taken and progress regarding response and change. These include
challenging non-attendance at board meetings, use by the police of the absent
category when missing is more appropriate for young people, insufficient
health presence in MASH, standards of care provided by a hospital trust to
children, and high numbers of children at home on care orders. All these areas
have subsequently been addressed by the local authority and partners.
range and complexity of subjects. Courses are designed to meet the needs of
a wide variety of staff, from those who require basic generalist knowledge to
those who require specialist input. Courses include child sexual exploitation,
domestic violence, and drug and alcohol awareness and disguised compliance.
However, analysis of what courses work well and evaluation of the impact of
those courses on staff practice are limited to a basic questionnaire at the end
of the course. The board has plans to develop evaluations to include impact
from lessons learned at the three-month point after courses end. At the time
of inspection, it was too early to undertake this analysis. Lack of analysis of
impact, together with no systematic gathering of agencies views on what
courses should be held, means that commissioning of training is not being
undertaken on a needs-informed and planned basis. (Recommendation)
performance and effectiveness of services. Although the work of sub-groups is


described, it is not reader-friendly in its use of language. Childrens and young
peoples perspectives are largely absent, as are safeguarding issues with
regard to disabled children and female genital mutilation. There is little
analysis and focus on outcomes for the child. (Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and one
Additional Inspector (AI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Jenny Turnross HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Alison Smale HMI
Team inspectors: Linda Steele HMI, Brenda McInerney HMI, Lolly Rascagneres AI,
Tracey Zimmerman HMI, Andy Waugh HMI designate, Peter McEntee HMI
Senior data analyst: Judith Swindell
Quality assurance manager: Christopher Sands Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


