Warrington Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 24 February  20 March 2015
Report published: 12 May 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services require
improvement
The authority is not yet consistently delivering good protection and help for children,
young people and families.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.2
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires improvement

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Warrington require improvement because:
Management oversight, challenge and decision making
 Not all front line managers are providing sufficiently robust challenge to improve
the quality of assessments and this prevents consistently good decision making.
 Managers at all levels were unaware of the impact of inconsistent practice in a
small number of cases that inspectors drew to their attention during the
inspection. In these cases action was needed to strengthen current intervention
to ensure children received the right help to meet their needs.
 In a small number of cases, there were delays in taking decisive action to protect
children through the use of the public law outline.

Workforce development
 Line management supervision is not consistently effective in improving the quality
of social work practice across the service. Despite a clear strategy for continuing
professional development, a culture of positive challenge to promote individual
learning is not fully embedded.

Performance monitoring and quality assurance
 Some challenges by independent reviewing officers (IROs) and child protection
chairpersons have not been acted on in a timely way or effectively monitored.
 Neither the local authority nor the LSCB has taken the necessary steps to
understand the circumstances of the children affected by the increase in the use
of police powers of protection. This means that they have not established
whether there were opportunities for earlier action to be taken thereby avoiding
the need for emergency intervention.

Consistency of practice
 Multi-agency procedures to respond to child sexual exploitation have not been
implemented consistently by frontline staff, which means that children are not
being supported effectively.
 The arrangements to assess 16- and 17-year-old young people who present as
homeless are not sufficiently robust.
 When looked after young people return home in an unplanned way, timely
assessments and support are not consistently provided.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Management oversight, challenge and decision making

Line managers should improve management oversight and challenge for the
quality of assessments, so that analysis of risk and the quality of decision
making are improved.


Senior managers should take action to ensure that the recommendations made
by IROs and child protection chairs are acted upon promptly.


Senior managers should ensure that the legal gateway process is effective in
assisting the implementation of pre-proceedings and in monitoring the progress
of cases to prevent avoidable delay.

Areas for improvement

Workforce development

Ensure that frontline managers receive good support and challenge through
effective supervision and training.

Performance monitoring and quality assurance

Senior managers and relevant partners should review the circumstances of all
children made subject to police powers of protection and explore whether there
were missed opportunities for earlier intervention which would have precluded
the necessity for emergency action to remove the child from home.


Senior managers should improve the quality of management information on
care leavers so that interventions can be more effectively targeted and
monitored.

Consistency of practice

The local authority should ensure that the multi-agency procedures developed
to respond to child sexual exploitation are fully understood and consistently
applied in practice by its frontline workers and managers.


Social workers and their line managers should reassess promptly the
circumstances of children who cease to be looked after in an unplanned way
with a view to providing timely and appropriate further support.


The local authority should ensure that the arrangements to assess 16 and 17year-old young people who present as homeless are sufficiently robust so that
their needs and risk are identified and appropriate support is offered.


the emotional well-being of care leavers and that reviews are overseen by
qualified social workers.
plans to ensure that they are properly focused on the needs of children.
cases whether children and young people would benefit from an advocate to
enable them to express their views.

Commissioning and Sufficiency
implement a strategy to support children on the edge of care.
programme to expand the range of supported housing provision for care
leavers aged 16 to 18 and for vulnerable care leavers who are aged over 18, to
enable them to undergo a phased transition to independent living.

The local authoritys strengths
budgets have been protected. The DCS and senior management team have
acted decisively to improve outcomes for children in Warrington, including for
care leavers and health outcomes for children in care. A systematic approach is
taken to tackling areas for improvement from previous inspections.
Directorate, formed in 2014, has created new opportunities for collaborative
work across childrens and adults services. This is providing more focused joint
commissioning of services such as domestic abuse services, children and young
peoples emotional health and wellbeing services and short break provision.
Families programme and is making a positive difference. A virtual team of 27
professionals drawn from a wide range of partner agencies is helping families to
make positive changes in their lives. Phase one of the programme (up until the
end of January 2015) has seen significant progress made by 77% of the 345
families who have been supported.
Board swiftly secure legal permanence through the family court. Care
proceedings are concluding within 23 to 24 weeks, which is better than the
national average of 29 weeks.


partnership arrangement (WWiSH) with two other local authorities, Wigan and
St Helens. This provides good choice for children and enables them to be
appropriately matched. There have been no placement disruptions in the last
year.
framework) to support all families in need of early help. These high quality
assessments take a holistic view and lead to specific family support plans
addressing identified needs and risks.
protector assessments, which consider a parents ability to protect their child
from risk presented by other adults.
education. This enables timely interventions to understand the reasons for
absences and to re-engage the young person.
after children nationally. Warrington Virtual School has been running a book
scheme since 2011. The original aim was to improve literacy levels. Initially the
scheme provided a pack of books once a term for children in care in Key Stage
that in 2014, 90% of children in care were at or above level 4 in reading at the
end of Key Stage 2. In addition, feedback from users of the scheme is
overwhelmingly positive.
the local authority and are close to home. This increases the opportunity for
children to remain at their current school and reduces disruption to their
routines. It also means that contact between children and their family and
friends is better promoted and supported.
to their pathway planning and transition to independent living. Personal
Advisors go the extra mile to engage with young people and are persistent in
keeping in contact with care leavers who disengage from the service.
and training (NEET) compared with their non-looked after peers is substantially
reducing, with an improvement for 1618 year-olds over the last three years.
This is the result of a targeted approach to prioritising services with a range of
partners through the NEET strategy group and improving participation group.


Progress since the last inspection
November 2009. The local authority was judged to be inadequate. A reinspection of safeguarding and looked after children services took place in
February 2011, when the local authority was found to have made adequate
progress in addressing the serious child protection concerns identified. The
authority was judged adequate overall at this inspection for both safeguarding
and looked after children services.
safeguarding concerns in January 2013 and identified further areas for
improvement. Although positive action has been taken to ensure that children
and young people are protected, there remain some planned actions that are
not consistently embedded in practice. These include: analysing the impact of
historical information in assessments and the needs arising out of ethnicity,
culture and religion; ensuring that general practitioners (GPs) contribute to
child protection planning; ensuring that assessments for looked after children
are updated as needs change and the need to increase the number of foster
carers.
judged to be good. The authority has fully addressed the two recommendations
for improvement at this inspection. Of positive note is the progress made in
ensuring that foster carers achieve the childrens workforce development
standards. Currently almost 90% of carers have completed workbooks.
judged to be satisfactory. The authority has made good progress against the
almost all of the ten areas for improvement that were identified. This includes
developing and implementing an effective recruitment strategy for adopters
under the strong partnership arrangements of WWiSH, and improving the
quality of child permanence reports. However, the timely completion of life
story work remains an area for improvement.
been steady overall. Progress in embedding consistency of practice has slowed
in the past year as a result of a number of senior managers leaving the
authority and experienced social workers being promoted internally. Senior
leaders have provided strong leadership during this period, restructuring
services to better meet the needs of children and families. Positive change is
seen in the identification of children in need of help and protection, particularly
in relation to neglect. This has resulted in increased numbers becoming subject
to child protection plans and for some becoming looked after. Good progress
has also been made in improving permanence for looked after children, and
outcomes relating to their health, education, and life chances. Leaders are
ambitious and appropriately focused on improving consistency in practice so
that all children, young people and their families receive good quality services.


Summary for children and young people
 When children, young people and families first need help there is lots of support
available. Different people work together, such as schools, childrens centres and
youth services, so that families get help to make improvements. The local
authority is looking more closely to check how this support is helping families to
make changes in their lives.
 Assessments and decision making for children who need help to keep safe are
not always good. This means that on occasions a small number of children do not
get the help they need quickly enough. We have asked the local authority to look
at how managers and the people who chair child protection meetings check that
children get the right help at the right time to keep them safe.
 Social workers say they enjoy working in Warrington. They know the children and
young people they work with well, help to make sure that they are kept safe from
harm and ensure that important meetings happen on time.
 Social workers and their managers feel supported in their work. They receive
regular training so that they can continue to support and help children and young
people well. Senior managers check their work but do not always find out if
things are getting better for children and young people, or whether things could
be done differently.
 When it is necessary for children and young people to become looked after in
Warrington, their needs are met well and outcomes get better. For example, the
local authority makes sure that children go to school regularly and it provides
support so that children make progress and do well at school.
 When it is time to leave care, the local authority makes sure that young people
have suitable places to live, with some choosing to stay with their foster carers.
Personal advisors help to prepare young people for living on their own. Care
leavers receive a lot of support to access education or training or to get a job.
 Adoption services are doing a good job by making sure that children are placed
with their new forever family quickly. The local authority has plans in place to
make sure that work to help young people to understand their life story happens
quickly.
 Senior leaders in Warrington are passionate about and committed to improving
the lives of children and young people. They make sure that children in care get
the right support so that they do well.
 We have asked the local authority to improve services further and to check how
managers make decisions for some children, young people and families who need
help or looking after.


Information about this local authority area
Children living in this area
 Approximately 44,300 children and young people under the age of 18 live in
Warrington. This is 22% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 15% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 In primary schools is 12% (the national average is 17%)
 In secondary schools is 10% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 6% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole. The
largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are Asian
and Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 In primary schools is 6% (the national average is 19%)
 In secondary schools is 4% (the national average is 14%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 January 2015, 1,021 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 January 2015, 215 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 170 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 January 2015, four children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from six at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection, one serious incident notification has been submitted to
Ofsted and one serious case review is on-going at the time of inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 January 2015, 294 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 66 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 232 (52.0 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014. Of this number:
miles or more outside the area
authority area


 eight live in residential special schools3, of whom 100% live out of the
authority area
 one child is an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.
 In the last 12 months (from 1 April 2014):
 there have been 9 adoptions
returned to be looked after
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to
independent living
 six children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates six childrens homes. All were judged to be good or
outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since August 2014.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Childrens Board (LSCB) has been in post
since September 2012.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
No children and young people were found to be unsafe and not being supported
during the course of this inspection.
The quality of Common Assessment Framework (CAF) assessments is too variable.
The local authority is beginning to examine more closely the impact of early help
where there is a CAF assessment, to find out why the level of need for some families
does not reduce with the support provided.
The quality of decision making and assessment for children needing help or
protection is not consistently good. This leads to a small number of children not
receiving the right help to meet their needs.
Management overview is not sufficiently strong in all cases to ensure that poor
practice is identified and rectified. Actions to support children are not always
sufficiently focused on addressing broader risk factors in the case. In some cases,
this includes delays in consideration and implementation of legal proceedings.
Challenge by child protection chairs, including where they use established escalation
procedures, does not always lead to sufficiently swift action by social workers and
managers to improve practice.
In cases known to be in crisis, childrens services has not taken steps to analyse
whether there have been missed opportunities to intervene earlier without recourse
to the use of police powers of protection.
Comprehensive multi-agency procedures to respond to child sexual exploitation have
not been implemented consistently by frontline staff, which means that some
children are not being supported effectively.
Arrangements for assessing the circumstances of homeless 16- and 17-year-olds are
insufficiently robust.
The work of the family outreach service is of consistently good quality and is
improving the provision of help for families at an early stage.
The quality of specialist parenting assessments and protector assessments, which
consider a parents ability to protect their child from risk presented by other adults, is
good.
Effective systems are leading to timely intervention with children who are missing
education.


unsafe or not supported. In the vast majority of cases where children are at risk
of significant harm they are responded to swiftly. Strategy discussions are held
promptly, but often only include childrens social care and the police. This
potentially limits the extent of the information available and, consequently, the
robustness of the planned response. In examples of more complex cases,
strategy meetings were held with good attendance from all relevant partners,
followed by review meetings when these are needed. In a small number of
cases seen by inspectors, decision making was not consistent with potential
risk. For example, cases were closed without a full assessment of need and in
others the rationale for case closure did not correspond with the risk factors in
the case. The local authority has taken immediate action to ensure that risks
beyond the presenting risk have now been fully addressed in these cases.
they can access a wide range of early help services, including childrens centres
and targeted youth services for drug and alcohol advice. The family support
model is embedded well across Warrington, with agencies having a clear
understanding of thresholds at levels one, two and three.
quarterly audits. In June 2014, the authoritys audit showed that 37.5% of CAFs
were of good quality, and this increased to 41% in December 2014. The quality
of assessment can be linked to the lead agency undertaking the CAF. The
better assessments were those completed by professionals in the family
outreach team. There were gaps in six out of ten CAFs sampled as part of the
inspection. The information gathered is not fully analysed, and actions set are
not always specific in identifying what needs to improve, what support will be
given, and in what timeframe. As a result, in October 2014, CAF workshops
were introduced to help professionals to complete good quality assessments. A
re-audit of the quality of CAFs demonstrates that the workshops are helping to
improve the quality of assessments.
using a four point scale of need linked to the five outcomes of be healthy, stay
safe, enjoy and achieve, positive contribution and economic wellbeing. Between
April 2013 and the end of December 2014, a total of 272 children and young
people had an episode of family support. Of these, 48% showed improved
outcomes, 22% had an increased level of need and 30% maintained their
current level of need. The authority recognises that it needs to understand
better why outcomes for different children and young people improve, remain
the same, or show an increased level of need following a period of early
intervention.


more complex needs. These assessments take a holistic view of the whole
family, and lead to appropriate and specific family support plans that address
well identified needs and risks. Family outreach team members attend transfer
meetings to discuss families who need to step up to statutory intervention or
step down to family support, and this is helping to ensure that children receive
appropriate and timely support.
Families programme, and is making a positive difference. A virtual team of 27
professionals drawn from a wide range of partner agencies is helping families to
make positive changes in their lives. Phase one of the programme has seen a
significant improvements for 77% of the 345 families supported through the
programme as at January 2015. Work is continuing with the 23% of families
where support is yet to have a positive impact.
and all contacts are appropriately overseen by a social work manager within the
duty and assessment team. This has enabled an appropriate reduction in the
number of repeat referrals received by childrens social care, from 22% in
March 2014 to 9% in January 2015. Information provided on the multi-agency
referral form (MARF) is mostly good, and notifications of domestic abuse
incidents from the police are a particular strength. Details include a risk rating,
action taken by the police, which may include referral to other services, and a
record of the views of children and young people spoken to by the officers
attending. This detailed information supports decision making and planning by
childrens social care.
hospital maternity services through regular liaison meetings. Pre-birth
assessments sampled by inspectors were of good quality and timely. The
meetings provide opportunities to identify parents needing additional support or
childrens social care involvement at an early stage. Examples were seen of
cases progressing appropriately to childrens social care for assessment, and
concerns reducing following the support provided.
histories to inform assessment and decision making. The quality of chronologies
as the case progresses is variable, and history is not consistently used to inform
assessment and decision making. A very good use of a chronology was seen to
identify a pattern of minor injuries to a young child. This led to an initial child
protection case conference and an improvement in the childs circumstances.
The team manager described increasing use of chronologies to support
planning, and inspectors saw improving reflection by social workers in their
practice.


Social work visits to children and families are proportionate to the level of risk
in the case. Social workers describe a range of tools they use to work with
children and young people to gather their views and feelings, including Three
houses and Three islands. One social worker was able to show inspectors a
range of books she uses with children to prompt discussion about their feelings.
Another example was seen where a social worker had used drawings to provide
a focus for discussion. This had identified significant life events for the young
person which she had found difficult to talk about previously. Some children
had experienced a number of recent changes in social worker including, in one
case, four in 18 months. This had led to drift in this case, and in other cases
parents felt unsettled by the changes and said that they had hindered positive
working relationships.
developed in compliance with Working Together to Safeguard Children 2013) to
replace initial and core assessments. The quality of combined assessments seen
by inspectors ranged from inadequate to good. Six assessments in ten tracked
cases did not meet a good standard. This reflects the findings of the local
authoritys own audits. Assessments that were not good had too narrow a focus
on the presenting issue, failed to give sufficient weight to family history in
evaluating risk, or were delayed. In some cases, there was over optimism about
parents ability to make and sustain changes. The childs view is evident in most
assessments, but this can be superficial and fails to reflect well their lived
experience. Six cases were referred by inspectors to the local authority for
review because of concerns about the quality of assessment. Prompt action was
taken by the authority to address these concerns. Specialist parenting and
protector assessments seen were consistently strong. Where assessment is
stronger, it is holistic, fully describes the experience of the child and uses
research to support the analysis of the case.
young people and their families. Good attention is given to needs arising out of
ethnicity and religion for young people who, for example, have been trafficked,
or where there is a risk of honour based violence. However, the individual
identity and needs of children in large families are not always explicitly
considered in assessments.


practitioners and managers on a rota, which supports case continuity. Social
workers and their managers are informed of events taking place out of office
hours by an alert on the electronic case system. Out-of-hours staff conduct
planned visits to children and families during the evening and at weekends
when this is assessed as necessary as part of the care plan. This provides
children and young people with additional support outside office hours, and is
valuable in contributing to the assessment process. The out-of-hours service
has direct access to the electronic case recording system. Inspectors found that
in one instance not enough checks were carried out to determine whether
arrangements made for a child were safe following a mothers emergency
admission to hospital. The local authority promptly re-issued guidance to staff
on the importance of conducting thorough record checks.
Local Offer for children and young people with additional needs was published
in September 2014, and was prepared utilising excellent consultation with a
variety of stakeholders. The offer is comprehensive and covers all of the areas
that the integrated service deals with. However, the first port of call for most
carers and young people is through the website, and this is currently not easy
to use. Navigation is confusing and includes some jargon that does not help
parents to understand the services available or where to go for help, support
and advice. The local authority is aware of this problem and is redesigning the
website with a re-launch planned for May this year.
significantly from 11 in 201314 to 20 in the first three quarters of 201415. At
the time the children were made subject to police powers it was appropriate
and necessary to do so. All cases seen by inspectors had a substantial history of
childrens social care and police involvement, and five were currently in crisis.
The impact of this is that children were moved to other family members or into
foster care as an emergency, without preparation and in an unplanned way.
The local authority has not yet reviewed these cases to identify any learning.


increased from 170 in published data as of 31 March 2014. The local authority
has a good understanding of where child protection plans have a risk factor of
neglect, domestic abuse, parental substance misuse or mental health problems.
Extensive awareness raising by the LSCB and the local authority has had a
significant and positive impact on the number of children and young people
identified as suffering neglect. The proportion of children in Warrington subject
to a child protection plan under this category has risen from 38% in 201314 to
children who are subject to a plan. Domestic abuse featured in 49% (190) of all
child protection plans between April and December 2014. Parental mental
health problems were a presenting factor in 29% (115) of child protection plans
between April and December 2014. In 31% (123) of cases, alcohol abuse was
the presenting issue, and in 24% (94) of cases, parental drug abuse was a
feature. In 4% of child protection plans, all elements of the toxic trio of
domestic violence, parental substance misuse and mental ill-health were
present.
Caseloads in the duty and assessment team and children in need teams are
manageable, with the highest seen consisting of 24 children.
effective partnership working between childrens social care and adults services
such as community psychiatric nurses and adult drugs and alcohol services.
Investment by the domestic abuse partnership in services for children and
parents has had a positive effect in increasing the availability of services such
as the independent domestic violence advocates (IDVAs) to children, young
people and their families. A voluntary scheme for perpetrators of domestic
abuse, commissioned last year, gives priority to families with children on a child
protection or child in need plan. The first cohort of 14 adults, representing
seven families, has shown good success, with 86% of perpetrators reported not
to have carried out further acts of abuse to date. Children are benefiting from
this approach, with the level of risk reducing in five families and resulting in
step down from the public law outline process (PLO) or removal from child
protection plans. Operation Relentless, a Cheshire Police initiative, works with
repeat domestic abuse offenders, and is currently being piloted with 12
perpetrators in Warrington. Although in its early stages, there is already
evidence of initial impact in one family with children subject to a child
protection plan. Operation Encompass is also being piloted in Warrington, and
provides prompt information to childrens schools following an incident of
domestic abuse.


protection plan by appointing an additional child protection chair on an interim
basis. This has had a positive impact on the timeliness of initial and review
conferences. In January 2015, 18 of the 19 children subject to initial child
protection case conferences had their meeting held within timescales; 95% of
review case conferences are within timescales in the year to date; and parental
attendance at conferences is good, with parents or carers attending 100% of
conferences held in January. Training completed with GPs had a positive effect
on increasing the number and quality of the reports provided to case
conferences. However, this has slipped more recently, with only 52 out of 111
invitations resulting in a report being provided to conference. In quarter three
of 201415, the children and adolescent mental health service (CAMHs) has not
provided any reports to child protection case conferences where they have
been invited to do so. This hinders robust planning for children and young
people.
There was good multi-agency attendance and ownership of the plan. Although
not all child protection plans are clear and outcome focused, some good
examples were seen, and parents spoken to by inspectors understand what
needs to change. Core groups are held regularly, with good attendance by a
range of partner agencies. Examples were seen of plans having a positive
impact in effecting change for children. In one instance, children were able to
remain with their parents with an appropriate range of services provided,
including support from the adult learning difficulties service. In another case, a
comprehensive parenting assessment identified relevant history of neglect and
parental mental ill-health. This led to a timely move to proceedings and children
being placed in foster care.
attend or give their views to a child protection case conference remains low at
children receiving independent support is a lost opportunity to ensure that their
voice is clearly and explicitly represented in their meetings and plans. This can
also reduce an understanding of childrens experiences.
issues is not yet sufficiently robust. Priority recommendations made by
conference chairs are not consistently leading to swift remedial action by
managers. In three of five cases seen by inspectors, action including
progression to legal gateway planning meetings had been avoidably delayed,
thereby impeding progress. Challenge and recommendations made by chairs
are applied on a case-by-case basis rather than being collated and analysed to
improve the quality of practice across the service.


oversight, but this does not always translate into swift and decisive action. The
Legal Gateway Panel (LGP) has appropriately identified and taken action where
there has been drift or delay in child protection cases progressing to the panel
and in cases where the threshold has been agreed for issuing proceedings.
However, these children have experienced delay in the progression of plans to
safeguard them when the threshold for significant harm has been met.
longer being at risk of significant harm they continue to be supported by child
in need plans. These cases are regularly reviewed at well attended review
meetings. This has not yet had an impact on reducing the number of children
subject to a second child protection plan, which has continued to increase to
have been made subject to a plan at any time in the past. The proportion of
children subject to a second plan within two years is 14%, and within three
years is 17%. This performance is closer to statistical neighbours at 13.4% and
England at 15.8%.
who are missing education (18 at the time of inspection). The authority
receives a range of information from partners to make sure that children are
identified. The monthly pupil out of school monitoring meetings (POOSM) are
well attended by a wide range of agencies, and there are clear links made
between child sexual exploitation and children who are missing. The local
authority is persistent in ensuring that children are accurately identified and
school places found. Live birth data are used within the early help division to
check if children take up nursery places, and this information is used by the
school admissions team to cross check applications for school places. All
Warrington children (22) who are not receiving 25 hours of education or are at
risk of exclusion are carefully monitored by the vulnerable pupils team. This
ensures that alternative education is provided quickly and additional support is
provided for schools where children are at risk of exclusion.
elective home education (EHE). This service is led by Warrington and shared
with four other authorities (Cheshire West and Chester, Knowsley, Liverpool,
and Wirral). Currently, 46 children are home educated, and this figure remains
broadly stable each year. During 2014, there were 16 new cases and 10
returned successfully to mainstream education. This is because the local
authority works with families to consider the appropriateness of home
education, helps to resolve any conflicts with schools, and finds alternative
placements to encourage children to return to school. In 2014, 24 out of 25
known families provided evidence to assure the authority that the education for
their child is suitable.


in an increase in the number of cases known. Of five such arrangements in
place during the last year, three were assessed within timescales, with timely,
appropriate and regular support delivered in line with regulation. In one of the
cases, the work was of particularly good quality, with the local authority
progressing to permanence through a Special Guardianship Order (SGO). In
two cases there was significant delay in completing the assessment and
management sign-off.
the last year, outcomes for nine were not known and a number of other shortterm temporary living arrangements described by young people were not
followed up before case closure. Although procedures are appropriately
followed in the majority of cases the absence of follow-up in these cases means
that the local authority cannot be assured about young peoples safety and
well-being.
workers, schools and other childrens practitioners in relation to child sexual
exploitation (CSE) and children missing. This includes awareness raising with
young people through a theatre production for schools, Risking it All. 61 young
people were identified as at risk in 201314, a 43% increase on the previous
year. Currently five young people are subject of risk management plans, three
are subject to child protection plans, 12 are subject to child in need plans and
used and local procedures are not always followed by social workers and
managers. For example, in one case there was delay in convening a risk
management meeting following a strategy discussion, and in another, section
local service commissioned by the Cheshire local authorities to support children
and young people who go missing. Return interviews were completed in the
majority of cases (21 out of 26 in the last quarter). Examples of persistent work
to engage with young people have resulted in the reduction of missing episodes
for some children.
is an effective forum for information sharing, and has led to targeted disruption
work including Operation Macerata, a joint police and social care investigation.
This has resulted in individuals being charged and criminal proceedings were
underway at the time of the inspection. Multi-agency disruption work has led to
the closure of one take-away food outlet and the prosecution of out-of-area taxi
drivers operating in Warrington. Between May 2013 and September 2014, 21
abduction notices were issued against male and female perpetrators.


live in households where there is significant risk of domestic abuse. A multiagency partnership, led by police and supported by regular attendance of
childrens services representatives, carefully considers childrens circumstances.
All cases considered by the multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC)
are appropriately and routinely risk assessed by the police or the IDVA. Any
subsequent assessment by childrens services is suitably detailed and focused
on the presenting risks.
or allegations of harm against professionals or volunteers who work with
children and young people. Cases seen show good consideration of childrens
safety, such as a suitably in-depth combined assessment of an alleged
perpetrators own children with differentiated child protection plans in place.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Good

Summary
There is a strong commitment by senior leaders and elected members to children in
care.
The vast majority of children who become looked after in Warrington have their
needs met, and their outcomes improve when removal from parental care is
unavoidable. Legal permanence is secured swiftly when cases proceed through the
family court. Care proceedings are concluding within 23 to 24 weeks which is better
than the national average of 29 weeks.
A high proportion of children and young people are placed in foster care within the
local authority and are close to home. This increases the opportunity for children to
remain at their current school and reduces disruption to their routines. It also means
that contact between children and their family and friends can be better promoted
and supported.
An excellent service is provided to children in care who are placed out of the area,
irrespective of distance.
The educational outcomes for children looked after are better than those for looked
after children nationally. The attainment gap between looked after children and all
Warrington children is closing. Children and young peoples health needs are
effectively promoted and outcomes are good.
Multi-agency action to prevent looked after young people offending and re-offending
is good. Performance has improved over the past twelve months and is now better
than comparators.
Children are being placed with their adoptive families in a timely way. Adoption plans
and care proceedings are being concluded on average at 24 weeks, reflecting a
determined and effective approach to achieving permanence plans at the earliest
opportunity. The local authority has a sufficient number of adopters through a
partnership arrangement with two other local authorities (WWiSH), which provides
choice and stability for children and enables them to be appropriately matched with
their forever families.
Warrington keeps in touch with all its care leavers, providing careful attention to
their pathway planning and transition to independent living. The gap in the
proportion of care leavers who are in education, employment and training compared
with their non-looked after peers is substantially reducing.


after by Warrington Council. This number has increased from 234 in March
authoritys significant focus on the area of neglect. The impact has been an
appropriate and proportionate rise in the number of children becoming looked
after. Decisions to look after children are made in their best interests. In the
vast majority of cases, clear, knowledge-based assessments underpin these
decisions unless in an emergency or crisis.
ensures that focused decisions are made and that all alternatives to care are
fully explored before legal proceedings are issued. A further strength of the
panel is the arrangement to review those cases where children are looked after
on a voluntary basis through an agreement with their parents under Section 20
of the Children Act 1989. These arrangements are ensuring that legal
permanence is routinely considered and drift is avoided.
is drift and delay within child protection cases progressing to PLO, and where
care proceedings are not progressing in a timely way. In a small number of
cases seen in pre-proceedings (5 of 79), remedial actions were not completed
swiftly. This meant these children experienced delay in the progression of their
plans. Consequently, the local authority has identified a need to improve
practice in pre-proceedings, with particular regard to the assessment of
parental capacity and when to take authoritative action when parents are
unable to achieve and sustain change within the childs timescale. As a result, a
series of workshops and training have commenced, targeted at frontline staff
and their managers.
proceedings is clear and understood. Robust legal advice is provided to the
LGP, staff and managers. When cases proceed through the family court, legal
permanence is secured swiftly. Care proceedings are concluding within 23 to 24
weeks, which is better than the national average of 29 weeks. This has been
achieved through robust tracking and monitoring arrangements through the
LGP and through effective relationships between the local authority, CAFCASS
and the Judiciary. As a result, children and young people benefit from efficient
progress through legal proceedings.
timely assessments give good consideration to the safety of those
arrangements and ensure that sufficient support and contingency planning are
in place. However, where these arrangements are unplanned, assessments are
typically delayed, leaving children without appropriate levels of support.
authority is meeting the requirements of the sufficiency duty.


inspection, there were seven placements available for younger children in foster
homes. In the year to date, 14 new carers have been recruited and two more
are expected to be approved at the March 2015 panel. However, there have
been 16 resignations or retirements and this means that the authoritys
published target of a net increase of 10 new carers per year for three years
from 2014 is not met. Recruitment is hampered by the lack of a marketing
strategy for the next year and an unfilled vacancy of a dedicated recruitment
officer. Firm plans are now in place to recruit to this post.
aiding retention. Foster carers say that Warrington is a good place to foster and
good information is shared with them prior to a child going to live with them.
Caseloads within the fostering service are manageable and enable good
supervision and support to all carers. Fostering social workers are supported to
effectively match children by a locally developed matching system that
promotes best fit when children are identified as needing foster care. The
fostering panel has an experienced membership and is well chaired. It meets
with sufficient regularity and there has been improvement in the quality of
assessments with the introduction of the Fostering Network materials, which
offer a more focused insight into potential carers skills.
authority foster care within the borough. Only 7% of children are placed more
than 20 miles away. This is significantly better than comparators and the
England average at 17% and 38% respectively. This increases the opportunity
for children to remain at their current school and reduces disruption to
childrens routines. It also means that contact between children and their family
and friends can be better promoted and supported.
great care is taken to find the most appropriate placement. Of the 308 children
in care, only 15% are placed in external fostering provision. Where children are
placed in external placements which meet their needs, there is no pressure to
return them to in-house placements. Decisions are not resource led, but made
in the childs best interests.
reduced slightly, from 10.3% to 9.2% between March 2014 and January 2015
and still remains better than comparators. The Placement Support and Contact
Service offer specific support to challenging placements. Disruption meetings
occurred on five occasions in the year 201314 prior to placements breaking
down. This is good practice. The local authority learns from its evaluation of
disrupted placements, and has identified that intervention to support
placements needs to take place earlier.


or separately varies across teams and the rationale for these decisions is
recorded in a variety of documents, typically within court statements. A lack of
clear recording about the quality of sibling relationships makes it difficult to
understand how these decisions are made.
by Ofsted at their last inspections and three outstanding. Rigorous
arrangements are in place to monitor the care of children and young people
who are in external placements. No residential or foster care placements have
been commissioned from independent agencies that have been judged to be
less than good in recent Ofsted inspections. The authority is an established
partner in the regional network and framework for commissioning for children
looked after. The commissioning process is effectively monitored through, for
example, feedback from social workers, IROs and reports from other
professionals.
significantly from 1 (6%) to 28 (9.5%) since April 2014. This is higher than
comparators (2%) and the England average (5%). The vast majority of
decisions for children to be placed at home are based on clear, risk-based
assessments when care proceedings have been completed. In a small number
of cases children have remained with their mother as the court has not
supported a plan of removal. This was despite the authoritys robust challenge
and supporting evidence that the threshold for significant harm was met. This is
an area of ongoing discussion with the Local Family Justice Board and
neighbouring authorities.
focus on securing family placements where appropriate. There is evidence of
early consideration of the potential for permanency with family or non-kinship
carers, including foster carers, within the pre-proceedings processes. Where a
family placement is not possible, placements with other people connected with
the child are considered in a timely way. Viability assessments are appropriately
undertaken, and if approved they are well supported by the provision of
practical and financial arrangements.
Arrangement Orders or Special Guardianship Orders are promoted. In the year
ending March 2014, one Child Arrangement Order was made. There has been
an increase in children leaving care subject to Special Guardianship Orders
(SGOs) from eight at the end of March 2014 to 12 at the end of January 2015.
Six of these SGOs were made to foster carers and six to family members. In all
cases, appropriate financial support arrangements are in place. All cases also
have practical support plans, but there was insufficient information about how
to manage contact arrangements with birth families.


through the integrated service for children with disabilities. Help is provided in
line with good assessments, enabling families to address the challenges of
additional needs through use of targeted services. Good systems are in place
for the use of the direct payments system, which is very well embedded,
enabling parents and carers to be in control of the support plans for their
children.
There is sufficient capacity within the teams, but one children in care team has
experienced a high turnover of staff in the past five months. This includes the
loss of four permanent social workers and one principal manager. This has
affected consistency of social worker for children and the development of
trusting relationships. For example, one child said that they had three changes
of social worker in a four-month period. All social workers who spoke to
inspectors knew children and young people well and demonstrated a real
passion and commitment to improving their outcomes and making children
safe. One child told an inspector that her social worker is like a friend and she
could tell her anything.
directly to understand their wishes and feelings and the quality of their
placement. Visits to children who live outside the local authority area are
regular irrespective of distance, and support provided is of a consistently good
standard. For example, a child living in the East of England was visited six times
in a three-month period, which is good practice. Social workers are clear about
the outcomes they are working towards, although this is not always reflected in
written records. Not all placement information records and care plans are
routinely updated following childrens reviews or when childrens circumstances
change. This makes it difficult to see the longer term plan for the child and how
this will be achieved. Records of statutory visits do not consistently
demonstrate the direct work undertaken with children. While ethnicity is
recorded, the wider impact of equality and diversity issues is not always fully
explored.
services provided through the National Youth Advisory Service (NYAS). There is
no waiting list for advocacy services, with 83 children being supported during
proceedings in the last reporting year. There are currently 13 young people
matched with independent visitors and receiving support, which is an increase
from seven last year, and there are currently seven young people reported as
waiting to be matched, with an average wait of eight to ten weeks. The
complaints manager has increased the level of engagement with social work
teams, IROs and childrens homes, to raise awareness of the complaints
process. Childrens complaints are discussed at performance meetings and
cascaded to social work teams to aid learning and prevent repetition of
avoidable problems. Individual examples of children influencing service delivery
include remaining in their choice of placement.


permanence decisions being made by the childs second review. There is
evidence that IROs have taken robust action to escalate matters to managers
where there is delay in childrens plans, although in some cases without
sufficient impact. In a small number of cases, delay continued because remedial
actions identified had not been followed up by social workers and managers.
Children are seen by their IRO prior to their review in the vast majority of
cases. IROs actively encourage children and young people to participate and
this has resulted in some children chairing their own reviews. Childrens views
about improving service delivery are actively sought through the review
process.
agencies and within the local authority in response to children missing from
care and where children are at risk of child sexual exploitation (CSE). Between
April 2014 and February 2015, 26 children went missing from care. All of them
were offered return home interviews with a commissioned local service, and the
majority accepted the interview. There were four children who refused, and in
these cases alternative visits were offered or social workers followed this up.
Looked after children placed in Warrington by other local authorities receive the
same protective service.
risk. The local commissioned organisation that undertakes these provides
quarterly reports to MCSETO (missing children, children at risk of sexual
exploitation and trafficked children operational group) which feeds into a wider
multi-agency analysis of patterns, trends and intelligence. However, in one case
inspectors identified that missing procedures were not robustly followed for a
young person living outside the area. Opportunities were missed to escalate the
case to MCSETO and to interrogate the findings from missing episodes to
inform the childs safety plan. The authority took immediate and appropriate
action when notified of this by inspectors. The childs circumstances have been
reviewed and senior managers have reissued the procedures for out of area
placements to all managers and social workers.


assessment tool is not consistently used despite very clear procedures and
targeted training provided to social workers and managers. Some good
examples were seen by inspectors of positive impact where risk had been
significantly reduced in cases of young people at risk of or suffering CSE.
However, in five cases seen by inspectors, including three where children have
been discussed at MCSETO, this has not informed the individual safety plans for
children. In two cases, the CSE tool had not been used where CSE was a known
risk. Further scrutiny of files identified that safety work was on-going; however
this was not recorded in the childs plan. This makes it difficult to measure
progress and reduces accountability.
people in Warrington. There are effective links with partner agencies, who
share their focus on improving outcomes for children and young people.
Corporate parents have contributed to maintaining and improving the
educational attainments and health of looked after children and young people.
The virtual school keeps a close check on the educational achievements of
looked after children, and monitors their attendance to make sure that they
attend school regularly. Improved systems to monitor attendance, and focused
action taken, have resulted in a reduction in the level of children who are
persistently absent, from 14% in 2012-13 to 6.7% in 2013-14. Attendance is
currently at 94%, which is slightly below the attendance of all Warrington
children at 95%.
Warrington for 12 years, and fixed term exclusions continue to reduce
significantly, for example from 12.9% in the academic year 2010-11 to 5% in
year 2012-13. The reduction in fixed term exclusions is due to the virtual school
working directly with schools to provide additional support when children are
identified as at risk of exclusion or are known to be especially vulnerable. On
occasions when alternative provision is needed, this is provided by tailored
packages that include attendance at the pupil referral unit, one-to-one tuition
and/or on-line learning. This ensures that children who become looked after, or
have a disruption in their schooling, continue to receive full time education. No
children who are looked after are missing from education.
needs work to achieve consistently good standards. In seven out of 11 PEPs
sampled, targets lack detail and do not include measureable success criteria,
which the local authority recognises from its own monthly quality assurance. In
the large majority (73%) of PEPs the childs view is captured well, with a couple
of examples of the childs voice ringing out clearly. Since September 2014, PEPs
are required to be completed termly and include requests for pupil premium
spend. It is too early to show the impact of the pupil premium on the childrens
attainment, but the better PEPs identify how pupil premium is to be used and
how its impact is measured.


ensure that they receive support to make at least expected progress from their
starting points. The outcomes for looked after children at the end of primary
school are better than the nationally established level for looked after children,
and the attainment gap between looked after children and all Warrington
children is closing. In 2014, 60% of children reached level 4 in reading, writing
and maths compared to 83% of their peers. This means the gap has reduced
from 28% in 2012 to 23% in 2014. The book scheme that was introduced for
children in Key Stage 2 in 2014 has helped to accelerate childrens learning,
with 90% of children making expected progress in reading. This has now been
extended to Early Years Foundation Stage and Key Stage 4 to promote home
learning across all stages of education.
(including English and Maths) declined from 25% in 2013 to 16% in 2014, but
this was in line with the target set by the local authority for this cohort of
children (a small cohort and a high number of children with special educational
needs). Despite this decline, children looked after in Warrington continue to
perform slightly better (3%) than statistical neighbours and 4% better than the
national average. Additional support and tuition is in place to help three young
people who narrowly missed getting their predicted grades to prepare for resits.
outstanding at the last Ofsted inspection. The virtual school looks carefully to
see if a change of school is required when a pupil at a school not yet good
comes into care or if a school is subsequently judged less than good. The
virtual school works in partnership with the school improvement team and
provides additional support, such as additional pupil premium, where children
are placed in a school that is not good. A total of 13 children are currently
attending inadequate schools. The individual circumstances and specific needs
of each child are fully considered when deciding if a change of school is
needed. Where a child/young person is not making expected progress this
leads to a change of school. A change of school is currently underway for two
children where a deadline for the school to improve was not met.
outcomes are good. The co-location of the specialist looked after nurse with
social workers helps to ensure a coordinated approach to children and young
peoples care plans. The majority of health reviews are completed within
timescales, an improvement from 88.3% at the end of March 2014 to 89.6% in
March 2015. Performance on arranging up-to-date dental checks has also
improved, with 85.5% of the cohort having had a check in the past 12 months
compared with 80% at the end of March 2014.


use of Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaires (SDQs). The outcomes of SDQs
are monitored by the specialist nurse, who supports social workers to identify
appropriate service responses. There is, however, no overall evaluation of the
findings to identify service gaps or service development. Foster carers and local
authority residential staff are well supported by the specialist nurse, who has
recently provided training to develop their understanding of how to support
children and young people who self-harm. Any looked after child who presents
with emotional or mental health difficulties is quickly assessed by the in-house
CAMHs service. Young people who require more intensive or specialist support
receive appropriate treatment, with average waiting times to access treatment
being good at between two and four weeks.
problem. The authority is aware that this number is low and that there is likely
to be under reporting by social workers. Work is underway to raise social
workers awareness of the need to record in assessments where substance
misuse is a factor, to ensure that children and young people receive the right
service. In addition, this will help the authority and its partners to measure
prevalence and better inform service planning.
established and highly valued. Regular meetings and events are well facilitated
by enthusiastic staff, who promote children and young people to have their say
about all levels of the service. Events are well attended and help to give the
children and young people a genuine influence as well as enjoyment. Initiatives
such as the music group, currently funded through the virtual school, allow
children in care to feel valued and celebrated, and were very well regarded by
the enthusiastic group of 11 children and young people who met with
inspectors. The awards ceremony in December 2014 was attended by over 200
children, young people, carers, staff and elected members. Certificates and
letters of encouragement were shared proudly with inspectors and allowed CiCC
members to reflect positively on their impact on service improvement, for
example, their work with the virtual school on bullying and delivering training to
foster carers on children and young peoples emotional well-being when they
first become looked after.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
Effective case tracking through care proceedings ensures that family finding
processes begin early and subsequent placements with adopters are timely.
This is helped by the local authority having sufficient adopters through
partnership arrangements with two other local authorities, which ensures good
choice for children and enables placements to be supported locally.


placed with adopters and six children are yet to be formally matched, although
adoptive families have been identified for five out of the six at the point of
inspection. Active family finding continues for the other child.
local authority child care social workers back into Warringtons own adoption
service from management by WWiSH. This followed a partnership arrangement
between Warrington, Wigan and St Helens in 2011 to establish a shared
adoption service. This decision has helped to ensure that plans for children are
progressed without unnecessary drift and although there are still relatively few
social workers with extensive adoption experience, their skills are being
cascaded through the wider workforce to good effect, demonstrated by good
quality child permanence reports.
having a positive impact on improving adoption performance. For example, 79
adopters were recruited during 201314 and the partnership expects to have
approved a further 56 in 201415. These numbers reflect targeted recruitment
for early permanence and for sibling groups, and are more than sufficient to
meet the needs of children with adoption plans in Warrington.
service, which over the last year has achieved significantly better outcomes for
children. The adoption service performance against the national scorecard is
affected by some legacy cases which reflect practice dating back to when the
local authority was judged to be inadequate at an Ofsted inspection in 2009.
The local authority believes it will be a further 12 to 18 months before the
adoption scorecard shows improvement to take account of more timely
adoptions now being achieved.
care and moving in with its adoptive family (for those adopted) has improved
slightly from 679 days to 653 as at January 2015. This improvement has
coincided with the DfE setting a more challenging national target. The average
time between a child entering care and moving in with its adoptive family, for
the nine children adopted in 201415, is only 18 days longer than the revised
national target and demonstrates marked improvement against the three-year
average adoption scorecard targets. This improvement is supported by
improved timescales for the completion of care proceedings and a concerted
push to more timely family finding for children, along with a high number of
adoptive families available from WWiSH.
deciding on a match is improving, but remains longer than the England
average. This is still a priority area for improvement.


they are supporting, their background histories and developmental needs.
Decisions taken by managers and social workers are child centred and
undertaken in timescales to ensure that children are appropriately prepared for
and matched well to their adoptive families. However sibling assessments are
not always completed. The overall effectiveness of this work is endorsed by the
fact that there have been no disruptions of adoption placements during the last
year.
decisions as to whether adoption is the most appropriate permanence plan for
the child. The local authority is strengthening its procedures for decision
making to change plans away from adoption. In future this will be undertaken
by the ADM rather than direct line managers. However, only one plan for
adoption has been overturned in the last year, at the direction of the court. The
WWiSH adoption panel is chaired by a knowledgeable and experienced
independent chairperson. The adoption panels are always quorate due to
having sufficient experienced members available from a central list, which
ensures capacity for three panels to meet monthly. Panel minutes are produced
to a good standard and record well the discussions held and the
recommendations made. Those that inspectors reviewed as part of the
inspection showed the agency decision makers decisions to be properly
detailed and well reasoned.
completed to establish the suitability of applicants, including references and
stage one and two plans. Prospective adopter reports and childrens
permanence reports are produced to consistently good standards. The reports
evidence what adopters have to offer a child, their attributes, skills and how
they will parent a child with a challenging background.
months. Where this has occurred for a child in the other local authorities within
the WWiSH partnership, minutes of the adoption disruption meeting were
shared at panel. This enabled lessons to be learned to improve practice.
approach to adoption. This is illustrated by the profile of adopters and the
evident commitment to attract a diverse range of adopters to meet the needs
of the children for whom the local authority is responsible. This includes same
sex couples, single carers and adopters from the age of 20 to 60. Although
predominantly a white British population, one child from a minority ethnic
heritage has been suitably placed and no minority ethnic children are currently
awaiting adoption.


with WWiSH adopters, which reflects the strength of the partnership
arrangement. The remainder have secured placements through the Adopt North
West consortium or voluntary adoption agencies. Local placements allow
children to be supported more effectively by workers with detailed knowledge
of local resources, that can be accessed as additional services to support
children post-placement. The average time in 201415 from approval as
adopters to being matched is 3.1 months, which demonstrates good
performance. Those adopters and children who do not secure matches are
referred to the adoption register. The service currently has 19 adopters waiting
to be matched.
recruitment process. This includes details of support and entitlements available
to them pre- and post-adoption. Adopters spoken with were very positive about
WWiSH at all stages of their adoption journey. They were particularly
complimentary about their WWiSH social worker, with one adopter commenting
its a very intrusive process, but not done in an intrusive way. All adopters
spoken to felt the assessment process was done at the right pace and in an
informative manner, including being prepared in advance for the following
home study session. Although a small number of adopters felt support was
lacking from the childs social worker when their child was placed, all would
recommend the adoption service, and thought the children were prepared as
well as could be expected at the point of placement.
early permanency carers who are prepared to foster a baby or young child
during care proceedings before proceeding to adopt should the court grant a
placement order. The WWiSH partnership is running a targeted recruitment
campaign to promote fostering to adopt through which children can be placed
with their potential permanent carers at an earlier stage. It is also targeting
recruitment of adopters who are able to care for more than one child, so that
brothers and sisters can stay together.
and timeliness of life story book completion. Last year, foster carers received
training in life story work, which is positive and reinforces its importance in
helping children to preserve their memories. The books include relevant birth
history information and personal information about the childs interests, but
they are not consistently prepared in accordance with the agreed format and
are in a style which makes them less engaging for children. Some examples
that were seen during the inspection contained narrative that would be more
relevant to include in later life letters.


child; they read like a report and included professional language, rather than
plain English. On a more positive note, one letter recognised the sensitivity of
the issues shared in the letter, alerting the child to this at the beginning so that
they could seek support at the point of reading.
receiving support provided by the WWiSH partnership. This includes a
programme to promote therapeutic play techniques to enable the relationship
between the child and the adopters to be built. Therapeutic parenting courses
are available, which also enable adopters to derive support from the experience
of other adopters facing similar issues. These services are widely available and
adoptive families take up courses when they are required.
tending to be focused on single issues rather than the childs holistic needs.
Plans do not have measurable, outcome-focused targets and none of the cases
have been reviewed to consider the impact of support provided. No case
supervision was recorded on any of the childrens files, although reference to
specific cases was made in the social workers supervision file. The local
authority commissions an appropriate service for birth parents, and a dedicated
worker facilitates letter box contact when appropriate and possible. During
The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good
providing careful attention to their pathway planning and transition to
independent living. The gap in the numbers of care leavers who are in
education, employment and training compared with their non-looked after
peers is substantially reducing.
people aged between 16 and 18 years. Most of these young people live in
Warrington, with only 19 residing outside the local authority boundary.
have dual roles as Social Work Assistants, providing contact supervision to
children who are the subject of proceedings or of Care Orders with supervised
contact requirements. Caseload weighting reflects this workload division, and
Personal Advisers have manageable numbers of young people allocated to
them. A restructuring programme creating a dedicated Leaving Care Service will
be implemented in the summer of 2015. This is intended to strengthen service
provision, allowing Personal Advisers to assist in the implementation of
improvement priorities set in the Care Leavers Strategy.


Advisers. They particularly value the consistent, long-serving staff team, which
enables them to build trusting professional relationships. They described their
Personal Advisers as going beyond the call of duty in offering support and
guidance.
three months. These are updated twice a year. Pathway Plan Reviews for care
leavers over 18 years are not, however, reviewed with the oversight of a
qualified social worker.
comprehensive, salient information about young people, including their income,
accommodation, education, employment, training and health outcomes;
objectives were clear, with detailed, accountable actions and well considered
contingency plans. Young peoples practical needs were carefully documented
and timely responses provided.
emotional wellbeing, particularly amongst the majority of care leavers who live
independently, whose good emotional health and stability is particularly
important to coping with the demands of independence. This is further
compounded by insufficient management information on care leavers with
greater vulnerabilities, including those with substance misuse problems or
mental health difficulties. A small proportion of Pathway Plans seen were not
specific enough in addressing young peoples health needs, and were too
dependent on young people to make appointments and access services.
benefited from extensive consultation with young people and their parents.
Personal Advisers work jointly with young peoples Social Workers from the age
of 16 to 18 to ensure that their Pathway Plans are rigorous. Twenty-five care
leavers, representing about a third of those eligible, are tracked from the age of
services. A commissioning process is in preparation to provide additional wrap
around services in education, health and care for young people aged 16 years
and over.
(LAC) Nurse works with looked after children and young people up to 18 years
of age, but no dedicated service is available to older care leavers. There are
two specialist looked after CAMHS posts, assisting navigation of some young
people with complex mental health needs into adult mental health services, but
pathways for care leavers with additional emotional and mental health
difficulties that do not meet adult thresholds are currently underdeveloped.
Individual risks concerning offending and substance misuse are known and
understood by Personal Advisers, but the availability of additional services to
support more vulnerable care leavers is patchy.


sexual health and substance misuse services as required. Care leavers are not
currently provided with a health passport or summary of their health histories,
and young people spoken to stated that they would find this helpful. There is a
commitment to implement health summaries by June 2015.
planned, structured preparation for independence training. This is provided by
Personal Advisers, who offer group programmes on key aspects of preparation,
bolstered by four supported and semi-independent housing providers who offer
independence preparation as a core component of their contract specifications.
Provision of continuing independence preparation to young people aged 18
years and over is less robust, as the majority of older care leavers reside in
independent settings with limited or no additional support packages supplied.
Some care leavers said that they would have welcomed more independence
training phased over a longer period.
are living in unsuitable accommodation. These are both short term
arrangements and Personal Advisers are working with these care leavers to
help find suitable permanent accommodation. Thirteen young people have
remained with their foster carers under Staying Put arrangements and there is
a strategic objective to increase this number.
accommodation offered in the private rented sector or through social housing
nominations. No care leavers reported feeling unsafe in their accommodation or
are housed in high crime hotspot areas of Warrington. There is an emerging
commissioning programme to expand the range of supported housing
providers, both for young people aged 16 to 18 years, and older care leavers.
Currently, four providers are commissioned through a framework arrangement
with a regional commissioning consortium, providing thirteen placements for
young people aged 16 to 18. There are no young people placed in bed and
breakfast accommodation and only four care leavers over 18 years (5%) live in
houses of multiple occupancy, and are appropriately assessed to do so.
not in education, employment or training is improving, and the gap between
them and all Warrington young people is closing quickly. The gap has
decreased from 5.6% in March 2012 to 4.2% in March 2014. In March 2012,
employment or training (NEET). This has reduced significantly to 8.2% in March
Service. This team sits alongside the virtual school, providing well-coordinated
monitoring and support to children in care and care leavers in Warrington and
those placed out of the area.


of partners through the NEET strategy group and improving participation group.
The Careers for Young people Service, which became an in-house service in
priority group, providing lists to schools of young people who are at risk of
becoming NEET.
education, employment and training. Of care leavers aged 19 to 21, 61% are in
education, employment or training, and this trend is improving quickly. This is
an improvement of 16 percentage points from 31 March 2014. Current
performance is 10 percentage points higher than the average for comparable
authorities and 17 higher than the average for England as at 31 March 2014.
The whereabouts and destinations of older care leavers are closely monitored
and a range of tailored support and guidance is offered. A total of nine care
leavers are currently being supported at university. The number of providers
who offer apprenticeships and traineeships has steadily increased over time,
from one in 2012 to nine in 2015. Four care leavers are currently completing
traineeships or apprenticeships. In 2013, five care leavers started
apprenticeships with the local authority; three are still employed and one left to
go to alternative employment.
training. The local authority is continuing to track these young people and is
actively providing support and guidance to help them to access work or
training. Seven of these young people are not capable of work currently due to
ill-health.
supported. Exit interviews are deployed when care leavers cease their
involvement, with feedback used to develop service provision. Have Your Say
(Warringtons Children in Care Council) recommends issues for change and
improvement in their annual report. This is considered and addressed by the
Corporate Parenting Board and key decision makers, although specific examples
of influence achieving tangible change are scant. There is an annual awards
event to celebrate the achievements of looked after children and care leavers.
Members of the Have Your Say group meet quarterly with key decision
makers, including the Director of Childrens Services, the Virtual School Head
Teacher and elected members.


comprehensive. Warrington was part of the all-party Parliamentary entitlements
enquiry and all care leavers are provided with the Who Cares Trust guide to
Leaving Care. The National Care Leavers Charter has been adopted in
Warrington and this sits alongside local pledges to Looked after Children and
Care Leavers. Care Leavers participate in service redesign consultations, Take
Over Days, staff interviews and induction training for Social Workers. Income
entitlements are a key component of pathway plans. Two care leavers who
spoke to inspectors were not fully aware of all their entitlements, particularly
financial entitlements for young parents to assist with childcare costs to support
their college attendance.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Frontline practice, management oversight and outcomes for children receiving early
help and social care services are not yet consistently good.
Warrington was rated inadequate for safeguarding and adequate for looked after
children in its Safeguarding and Looked After Children inspection in 2009. Since that
time it has been on a largely successful improvement journey, but good practice is
not yet consistently embedded across all services. Although leaders have good
understanding of most areas of improvement, there are some significant exceptions.
Warrington has been slow to tackle a recognised area for development relating to
increasing the number of foster carers in order to reduce reliance on residential care.
A lack of decisive action in a significant number of cases has led to emergency
intervention by the police at a point of crisis. During the inspection six cases were
brought to the attention of senior managers, who took further action to strengthen
intervention. A small number of cases demonstrated that the good, multi-agency
procedures developed to respond to child sexual exploitation are not yet consistently
applied in practice. In addition, services for children on the edge of care are
insufficiently developed.
A new quality assurance framework is not yet achieving and maintaining consistently
good standards across childrens services, particularly for children in need of help
and protection and in early help services.
Staff turnover during the past year at senior and middle manager levels and in social
work posts has inhibited the pace of improvement. Senior leaders recognise that the
new managers need help to develop the skills and experience to become highly
effective in the challenging environment of social care.
The DCS and the senior management team are highly committed and ambitious to
improve outcomes for children in Warrington. They have acted decisively to improve
outcomes for care leavers and health outcomes for children in care and take a
systematic approach to tackling areas for improvement from previous inspections.
Partnership working is strong and the combined Families and Wellbeing Directorate
formed in 2014 has created new opportunities for collaborative work across services.
and services for children in need. The quality of common assessments,
combined assessments, plans and decision making is not sufficiently robust.
Some children do not receive the help they need when they need it. Quality
assurance systems are not yet achieving consistently good standards of
practice.


provided to social workers is better than that for IROs and managers. A clear
and comprehensive supervision policy for social work staff in Targeted Services
was refreshed in November 2014. Supervision of social workers is generally
regular and task focused, with detailed consideration of casework and evidence
of reflective practice captured in the template for supervision. The template is
not used consistently across the service for frontline managers and IROs.
Consequently their supervision is less focused on their roles in improving the
quality of social work practice and in holding staff to account.
support. Personal development plans (PDPs) were not in place in all files and
there was little recorded challenge about learning and progression. Positive
feedback was readily provided but constructive challenge was not evidenced.
High levels of support and challenge are particularly important currently, with
several new managers coming into post during the past year, as well as
changes in two key head of service posts.
through training received, and areas for development highlighted in PDPs are
not continued through the supervision process. This hinders continuous
professional development.
looked after children services inspection. Warrington has introduced a new
quality assurance framework, with suitable arrangements for audit, reporting
findings to senior managers and sharing themes with frontline staff. Audit
reports demonstrate improvements in the quality of practice over time. The
audits of tracked cases completed by Warrington staff for the inspection were
of good quality: accurate, exacting and fair. The audit tool is fit for purpose and
reflects well the experiences of children.
protection conference chairs to make priority and starred recommendations in
cases to prevent drift in care planning, and a process was firmly established for
escalation to managers. The Quality Assurance and Safeguarding team provides
regular reports to Heads of Service, outlining progress against these
recommendations. There is also a dispute resolution process. Despite these
initiatives, inspectors found that challenge by the experienced IROs and
conference chairs does not always lead to timely improvements in service
delivery to children and families.
of experience across the social work service as a whole is good. Seventy-six per
cent of managers have over two years managerial experience, 83% of social
workers have over two years practitioner experience, and 50% of staff have
been in post for more than two years.


two social work teams during the past year, has disrupted the quality and
continuity of services to children and families. Within childrens social care there
are 68 social workers and 26 social work managers. All vacant posts are
covered by agency workers. As at 31 January 2015, there were 15 agency
social workers and two agency managers. In addition, one head of service was
from an agency. Ten of the agency workers are concentrated in the two teams
with high turnover, and represent around 40% of the staff in these teams.
Social Work Task Force framework. Workforce issues are carefully considered,
strengths and improvements are recorded, and suitable areas for development
are drawn up in an action plan. For example, training has been provided to
managers to help develop reflective supervision. The most recent health check,
completed in July 2014, reports that all areas for improvement in the action
plan from the previous check in 2013 have been actioned.
close alignment between the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA), the
children and young peoples plan (CYPP) and the joint commissioning strategy.
These documents are refreshed annually. When needs are identified through
the JSNA, commissioning is responsive. For example, additional capacity was
commissioned for the children in care nurse because of increasing demand
during the year. The JSNA provides detailed, relevant and up-to-date
knowledge of the local community; the latest version was produced in January
insufficiently developed. Over the past year the number of children in care has
increased by over 25% from 230 in March 2014 to 294 in January 2015, which
is a substantial rise in this time frame. The council and partners understand the
reasons but they have been unable to support enough children and families
through alternatives to care.
previously done by WWiSH. There is insufficient accommodation for homeless
the JSNA.
needs. In January 2015, 18.4% of children in care were living in childrens
homes. This is 50% higher than the average in similar local authorities and
above Warringtons 12% target. Senior managers acknowledge that they have
insufficient foster carers and have revisited their recruitment strategy, as
targeted recruitment has proved unsuccessful. The vast majority of children in
care are placed in the borough or nearby. Sufficient adoption placements are
available, provided through WWiSH.


dealing with neglect, and historic delays in timescales for children to be
adopted still impact on the adoption scorecard. These problems are steadily
being tackled.
part of its Pledge. The corporate commitment to Childrens Targeted Services is
fully demonstrated through protection of the budget. Against a background of
protected.
reminds councillors and officers of their parental responsibility. This theme of
our children has been taken on board by officers and teachers who talked to
inspectors. The Lead Member has significant relevant experience from her long
career in health services, and she was previously chair of the corporate
parenting panel. She demonstrates a good level of knowledge of issues in
childrens social care and is kept closely informed of local developments through
very regular contact with the DCS. She has raised her profile as Lead Member
in the media so that she can champion children as widely as possible. The
scrutiny committee receives regular presentations from childrens services and
offers suitable challenge. It does not call for reports, so does not actively set
the agenda. The committee received an update on CSE recently and has
promoted training on CSE for elected members, a high proportion of whom
have now received it.
and Adults services roles demonstrates that risks have been mitigated. The
benefits include delivering better, more joined-up services for vulnerable
groups, for example, through joint commissioning.
develop services and improve outcomes for vulnerable groups. For example,
along with partners they have established a multi-agency, integrated service for
children with disabilities that provides single assessment and a one-stop shop
approach to service delivery. The local authority has been active in reviewing its
Childrens Targeted Services structure in order to maintain continuity of social
worker with families. Plans for the restructure are at an advanced stage.
Partners have agreed to establish a multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH)
model in the autumn of 2015.


Programme, Warringtons version of the Troubled Families Programme.
Effective partnership arrangements across three local authorities have enabled
pooling of resources in the WWiSH adoption service and an increase in available
adopters for local children. There are effective relationships between Cafcass,
the Local Family Justice Board (LFJB) and the local authority. Any issues of
concern are resolved quickly. Good partnership working is also evident in multiagency action to prevent looked after young people offending and re-offending.
This has improved significantly over the past twelve months, and is helping to
reduce the number receiving final warnings or convictions. Core groups,
conferences and other children in need meetings are well attended by partners.
However, there has been slippage in obtaining GP and CAMHS reports when
these partners are invited to child protection conferences.
high level strategic meetings in the local authority and across the partnership.
and attends the LSCB. He has brought influence to bear on specific issues, such
as the lack of participation by GPs in child protection conferences. There are
close working relationships between the Chief Executive, the Lead Member and
the DCS and between the DCS and the Chair of the LSCB.
information they require to drive performance, for example, reports to help
managers track the progress of referrals and assessments and to check that
statutory visits are completed. However, where there are gaps, for example in
relation to care leavers who misuse substances and have mental health
difficulties, managers are unable to measure effectiveness of services or
analyse needs to inform joint commissioning proposals for improved service
provision.
performance and take effective action to tackle areas of poor performance.
Examples of improvements are increased coverage of health and dental checks
for children in care; raising the proportion of care leavers age 19 to 21 in
education, training and employment; and continuing to improve placement
stability through, for example, very effective support, training and development
of foster carers in the fostering service. In some areas the performance
systems are yet to have the desired impact. These include systems to monitor
care leavers substance misuse and mental health.
alternatives to care are fully explored before legal proceedings are issued. A
further strength of LGP is that where Section 20 arrangements are in place,
these are tracked via the panel and reviewed to ensure that legal permanence
is considered and drift is avoided.


in the 2011 safeguarding and looked after children services inspection. As a
result, a programme of regular consultation with children in care was developed
and implemented. The Children in Care Councils now meet regularly with the
DCS and the head of the virtual school to ensure that the voices of children in
care are heard. They present their annual report to a meeting of the full Council
and are represented on the active Corporate Parenting Forum and the Children
in Care sub-group. Members of the Children in Care Councils take an active part
in the annual Takeover Day, where they take over the jobs of Senior Officers
and elected members. The Have Your Say newsletter is distributed quarterly to
every child in care and care leaver. This helps to keep them up to date with the
latest events and information, and to share good news stories. The group is
also involved in a number of projects, including helping to recruit senior
managers.
It has promoted the complaints process among young people with the
introduction of the Shout Out complaints leaflet, and the make your child's
experience count leaflet for parents, along with the commissioned service from
NYAS. IROs encourage all their children to take a lead role in their case
reviews, which has resulted in some children chairing their own meetings.
Childrens Centres organise an annual parent satisfaction survey, to determine
what service users think of Centre services. In 2014, 83% of all respondents
indicated that they were very satisfied with the services available. The
Principal Social Worker (PSW) has a social work practitioner reference group
and is involved in national and regional networks. The PSW provides regular
feedback from the front line to senior officers, for example on the recent
consultation on the redesign of the social work service and provides quarterly
audit reports to managers identifying key themes and areas for improvement.
The role is not yet having sufficient impact on improving consistency in the
quality of social work practice. Social Workers told inspectors that they enjoy
their jobs and are positive about the support provided by colleagues and
managers. Managers are accessible, and caseloads are manageable. New social
workers benefit from good support in their assessed and supported year in
employment (ASYE). The local authority has developed a post qualification
critical reflection module, which all social workers will work through after
ASYE. This is currently being evaluated for impact. The training programme is
well regarded by staff and covers training needs arising, for example, from
themes in case audits and serious case reviews.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement.
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.

Summary of findings
The LSCB requires improvement because:
 Although the Board has many positive aspects, its planning is not sufficiently
outcome focused to identify the impact of frontline practice on children.
 The Boards business priorities are not effectively measured once they are
implemented, which means that it is unsighted on the progress that is being
made.
 The performance reporting system is not effectively used to ensure that the
Board is fully aware of practice and management inconsistencies. As a result,
there has been a lack of effective action in some areas to ensure that good
practice is developed and promoted.
 Neither the intelligence provided by the Section 11 audit that monitors partners
safeguarding arrangements nor the detailed information provided by the Child
Death Overview Panel (CDOP) leads to a sufficiently robust understanding of
issues.
 The Board operates within a mature culture of respectful challenge under an
effective independent Chair who is supported by a well-managed and efficient
core team. The Board is well connected to other statutory bodies, in part due to a
set of clear and effective protocols.
 Training is a particular strength of the Board. A well-organised training pool
provides an extensive training programme, including popular, accessible
lunchtime sessions. The programme is sufficiently flexible to accommodate
emerging themes from national and local initiatives. Training sessions are
evaluated and this is appropriately followed up to ensure that learning has been
put into practice.
 The Board has a learning culture and has recently undertaken a peer review,
following which it has swiftly put in place improved structural arrangements. This
includes a suitably enhanced role for its Executive Committee to ensure that
Board business is now streamlined and able to drive its core priorities. Highly
active reference groups, including a young peoples group, are adding significant
value to the Boards functioning by providing expert feedback.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
There are no areas for priority or immediate action
Areas for improvement

Business Planning and Performance Monitoring
Boards business plan.
the interim and the long term, is sufficiently flexible to allow them to recognise
and respond to significant shifts in local methods of intervention.
that when it takes up an initiative, it has a clearer idea of what it wants to
achieve by when, and can regularly measure progress in achieving it.

Audit
needs to be strengthened by the local authority and its partners.
it is more accurate and evidence-based, and promotes a culture of continuous
improvement.

Learning the Lessons from Child Death
(CDOP) result in improved reporting to LSCBs at a local authority level.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
and is well resourced and supported by the commitment of the local authority
and its partners. The Board operates to a detailed, overarching business plan
and has adopted a range of Cheshire-wide policies and procedures, such as
their compliance policy and procedures, sexual exploitation strategy, and CDOP.
The LSCB has developed and ratified the threshold to services document 201416 and appropriate monitoring is leading to a sound understanding of agencies
application of the threshold for early help services and statutory intervention.


part, is what enables it to deliver across such an extensive agenda. An increase
in the frequency of meetings of the main Board to bi-monthly has facilitated an
increase in the volume of agenda items. Following an LSCB peer review
conducted in November 2014, the Boards structure has been improved to
enable it to deliver its business agenda. The Boards Executive Committee also
meets bi-monthly to purposefully drive forward the business plan. The wealth
of information generated by the Boards extensive business agenda means that
it knows itself well and it operates to a mature culture of appropriate challenge.
maintaining the right balance between challenge and support. She is held to
account for the work that she is responsible for, and in turn she is clear in her
role, which requires her to hold others to account. These processes are
achieved through her attendance at a series of regular meetings with senior
leaders, including the Chief Executive, who is also chair of the Health and
Wellbeing Board, and the Director of Childrens Services.
ensure that childrens safeguarding issues remain a high priority. For example,
the Chairs membership of the Health and Wellbeing board guarantees a
minimum of two safeguarding agenda items each year, and signed, written
protocols are firmly agreed. The Board has reported to the Vulnerable People
committee of elected members and taken part in a summit held by the PanCheshire Police and Crime Commissioner to consider prevalence of child sexual
exploitation within the county.
However, the current arrangements are insufficiently rigorous to allow
members of the Board to understand fully trends in frontline practice from early
help to statutory intervention. For example, the Board had not identified the
significant rise in the use of police powers of protection or inconsistencies in the
implementation of child sexual exploitation procedures. The Board receives and
effectively works through the implications of a range of required reports, such
as those relating to Private Fostering and Local Authority Designated Officer
(LADO) arrangements and monitoring reports on early help.


community from four well established and active reference groups comprising
operational managers, practitioners, young people, and faith and community
groups. These groups allow the Board to draw upon their members detailed
knowledge and to ensure that business priorities are tested out by those
directly affected. Following the peer reviews recommendation that lay
members take a more active role suitable to their background and abilities, they
are now highly engaged in the Boards current priority of reaching out to its
communities, for example through the faith and community reference group.
This groups work is having a particularly positive impact on the Boards
relationship with its emerging communities, such as a clearer understanding of
the needs of the rapidly expanding Polish community and the engagement of
members of the Muslim faith, who have recently attended training events.
prioritisation. However, the Board is not yet successful in its ambition to be
outcome focused in its planning, so that it is able to measure fully and report
on the impact of its activity, for example, of its work to raise awareness across
the partnership of the impact of neglect and of child sexual exploitation.
Although the Board has evaluated increased competence derived from training
and more children being kept safe, the business plan does not specifically
identify the expected outcomes to be achieved and how they will be measured.
This reduces the Boards ability to report on its effectiveness. The Board
undertakes a range of Warrington specific multi-agency audits to inform itself of
the quality of front line practice and this includes monitoring the effectiveness
of early help. The Board is outward facing and open to external scrutiny, for
example, peer review. The work within Warrington includes case reviews to
capture learning from individual cases, inter-agency deep dive audits of the
impact of multi-agency child protection intervention on individual cases, and
themed multi-agency audits used in part as a success measure for Board
activities. Detailed summary reports are produced that satisfactorily draw out
the implications for practice. However, case tracking by inspectors found that
lessons learnt from this process are not consistently influencing practice.
Children Act 2004 are variable in depth. The Boards own analysis of the quality
of these audits evaluates that some are over optimistic and positive in content,
providing insufficient evidence of achievement. For example, some respondents
maintained that they listened to the voices of children without providing specific
evidence of the way that childrens views had influenced service delivery. The
Board is committed to ensuring that the best response to this years audit
becomes the standard expectation for next year.


child sexual exploitation, both through membership of the Pan-Cheshire
strategic group and its own operational sub-committee, the Missing, Child
Sexual Exploitation, Trafficked Operational Group (MCSETO). However, tracking
of cases by inspectors indicates that it has not been sufficiently vigilant in
checking that its own thorough understanding of the issue at a strategic level is
mirrored by systemic improvements in practice among frontline professionals.
The Board has conducted an audit of child sexual exploitation activity, and this
contributed to the development of an offender profile which was used by the
Cheshire police force to successfully implement disruption activity. MCSETO
looks at patterns and themes emerging from practice, and uses this information
to map hotspots. A wide-ranging training programme is in place to promote
awareness of the risks of child sexual exploitation, with the inclusion of new
partners such as taxi licensing authorities and hoteliers.
activities. Its wide-ranging programme is tailored to the specific requirements
of professionals and is based on an analysis of need. For example, targeted
sessions are provided for lead professionals undertaking early help assessments
and elected members benefit from regular updates about service and practice
developments. The Board maintains additional capacity to provide focused
workshops or lunchtime sessions when further need is identified. This ensures
that it can respond flexibly to emerging issues such as radicalisation, and
promote multi-agency awareness of the issues and the responses that are
required. Training sessions are predominantly delivered by a well-organised
training pool of staff. A satisfactory evaluation process is in place that suitably
informs the planning of future sessions.
There are no recently published serious case reviews (SCRs), though one is
currently underway. A suitable system is in place to commission reviews when
necessary. Learning from SCRs from across Cheshire and those published
nationally is captured via regular reports from the Board manager to the subcommittee. Lessons are used to inform multi-agency practice locally, such as
the planned introduction of Family CAFs following recommendations from an
SCR undertaken in Yorkshire.
with an interim chair and work plan in place while a permanent appointment is
made. These structural changes will allow CDOP to take forward a well thoughtthrough plan. This will provide quality data about child mortality that will
potentially better inform the Boards business planning at a local level.
However, the arrangements currently in place for constituent LSCBs to receive
feedback and information from CDOP are ineffective. The Board is unable to
discern with confidence local trends or take specific action to address identified
themes, as it cannot be sure whether the information that is provided relates
specifically to Warrington.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted and two additional inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Sarah Urding HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Rob Hackeson HMI
Team inspectors: Janet Fraser HMI, Martin Parry HMI, Ty Yousaf (Seconded
Inspector), Tracey Metcalfe HMI, Nick Stacey (Contracted Inspector), Ian Young
HMI, Wendy Ratcliffe HMI
Quality assurance manager: Bob Morton Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


