Warwickshire
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 2 May to 25 May 2017
Report published: 14 July 2017

Childrens services in Warwickshire require improvement to be
good

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Requires improvement

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Since the last full inspection of services for children in need of safeguarding and
those in the care of Warwickshire, some areas of provision have not been sustained
or made further progress. As a result, most services now require improvement to be
good.
Greater stability in the senior management team in the past 18 months has enabled
some progress to be made. Senior managers and political leaders are committed to
making further improvements. They recognise that more work needs to be done to
ensure that practice is consistently good across the service.
While early support and prevention are identified as priorities and there is an early
help offer to families in place, the local authority cannot be assured that it is helping
all families and children who need early help at the right time. Not all partners
understand or are engaged in early help: the authority and the Local Safeguarding
Children Board (LSCB) have not yet ensured appropriate engagement from all
partners.
An effective multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) is in place that ensures that
there is a single front door for referrals. Almost all partners have engaged well with
the MASH, although work remains to be done to ensure full engagement from
health. Thresholds for cases to be stepped up from early help or stepped down are
not always consistently applied.
Some young people remain in police custody longer than they should, and further
work is required by the authority and its partners to ensure that this incidence is
reduced.
Risk is identified and children are kept safe across all services in almost all
circumstances. While assessments of need are often of good quality, plans to tackle
needs are less clear and sometimes overly optimistic about parental capacity to
change, leading to slow progress in achieving better outcomes.
Some staff, including social workers and independent reviewing officers (IROs), have
too much work. This, together with slow implementation of a new computer
information system, has meant some delays in gathering information and ensuring
that plans and decisions are updated quickly. Consequently, some children
experience delay and make slower progress.
Designated officer arrangements for the management of allegations against
professionals are insufficiently robust, and, as a result, interventions have not always
been timely. This area of weakness was not sufficiently recognised by the authority
until this inspection and, if left unchallenged, could have resulted in some children
remaining in unassessed, risky situations.
Managers make the right decisions to accommodate children. Social workers know
their children well and visit them regularly. In some teams, high caseloads make
managing work more difficult. High caseloads for dual-role child protection


chairs/IROs make challenges to poor work more reactive, and, as a result, less
effective in ensuring good outcomes that are timely. Some young people have had
too many placements in a short time, and the local authority has not yet ensured a
sufficient range of placement options to tackle this. In some cases, childrens mental
health needs are not being met sufficiently because of a lack of timely access to
mental health services.
When children are at risk of sexual exploitation, the response is effective and wellcoordinated by partners. Risk assessments are detailed and thorough. Through
increased investment, the local authority has ensured that there is effective
engagement through timely return home interviews with children who go missing
from home or care. Work on child sexual abuse activity is child focused, and has led
to a number of successful prosecutions and disruption activity in key hotspot areas.
When children are in the local authoritys care, managers give early consideration to
permanent living arrangements for most children. Children are matched well to
permanent placements, and brothers and sisters are almost always placed together
when this is in their best interests. Adoption is considered at an early stage for all
children who may benefit from this. The local authority has worked effectively to
make sure that the time between a child entering care and moving in with their
adoptive family is quicker than the national average. Adopters feel well supported,
and training prepares them well for the challenge of becoming an adoptive parent.
More needs to be done to ensure that all care leavers are appropriately prepared for
independence. While many care leavers are in education, employment or training,
there has been a rise in young people not actively engaged. The authority needs to
do more to ensure that young people leaving care have greater access to
employment opportunities and apprenticeships.
There is an active and engaged children in care council (CiCC), but the corporate
parenting panel needs to do more to demonstrate challenge and influence in
improving services. While there are good examples of children being heard and
listened to, case recording does not always reflect the voice of the child well.
A move to a new information system has not been implemented with sufficient pace.
Consequently, the local authority struggles at times to ensure that all its data is
accurate without considerable validation work. The authority cannot be sure that it
has a clear understanding of current progress in all areas of service and therefore of
what needs to improve.
The local authority has a quality assurance programme that includes case auditing,
but this is not consistently leading to learning and improved practice.
The local authority has worked to increase staff stability through a range of
recruitment and retention initiatives and has been successful in reducing its use of
agency staff.


Contents
The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates no childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
October 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in October 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The interim director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since 5 January
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services.
 The joint managing directors at chief executive level have been in post since 6
February 2017.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since 22 May 2014.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 112,262 children and young people under the age of 18 live in
Warwickshire. This is 20% of the total population of the area.
 Approximately 13.0% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 8.8% (the national average is 14.5%)
 in secondary schools is 7.2% (the national average is 13.2%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 14% of all
children living in the area, compared with 26% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Indian and Other White.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 9.8% (the national average is 20.1%)
 in secondary schools is 6.9% (the national average is 15.7%).

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2017, 3,318 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 31 March 2017, 443 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 473 at 31 March 2016.
 At 31 March 2017, seven children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from 10 at 31 March 2016.
 Since the last inspection, eight serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and five serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at
the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2017, 699 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 62 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 765 (68.1 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
authority area
authority area
area
 In the last 12 months:
 there were 64 adoptions
returned to be looked after
living
 no care leavers were living in houses of multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Recommendations

Ensure that all children and families have access to good-quality early help
services as soon as they need them and that the early help strategy is fully
understood and delivered in partnership with all agencies.


Ensure that the workloads of social workers, including newly qualified staff, and
IROs are reduced in line with the authoritys stated aims to enable them to
provide consistently high-quality services to children.


Accelerate plans to fully integrate the electronic recording system so that
accurate data can be produced and used effectively by all staff to measure and
improve practice.


Ensure that there are a sufficient number and range of good-quality placements
to provide stable and well-matched homes for children looked after.


Ensure that appropriate work is undertaken with the police and Warwickshire
Youth justice service to reduce the incidence of overnight stays in police
custody for young people.


Review and revise arrangements to ensure that care leavers gain appropriate
practical skills, including budgeting, before they leave care.


Ensure that pathway plans are effective to support and challenge young people
to achieve better outcomes.


Consistently evidence the childs voice on the childs case record to ensure that
their wishes and feelings about life at home are clearly recorded and
understood and that, when appropriate, advocacy is made available to ensure
that young peoples views are heard.


Prioritise plans to reduce the length of time children looked after have to wait
to receive support for their emotional well-being and mental health.

to their birth parents and wider family settings.
and challenge in partnership with young people to improve services.
panel chair are embedded in practice to support accountability and discussions
about the quality of the service.


Summary for children and young people
 When children and families have problems at home, almost all get help, but some
families do not get the help they need at the right time.
 Social workers, police and teachers talk to each other so that they can make sure
that they know what help children need to keep them safe. If a child has a social
worker, the child will be seen regularly and spoken to about how they feel. Plans
for children are not always clear about what needs to change and by when, and
what will happen if things do not improve. Children do not always have their
wishes listened to as part of making the plan. Social workers know this needs to
improve.
 When children are unsafe, social workers and police work hard to make children
safe and get them the support they need. They also use other people, such as
teachers and nurses, to help them. Managers make sure that everyone
understands about children being at risk of sexual exploitation and why it is
important to work together to keep children safe.
 Sometimes children cannot stay with their families. Social workers help to find
good homes with other adults, such as foster carers. Social workers will continue
to help families and will try to make sure that children can go home if it is safe to
do so. If they cannot go home, social workers will try to make sure that children
stay with their brothers and sisters and see their parents.
 Social workers make sure that children who need permanent new families get
them quickly. Children are helped to understand why they are not living with their
parents through detailed stories and pictures about their lives.
 There is a very good CiCC, which represents all children in care and care leavers.
These young people tell adults who make decisions about what needs to change
to make things better for them. Young people are working with managers, social
workers and IROs to make meetings better and to make sure that childrens
wishes are heard.
 Young people who have left care do not always get the support they need at the
right time. Although most young people are in suitable accommodation, some
have not been given the help to learn to live on their own.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Children who need help and protection in Warwickshire receive services that keep
them safe. However, services are not yet sufficiently effective, consistent or
coordinated to ensure that outcomes are improved and sustained. Social workers
build purposeful relationships with children and families, but the quality of case
recording is inconsistent, and many records do not always reflect the efforts made
to engage parents or seek the views of children about their day-to-day
experiences.
Partner agencies do not yet fully understand or engage in the early help offer.
While some partners are completing early help single assessments, the overall
quality and timeliness of the assessments are variable, often lacking detail,
analysis and the voice of the child. There is a significant shortfall of early help
single assessments from health partners. The early help offer is not yet providing a
consistent approach to supporting vulnerable families to prevent escalation to
statutory services.
Demand at the front door is high and the MASH has engaged most partners
effectively to ensure that systems and processes are in place to manage all new
contacts and referrals. These arrangements are still becoming established and do
not always result in timely and consistent application of thresholds. This is
particularly so for cases that are stepped up and down across the spectrum of
early help and statutory services.
Social work assessments are of good quality. Despite the limitations of a recently
implemented case-recording system and high caseloads in some service areas,
assessments show effective social work practice that is often analytical and
focused on risks, strengths and protective factors in families. However, plans can
sometimes be too vague, lacking in contingency arrangements and overly
optimistic about parental capacity to change in the light of longstanding historical
concerns.
Initial child protection conferences are not always timely, although effective
arrangements are in place to ensure that childrens needs are met prior to a multiagency conference. Designated officer arrangements for responding to and
overseeing the management of allegations against professionals are insufficiently
robust and require greater management oversight. The response to child sexual
exploitation is robust and effective, and is leading to improved outcomes for
children. Return home interviews are undertaken more effectively because of a
strengthened service that ensures timely information sharing and engagement with
children.


Inspection findings
a sufficient understanding of their role in preventative early help services.
Although the local authority has processes to monitor the quality and progress
of early help single assessments, oversight by the early help officers based in
the MASH is not yet sufficiently rigorous to ensure improvement in all cases.
Early help assessments completed by partner agencies are not always promptly
completed or sufficiently focused on childrens needs. This means that some
children and families are not receiving the right help at the right time.
(Recommendation)
when designated as lead professional in more complex early help cases. This
has ensured better-quality assessments, underpinned by direct work with
children and families. Plans for intervention are well targeted and clearly linked
to attainable outcomes.
help provision from childrens centres, Targeted Youth Support and
family/parenting support services. A recognised parenting programme provides
a major focus of work with families, and a range of staff across partner
agencies are trained to deliver the programme. Family group conferences help
identify additional support from extended family members for some children in
need. Locality panels are in place to scrutinise early help support when cases
are stuck, due to lack of engagement by families, and this helps to ensure
further progress in these cases.
response to referrals and requests for advice. When there is an immediate
presenting risk, children are kept safe and progressed promptly to childrens
social care teams for a single assessment. When parental consent is required,
consistent efforts are made in most cases to secure this, and managers
understand when it is appropriate to dispense with consent in the interests of
childrens safety. Feedback is provided to referrers in the majority of cases.
There is a robust triage system that provides effective decision-making when
professionals and members of the public contact the MASH with concerns about
childrens welfare.
Consequently, the availability of information and consultation from other
professionals at the point of referral are effective. However, the absence of a
health representative in the MASH is unresolved, despite consistent attempts to
progress this issue by the authority, making it difficult to ensure that childrens
health needs and history inform timely decision-making at the front door.


risk is identified and responded to effectively by staff within the MASH.
However, thresholds are not always consistently applied when cases need to
step up to statutory services or step down to early help, following work at a
statutory level. As a result, some cases are not responded to at the right level
of service in a timely way.
ensure that support is offered to children and families at the right point of
service. Partner agencies have worked together closely so that domestic abuse
notifications are progressed through to childrens locality teams or early help in
a timely manner. The identification of support to victims depending on need is
via police domestic abuse risk officers, independent domestic violence
advocates, the Safer Neighbourhood Team and a commissioned provider.
However, there is a limited range of interventions and tools to address the
impact of domestic abuse on children and minimal access to perpetrator
programmes.
good interface with daytime services, offering appropriate advice and guidance
to professionals and members of the public. The service has access to four
dedicated foster carer placements. However, some young people are remaining
in police custody overnight inappropriately. (Recommendation)
thorough consideration of risk. Decisions are recorded clearly, together with
actions that reflect good coordination between partners. Most strategy
meetings are held in the MASH with a range of partners. However, when
meetings are held by locality teams, these are not always attended by
appropriate agencies, particularly the police, although information is made
available.
welfare and take account of the impact of risk and protective factors on
childrens development. Assessments are mostly sensitive to disability, ethnicity
and cultural considerations, and social workers take appropriate steps to ensure
effective use of interpreters when language is a barrier. Inspectors saw some
effective child-centred practice with children who have disabilities, by workers
who form good relationships with families and encourage creative use of direct
payments following assessment. Management oversight is evident in allocation
processes and supervision records. In the best examples, this oversight has
provided clear direction to social workers on the key considerations prior to
undertaking an assessment via an allocation summary completed by managers.
of historical information for social workers completing assessments. In some
cases, social workers did not know where to look for records of previous
involvement. While the local authority has taken steps to provide system


champions in every team, system difficulties have made the task onerous and
time-consuming. However, social workers know their children and families well,
seek to engage them purposefully and use this knowledge effectively to help
assess childrens needs.
reported that they undertake direct work with children and were able to give
examples, this too is poorly recorded and, as a result, the work undertaken by
staff is not always well evidenced. (Recommendation)
meeting. The timeliness of initial child protection conferences has declined, with
only 53% held within the 15-day target timescale in the last six months and the
remainder within 30 days. Child protection chairs report that the delays are due
to a combination of late notifications by social workers following strategy
meetings, staff capacity and meeting venue availability. However, appropriate
protective actions are taken to ensure that children are safeguarded while they
wait for their conference to be held. Multi-agency core groups are held regularly
and review progress against child protection plans effectively in almost all
cases. This ensures that risk is minimised and children and families achieve
positive outcomes.
needs to change to make improvements to childrens lives, they are not always
specific enough about timescales for achievement and they lack detail about
contingency arrangements. This is particularly evident in relation to some cases
of parental substance misuse, domestic abuse and mental health, in which
there has been over-optimism about the capacity of parents to change.
However, when situations change and risk increases, in most cases this is
recognised by managers and social workers. Action is then taken, including
through Public Law Outline processes and applications to courts when
necessary.
(MARACs) and multi-agency public protection arrangements (MAPPA), assess
and manage risk effectively for families with multiple needs, such as domestic
abuse, substance misuse and parental mental ill-health. These forums are well
coordinated and held more frequently to respond to increased demand, and
there is evidence of good attendance from most partner agencies. When there
have been issues about irregular attendance, this has been appropriately
escalated to relevant agencies and addressed to ensure improvements. There
are clear pathways from the MASH, which triages cases of high-risk domestic
abuse prior to the MARAC to ensure that effective safety plans are in place.
Medium-risk cases can also escalate to the MARAC if there is a pattern of
repeat incidents.
effective and coordinated. There are clear pathways from the front door to the


child sexual exploitation team. Risk assessments are detailed and thorough and
inform the multi-agency child sexual exploitation (MASE) process to ensure
intelligence sharing and planning to keep children safe. The work is child
focused and supportive. This has led to a number of successful prosecutions
and disruption activity in key hotspot areas.
staff within the child sexual exploitation and missing service. Most return home
interviews are completed promptly. After a safe and well check by police, return
home interviews are offered to children for every missing episode, including to
children looked after who are placed in Warwickshire by another local authority.
Intelligence from every return home interview is then shared with police and
with other agencies as appropriate. This helps to make sure that the process
informs planning for children effectively to keep them safe. Out-of-hours social
work support includes making telephone contact with children found after a
missing episode, prior to the return home interview. This offers added
assurance to both child and carer following a missing episode.
missing education (CME) through clear guidance. All cases, currently 80 in total,
are competently risk assessed by an education officer based in the MASH, who
checks with a range of other agencies to ensure that children still missing
education after a few days are monitored closely. Lateral checks are carried out
at regular intervals to mitigate risk and to see whether CME have re-emerged.
Those children who continue to be deemed missing are logged with the
national Department for Education missing database.
There is an established process to monitor the use of all school computers, and
there is a prompt and effective response to concerns. Schools identify and
respond to bullying through their reporting of prejudice-related incidents. As a
result, schools more readily take action and report incidents to the local
authority to keep children safe. The local authority analyses the nature of
incidents and intervenes directly with schools when incidents appear high.
profile and understanding of female genital mutilation has been raised through
partnership activity and a local action plan. Female genital mutilation is
recognised and responded to effectively, evidenced by two female genital
mutilation protection orders obtained within the last 12-month period.
is leading to appropriate referrals to the Channel Panel. Although Warwickshire
is not a priority area for the Prevent duty, education providers, social workers
and other professionals have made a number of referrals. Additional support is
available from the MASH service manager, who is the conduit between
childrens services, the police and community safety. This shows increased


awareness about the risks to children from radicalisation and their potential
origins.
assessed and supported to ensure that appropriate accommodation is identified
in accordance with a clear local protocol. When assessment identifies
vulnerability or risk, future support is provided directly through a child in need
plan or, if necessary, entry into care.
complete timely assessments that identify risk and support needs effectively.
Although there are only seven children identified as living in private fostering
arrangements, publicity has been prioritised and information disseminated
across a range of agencies, including faith and community groups. Training for
staff in the MASH has ensured an effective response at the front door. This has
led to an increase in referrals and the appointment of a dedicated private
fostering social worker.
responses in several cases. In a small number of these, it has meant a delay in
ensuring that children are safeguarded quickly enough. The local authority has
not been aware of this until it was raised by inspectors. In response, managers
took appropriate steps to ensure that this was addressed.
last 12 months, not all children and families who could benefit have timely
access to advocacy services. This makes it more difficult for children to voice
their wishes and feelings effectively without assistance during meetings.
help single assessment. Creative methods of feedback using mobile phone
technology are available for families to access and express their views on the
quality of service. However, feedback is not routinely sought, collated or used
to inform planning for all children and families.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Decisions for children to enter care are appropriate. Social workers visit children
regularly and often build relationships of trust that support improved outcomes.
However, high caseloads and a recording system that is not supporting good
practice effectively are having a negative impact on the ability of social workers to
consistently do their best for children. Early consideration is given to securing
permanent homes for children. The local authority acts quickly to secure adoption
for all children who could benefit, including those for whom it is harder to find a
placement. Adopters and children benefit from good post-adoption support. For
the few children for whom there is delay in achieving permanence, the monthly
permanence panel is increasingly effective in recognising and correcting this. When
the aim is to achieve permanence by return to birth parents, these plans lack
rigour and consequently are not consistently successful.
The local authority is not providing stable long-term placements for all children.
Placement stability is below that achieved by similar local authorities. The local
authority is working hard to tackle this, with an increasing range of placement
options, enhanced support to foster carers and a well-considered new sufficiency
strategy. However, these measures are either relatively new, yet to be
implemented or are only providing services for a very few children and so have not
had a significant impact. Services for children looked after who have disabilities
and those in specific circumstances, such as unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children and those at risk of sexual exploitation or of going missing, are effective.
However, those who have emotional well-being problems or mental ill-health wait
too long for a service. The virtual school works well with schools to enhance
educational attainment of children looked after but has not been successful in
reducing fixed-term exclusions, which remain high.
IRO caseloads are excessive. Minutes from review meetings often wait months to
be uploaded into electronic case records, exacerbated by the challenges of the
new electronic recording system. This makes it more difficult to track actions and
childrens progress between reviews. Not enough children benefit from the support
of an advocate or independent visitor. Their use is not routinely considered or
offered for children looked after.
A large majority of care leavers live in suitable accommodation and are supported
by social workers and personal advisers who know them well. However,
preparation for independent living is not strong and suitable accommodation is not
always readily available for care leavers who require higher levels of support.
Some care leavers experience placement breakdown and moves as a result.


Inspection findings
these are appropriate. In all the cases seen by inspectors, no children were
being looked after unnecessarily. There are a few children who could have been
brought into care earlier. These are mainly children who were living in homes
where they were experiencing chronic neglect, and existing services had not
been successful in reducing risk. Some of these children had to wait until
concerns escalated from chronic to acute, and then came into care in an
emergency rather than in a planned way.
know them well and, in many cases, build relationships of trust with their social
workers. However, high, and in a few cases excessive, caseloads and a caserecording system that is not currently supporting good practice effectively are
reducing the ability of social workers to consistently do their best for children.
systems in place to make sure that this is achieved swiftly. These include
fortnightly case decision-making meetings, a Public Law Outline tracker for
cases that are likely to come before the court, and a case progression
monitoring system. The local authority monitors closely how work is
progressing, thus ensuring that there is no unnecessary delay. The current
timescale for court proceedings is 29 weeks, compared to the national target of
the quality of court assessments completed by social workers, which are mostly
good, clear and analytical. This progress was commented on to inspectors by
the local authoritys partners in the Children and Family Court Advisory and
Support Service (Cafcass) and the judiciary.
finding them permanent homes. This includes early consideration and good use
of twin-tracking and foster-to-adopt placements for children who are the
subject of court proceedings. However, the local authority is not achieving such
early consideration or finding permanent homes for all children. The monthly
permanence panel meeting recently reviewed the situations of a number of
children looked after, who had been in care for over nine months without a plan
for permanence, and put in place remedial actions when necessary. Alongside
an earlier review of children voluntarily looked after under section 20 of the
Children Act 1989, this shows that the local authority is strengthening its focus
on achieving permanent homes for children as soon as possible.
childrens social workers work well together to complete the matching
assessments and to provide support to children and foster carers. Sensitive and
age-appropriate life story work is helping many children make sense of their
pasts and supporting better outcomes. Brothers and sisters are almost always
placed together when this is in their best interests. The local authoritys work to


manage and, when appropriate, promote contact is sensitive to childrens
wishes and needs. When children may have mixed feelings about contact, when
family dynamics are complicated or when there may be ongoing concerns about
some family members, the local authority is rigorous in making sure that
arrangements are safe and in childrens best interests.
foster care arrangements is an increasingly frequent and generally positive
permanence option for children in Warwickshire. For a small number of
children, however, these placements have not worked well. Placements have
broken down, and children have had to move to new homes. When inspectors
looked at the viability assessments that had led to these placements, they
found that they were over-optimistic about carers ability to provide stable longterm homes for children and lacked clear analysis.
returning to live with their birth parents, the assessments and subsequent
support and rehabilitation plans lack the rigour that is applied to other
permanence options. Consequently, children and their families do not always
experience successful returns home. The emotionally harmful impact of this on
children, who have already been removed from their birth families once, can be
significant. While inspectors did see some examples of very well-managed
rehabilitation plans and packages of support, these were in the minority.
(Recommendation)
Warwickshire. Social workers are trained in age assessments, have good access
to interpreters, support young people in liaising with the Home Office and
display cultural competence in their work with young people from diverse
cultures, religions and nationalities. This is ensuring appropriate
accommodation, including placement with foster carers and spot purchasing of
high-support need accommodation in cases of high risk of trafficking, and
further education opportunities.
not been sufficient to ensure stable and lasting placements for children in
Warwickshire. At the time of the inspection, childrens short- and long-term
placement stability was below that for similar local authorities and had reduced
slightly over the last year. The local authority is aware of this and has taken
action to improve matters, including wider placement options (such as solo
placements for young people who have more challenging needs, and a new
mother and baby foster placement) and enhanced support to foster carers
(including doubling the frequency of supervision, strengthening annual
appraisals, and the recent addition of psychological support, which foster carers
value). A detailed and comprehensive new three-year sufficiency strategy,
aimed at improving the volume, breadth and quality of placements available for
children, has been created and will soon be implemented. While these
measures are all positive and well focused, most of them are either relatively


new, yet to be implemented or only provide services for a small number of
children and consequently have not yet had a significant impact. Ensuring the
availability of a sufficient breadth and number of well-supported placements for
children therefore remains a significant challenge for the local authority.
(Recommendation)
children looked after and all children. At key stage 2, results have improved
steadily over the last two years, and children looked after have performed
better than similar children nationally. There has been further improvement at
key stage 4, with the proportion achieving good grades in GCSE English and
mathematics now at 25%, against a national average rate for children looked
after of 18%. At 16, the proportion of children looked after who progress to a
positive destination, such as a college place, has improved over the last three
years. It was 93% in 2016 and had increased over the previous two years.
personal education plan (PEP) process to focus on improving the educational
experience and attainment of children looked after. Access by schools to pupil
premium funding is directly linked to the completion and quality of PEPs and is
managed well by the virtual school. The pupil premium has supported afterschool activities and essential equipment such as an eye-gaze recognition
computer to support a young persons communication in placement. Most PEPs
completed by schools have clear targets and a good focus on childrens broader
welfare needs. However, PEPs completed by colleges are not consistently of the
same quality and, consequently, support to these students is less well targeted.
after nationally. However, fixed-term exclusions, at 13%, are higher than the
have not been sufficiently effective. The local authority takes a lead in quality
assuring alternative education providers, and the majority of the 92 pupils
attending such provision access 25 hours per week or more. When they attend
for less time, it is for legitimate reasons and is well monitored.
higher, the caseloads of IROs are exceptionally high. This has been
exacerbated by the challenges of the implementation of the new recording
system. The impact of this is that, although review meetings for children looked
after are consistently timely, minutes and actions from them routinely wait
months to be uploaded into childrens electronic case records in some cases.
This makes it more difficult for IROs, social workers and others to track actions
and childrens progress between reviews. IROs are still exercising some limited
challenge and scrutiny of how childrens plans are being progressed. Such
challenge and scrutiny are often reactive to problems that arise for particular
children, rather than proactively monitoring the progress made by all children,
including those in long-term and stable placements. (Recommendation)


appropriate and are often engaged well by social workers and IROs. A pilot
project under way at the time of the inspection has supported some children to
chair their own meetings. This is a very positive development. However, the
use of advocacy to enhance childrens involvement and strengthen their voices
is not routinely considered or offered. As a result, only a small proportion of
children looked after in Warwickshire are benefiting from the support of an
advocate. Social workers reports to review meetings typically provide a helpful
summary of key events since the last review but do not consistently provide a
sufficiently strong analysis of key issues for discussion, future needs or clearly
articulated recommendations. This does not support the best use of care plans,
which are not generally treated as living documents that are updated to reflect
childrens changing needs. (Recommendation)
going missing, this is consistently well addressed. Return home interviews are
usually swift and used to inform planning, while the completion of child sexual
exploitation risk assessments and close working with the police help reduce risk
and keep children and young people safe. Inspectors saw examples of timely
and effective intelligence sharing between the local authority and the police,
leading to children looked after being protected from harm  for example,
through the issuing of child abduction warning notices to disrupt the activity of
suspected perpetrators.
effectively by care and other services that are well matched to their individual
needs. Their transitions to adult services are well managed. Leaving care social
workers and personal advisers are also involved in this process when their
particular knowledge can further strengthen the support that children receive.
The mental health needs of children looked after are less well addressed. When
Journeys, the local authoritys commissioned emotional health and well-being
service for children looked after, or child and adolescent mental health services
(CAMHS), are providing support to children looked after, this work is helping
children and young people to achieve better outcomes. However, waiting times
are lengthy. This is a significant problem because children are often not
receiving help at the time when they most need it. The local authority is aware
of this weakness and is working with its health partners to address it. A wellconsidered CAMHS re-commissioning programme, which involves positive direct
input from children and young people in the design of services, is well under
way but has not had an impact on practice, as the new services are not yet in
place. (Recommendation)
time, and this has been a longstanding problem. Recent significant
improvements in how long these take are very positive with the rate in April at
poor performance in March 2017 of only 24%. The timeliness of completing
review health assessments is much stronger, at an annual rate of 82%.


Strengths and difficulties questionnaires are completed for all children from the
age of four years, with the tool used by Journeys to measure pre- and postchange for young people in care who commence treatment.
the CiCC helps to ensure that children looked after and care leavers of various
ages are involved, currently from age 12 to 21. CiCC members feel a real sense
of responsibility to, and representation of, all children looked after and care
leavers. The CiCC has instigated and been involved in some positive pieces of
work, including designing new age-banded booklets for annual foster carer
reviews and working with IROs on a pilot project for children looked after and
care leavers to chair their own review and pathway plan meetings. The
corporate parenting panels engagement with the CiCC is progressively
strengthening and has the capacity for further development.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
identified at an early stage in care planning. There is suitable urgency in
decision-making to ensure that adoption plans are timely and this urgency
supports early family finding.
weekly case decision and agency decision-makers meetings, which monitor
progress. These ensure that permanency decisions are carefully examined
throughout care proceedings and planning. An early alert system about
potential adoption, via the case decision meetings, is further supported by
placement allocation meetings. These meetings involve childrens social workers
and adoption workers, and information is shared about childrens needs and
individual circumstances. As a result, the adoption team is fully informed about
children for whom adoption is the plan, and is able to consider at an early stage
not only approved adopters but also those being assessed.
and 55 children were adopted in the period 201516. In the 12 months prior to
the inspection, adoption orders were granted for 75 children. In the same
period, a decision for adoption was taken for 72 children, 47 of whom are
placed, and families are being actively sought for 25. The current cohort
includes five children who have a disability. However, adoption performance
data is not sufficiently focused on specific issues that may make it more difficult
to adopt children, and is not routinely capturing children who have complex
needs and disabilities. This is a missed opportunity to demonstrate the services
drive and effectiveness in family finding for this group of children.


family is improving, and is better than the national average and the majority of
the statistical neighbours, as is the time between receiving the court authority
and placing the child with their adoptive family. When there have been delays,
scrutiny of decisions by inspectors found that the delays were not due to a lack
of purposeful planning, tracking and/or monitoring. Indeed, there is
demonstrable commitment and tenacity to secure families for even the most
challenging and hard to place children (though family finding may take
longer), ensuring that children benefit from the experience of living within a
stable family. Sixty-four per cent of children waited less than 16 months from
entering care to moving in with their adoptive family, which is much better than
the most recent national average of 47%.
through a range of contacts, including Adoption Match, Link Maker and the local
adoption consortium. Matching is enhanced through life appreciation days, in
which those involved in the childs care share information with potential
adopters. This contributes to adopters gaining a better understanding of the
childs life history. There is an appropriate focus on the early consideration of
in-house adopters, with a realistic recognition that a suitable match may not be
available when taking account of the childs individual needs. The authority is
successful in finding suitable adoptive families for more difficult to place
children. For example, in 201516, seven brother and sister groups of two, and
two groups of three, were successfully matched with their adoptive families. In
the current cohort, there are nine brother and sister groups and five children
who have a disability.
Between 2013 and 2016, the plan for adoption for 22 children was changed to
an alternative permanence option, and two adoption plans were not agreed in
care proceedings. All of these children are in long-term placements. The large
majority of the children either returned to or remained with carers with whom
they have a strong relationship and attachment. Although this means that they
are now in stable placements, this outcome could have been achieved sooner
for some by considering adoption with their existing carers or long-term
fostering.
placements that have broken down over the past three years has been
relatively low (six). However, it has not been possible to establish whether the
learning and actions from work undertaken in May 2016 about adoption
disruptions were a contributory factor and had a positive impact on preventing
the disruptions that have occurred since that time.
support children and adopters before and after adoption are effective and
responsive. Timely assessments are completed to identify individual needs and
tailor support packages. The adoption support team offers a wide range of


therapeutic interventions and packages of support, ensuring a joined-up
approach when more sensitive situations require close monitoring. There is
recognition that the adoption service needs to widen its range of prospective
adopters so that the authority is better able to sustain its ability to meet the
needs of older children, in particular those who have complex needs. The
current plans to develop the regional adoption agency are seen as a good
opportunity to increase the diversity and range of adopters.
enquiries. Adopters seen by inspectors reported positively on the information
and welcome they received. They told us that they were well informed through
information events. One adopter described the impact of an event, saying that
[It] got me very excited. I couldnt wait to fill out the forms. The pre-approval
training prepares adopters well for the challenge of becoming an adoptive
parent. Adopters spoken to demonstrated a good understanding of the impact
that a troubled early life has on a childs future development and behaviour.
The adopter assessments seen by inspectors were timely, robust and child
centred with clear analysis to support the recommendations.
of which four were linked to children waiting for the adoption panels
consideration and recommendation to approve. Approved adopters are referred
promptly to Adoption Match and Link Maker when the adoption service is
unable to identify a child for matching. Some adopters wait longer for a match
because they choose to wait for a child who looks like them or is from the same
religious background. In these cases, the service demonstrates robustness in its
commitment and responsibility to safeguard children through their reapproval
process to make sure that adopters remain safe and suitable to adopt.
strength in Warwickshire. Foster to adopt is routinely discussed with all
fostering and adoption enquirers and applicants, and all are asked to consider
this option in relevant cases. This is further enhanced by the training provided
to a range of professionals, including hospital staff, to promote a better
understanding of this arrangement.
together are of good quality. The rationale for the decisions about children
being separated or staying together is well founded. Furthermore, assessments
capture and take account of parents views, even when those views are not in
the childs best interest.
on the impact of the childs journey and experiences and sensitively dealt with
the reason for children to be separated from their parents. This ensures that
children can understand why they cannot live with their birth family. However,
childrens voices were not always as prominent as they should be in some of
the written work seen, such as in assessments and plans.


focused, and sensitively captured the childs journey and ongoing experiences.
These were supported by later life letters that were timely, well written and
sufficiently detailed, so that young adults can fully understand their lives before
adoption, why they could not remain with their birth parents and why they
were adopted. Managers recognised, and inspectors were told by adopters, that
there are delays in the preparation of life story books. Adoption staff have
provided training to social work teams to enable them to carry out this work in
order to better help children to have a clear understanding and to make sense
of their histories.
recommendations and challenge are appropriately detailed and ensure that the
agency decision-maker is assured of the robustness of the panel process. While
the members of the panel are knowledgeable about adoption, there is a
challenge for the authority to recruit panel members from more diverse
backgrounds to more accurately reflect the communities. Although the agency
decision-maker is making timely decisions based on the information provided as
well as advice, there are no formal arrangements for the agency decision-maker
and panel chair to meet. This limits the level of accountability and challenge to
the service about the quality of its work. (Recommendation)
with care and sensitivity, providing good information to adopters about the
support that each child requires. Careful introductions involve foster carers,
adopters and parents to support the childs move into their permanent home.
assistance for adoptive families. The adoption team has taken steps to engage
adoptive families at an earlier stage of the adoption journey, for example
through the mentor scheme. Training to support adopters understanding of
parenting responses to childrens attachment needs is particularly highly
regarded by adopters. Individual therapy and psychological support have been
effective to help families improve relationships and attachments between the
child and parents. Relatives of adoptive families have also received training to
help them understand about adoption and the experiences of the adoptive
child. Additional post-adoption support is appropriately commissioned through
voluntary and independent agencies. The service supports 1,600 letterbox
contacts.
earliest opportunity. It is encouraging that the birth parents support team
engages a high percentage of birth fathers. Support is provided at all stages of
the adoption journey and is available for as long as it is needed.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
hard and effectively to maintain good-quality contact with young people.
Caseloads are manageable, and transition arrangements between social
workers and personal advisers as young people approach adulthood are
carefully and sensitively planned and managed, and tailored to individual needs.
Transition planning for children looked after who have special educational
needs and/or disabilities is effective and, when necessary, personal advisers are
allocated well in advance to ensure that appropriate housing solutions and
specialist services are commissioned in a timely way.
are enabled to access appropriate financial and associated benefits. Care
leavers speak positively about their relationship with workers and the efforts
that they make to provide support. Management oversight is consistently
present on case files, though not always focused on monitoring progress
against plans and key objectives for young people.
secure plans for the future. Some stated that they found living independently a
challenge and, for example, were uncertain about budgeting for domestic bills
that they had not foreseen. While some care leavers received tailored one-toone support from personal advisers, there is no formalised independence
preparation work or training programme provided or commissioned by the local
authority to ease the transition of children into post-care accommodation. In a
minority of cases, this lack of preparedness has led to the breakdown of
accommodation arrangements for some young people. Senior managers are
seeking to redress this and an independence preparation programme provided
by Barnardos is being piloted with a small group of young people over the
provide enough opportunities for young people to try out independent living
prior to leaving care. (Recommendation)
insufficient access to help from their workers outside office hours. Senior
managers acknowledged their awareness of this issue and plan to review the
provision of more flexible support arrangements.
still much work to do to achieve greater consistency of practice across all care
leaving workers. In some instances, plans are not completed to timescales and,
in most cases, action planning is insufficiently detailed and unclear about
responsibilities for actions, and timescales for their completion. Only a minority
of pathway plans are used well to guide and support care leavers as a living


and meaningful document. Consequently, for many care leavers, their pathway
plan is not as effective as it should be to help them understand how, when and
by whom they will be supported to meet their identified needs. Care leavers
described feeling detached from pathway plan meetings, which too often failed
to involve them at the heart of the discussions. (Recommendation)
replaced the previous plan that had been co-designed with care leavers. The
less appealing structure of the new electronic template has led to workers
struggling to engage young people in developing their pathway plans. The voice
of young people is rarely well recorded, and this is not driving their plans
effectively.
that child sexual exploitation issues, alcohol and drug misuse and other risktaking behaviours are consistently identified. When children are identified as
being at risk of sexual exploitation, thorough and robust risk assessments are
undertaken and, when appropriate, risk is managed well through the
coordinated action plans emerging from multi-agency sexual exploitation
meetings, with evidence that risks are minimised as a consequence. In some
cases seen in which risks are assessed as high, specialist out-of-area provision
is identified to disrupt patterns of child sexual exploitation activities.
However, for those who require higher levels of support, accommodation
appropriate to their needs is not always immediately available. This is
particularly the case for step down accommodation for young people moving on
from residential care. The local authority is engaging with its partners to
recommission accommodation to better meet the needs of vulnerable care
leavers and to increase the portfolio of emergency accommodation provision.
This work has been slow in its implementation.
prevent breakdowns in young peoples tenancies when these are at risk. Of
those young people inspectors met, all feel safe in their accommodation
provision.
encouraged in all appropriate cases. In the current year, 25 care leavers have
benefited from the option to remain with their foster carers when that has been
assessed as being in their best interests. The proportion of care leavers staying
put has increased slightly over the last two years.
dentist and optician. However, many workers and managers lack awareness of
planning securely for the long-term health needs of care leavers. While systems
are in place to trigger health reviews, workers are not effective in encouraging
young people to attend or in ensuring that they have access to their health


histories. This means that young people may not be suitably aware of health
concerns in their lives or of their immunisation records. When mental health
needs are identified and CAMHS or adult mental health services are referred to,
in many cases there are lengthy delays in the provision of such services.
Consequently, young peoples therapeutic needs are left unaddressed,
impacting negatively on their capability to successfully sustain accommodation
or employment.
interview, managers have not succeeded in enabling enough care leavers to
access the scheme, and no care leavers have so far been able to successfully
complete their course. However, seven care leavers are engaged in employerled apprenticeship schemes. Twenty-one care leavers are attending university
and this is a slightly improved figure on previous years. Personal advisers have
established good links with university outreach staff around the country to
ensure that care leavers are settled and that they succeed. This has
necessitated well-negotiated changes of accommodation to meet care leavers
needs and conversations with university staff to help care leavers to meet the
demands of their courses.
not in education, employment or training (NEET) have advisers who seek to
maintain contact and meet with them regularly. Advisers have a good overview
of the factors that can prevent care leavers from securing employment,
education or training, such as illness, parenthood, offending behaviour and
emotional problems. This knowledge helps them to shape the nature of the
support needed.
suitable education, employment or training  a small increase on the last two
years but better than the national average. Up to Year 11, children looked after
are guided by specialist career advisers who signpost them to up-to-date
information about courses and training opportunities at age 16. Such specialist
careers guidance is not available beyond 18, the point at which the NEET figure
rises. The local authority is seeking to deploy funds to establish a post-18
service to address this decline.
the time of the inspection, it was not in contact with only 14 young people
(4.2%), a figure that has remained constant over the last few years. Clear
records are kept on these young people, including evidence of attempts to
maintain and renew contact. They are written to, to remind them of their
entitlements and of how to contact their worker. The local authority is currently
exploring the development of the care leavers website and the use of the
MOMO app to enable more accessible means for young people to communicate
with their personal advisers.


or to access education and training. Workers communicate this information well
and ensure that young people are enabled to access support. An additional
entry to employment fund, approved by elected members, is used flexibly and
appropriately to help individual young people to travel, and to purchase
equipment for their studies or one-off items that they may require to help them
in training or employment. Those moving to university have their maintenance
costs met and accommodation costs during holidays.
held annually in conjunction with the virtual school. These are well attended by
carers, social workers and elected members, and provide a good platform for
care leavers to be publicly recognised for the good progress that many make.
Awards range from celebrating excellent GCSE results to excelling in kickboxing.
and care leavers are actively encouraged to become members of, and
participate in, the CiCC. A care leavers group has been established to review
and comment on the redesign of housing services.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Senior managers and political leaders understand their roles and are committed to
providing good services for children and their families. Some progress has been
made in the creation of an effective MASH and in a robust multi-agency response
to children at risk of sexual exploitation. However, progress in other areas has
been slow, although improvements have now started. The local authority
recognises that more work needs to be done to ensure that practice is consistently
good across the service. The corporate parent panel is not yet providing sufficient
oversight and monitoring of services.
Some early help services are in place, but they are not yet able to demonstrate
that they are making a difference for children, and not all partners are actively
engaged or involved.
Performance information is not used effectively to promote improved practice.
Inaccurate data is preventing the local authority from having a clear understanding
of progress and areas for improvement. Management oversight and case auditing
activity are regularly taking place, but lack an established process that consistently
leads to learning and improved practice.
The change from one information technology (IT) system to another has been too
slow. Six months after the new system went live, many historical documents have
still not been migrated, and some social workers cannot easily use the system or
readily access all the information they need.
Workloads of some social workers, including newly qualified staff and IROs, is too
high, which is impacting on their ability to provide consistently good practice.
Outcomes for children looked after are generally positive, and adoption is
considered for most children at an early stage. However, there is a lack of planning
around the needs of care leavers, who are not always fully supported and
prepared to live independently.
The local authority has worked to increase staff stability through a range of
recruitment and retention initiatives, and as a result has been successful in
reducing turnover and use of agency staff.


Inspection findings
and families in Warwickshire since the last full inspection of services has been
too slow. Greater stability in the senior management team in the past 18
months has enabled some progress to be made, particularly in the recruitment
and retention of staff, in the development and implementation of a MASH and
in ensuring effective responses to children at risk of sexual exploitation.
staff, all of whom have confidence in her ability to make the necessary progress
to ensure that services for children are good. While the current DCS leaves his
post in September, the incoming DCS already works in Warwickshire and is
familiar with the developing social care transformation plan and its priorities.
are fully aware of their respective roles. They discharge their responsibilities
appropriately and understand the priorities for childrens services. The leader of
the council takes her role as corporate parent seriously, and is well informed
about the experiences and issues of concern for children.
there is a range of performance information available to the panel, it does not
offer a sufficient focus on young peoples experiences. For example, the report
does not include areas of weakness, such as placement stability or the use of
advocacy. This limits the panels ability to scrutinise and challenge practice
effectively. However, the panel has supported some initiatives, including the
design of age-appropriate booklets for children in care to complete for foster
carer reviews. It has also taken steps to widen panel membership, which now
includes district council representation and the health commissioner. Young
people from the CiCC attend regularly, and a member of the corporate
parenting panel attends the CiCC at every second meeting. These
arrangements facilitate positive relationships. Young people have reported that
they have felt able to influence the panel about improvements to practice,
including the distribution of leaflets from the Who Cares Trust on rights and
entitlements of all children in care. (Recommendation)
measures in place. However, accuracy of data is challenged by the slow
integration of a new IT system. Use of information could be improved by more
detailed analysis of trends and performance against targets.
implemented yet, despite its set up six months ago. Consequently, social
workers are using two, and in some cases three, systems simultaneously. Not
all staff have received training on the new system, and many social workers
have difficulty accessing reports and documents. The transition has meant that
current data is not always immediately accurate, and at times considerable


work has to be undertaken to ensure the validation of information. For
example, service-level managers could not easily report on how many care
leavers are NEETs, and were unable to accurately report the number of cases
stepped down at MASH to early help. This limits the local authoritys ability to
fully understand current performance and to analyse weaknesses effectively in
order to improve practice. (Recommendation)
Some team managers do not have easy access to, for example, the current
number of open cases on their team or of how many children are subject to
child protection plans or social workers caseloads. This poor access limits their
ability to understand and respond to workload pressures.
auditing intentions. Case work auditing is beginning to highlight areas of
strength and when actions are required to improve. The local authoritys own
auditing of work closely corresponded to findings in this inspection. Key points
for learning are identified and shared with staff following each auditing cycle.
However, a full cycle of learning from quality assurance, which ensures that
changes in practice occur and are sustained as a result of auditing activity,
remains underdeveloped.
has an active focus on identified priorities within the local authoritys
transformation plan, the Journey of the Child, which seeks to ensure a
seamless process for access to services for vulnerable children. A dedicated
commissioning team uses information effectively, including from the joint
strategic needs assessment (JSNA) about the needs of local communities, to
inform its commissioning strategy, and provides adequate scrutiny of
commissioned services to monitor quality. A commissioning strategy aligns
priorities and reflects the work of strategic boards.
to safeguard children. The police are committed, strong partners and work
closely with childrens services, resulting in effective joined-up services for
children, particularly in the delivery of the MASH and the arrangements for
missing children and those at risk of child sexual exploitation. However, there is
no dedicated health representative in MASH, which means that information is
less easily available for strategy discussions or information sharing. While
health professionals are contacted by staff in the MASH, there is a missed
opportunity for enhanced professional dialogue and collaborative practice.
appropriate, integrate some early help services with childrens social care
services. Schools complete the majority of early help assessments but continue
to struggle with a consistent understanding and application of thresholds.
Health partners are not fully involved, and, while there are some good
examples of frontline health practitioners doing effective work with children and


families in individual cases, only 3% of all early help assessments completed
are done so by health professionals. This is much lower than comparators and
means that some younger children, not yet of school age, may not be identified
and recognised as in need of early help services. More needs to be done to
ensure that partners are able to demonstrate how they contribute to positive
outcomes for children at this preventative stage. (Recommendation)
at risk of child sexual exploitation. These arrangements are working well to
keep children safe. They promote the coordination of a range of strategic and
operational interventions that deliver appropriately focused multi-agency
responses to safeguard children. Partners, managers and political leaders work
together well to understand the prevalence of child sexual exploitation and to
establish effective ways of responding to and reducing risk. Operationally, joint
working with the police at the front door ensures early identification of young
people who go missing from home or education. Children generally receive
appropriate and timely return home interviews by a specialist team, which also
offers wider assessments of risk and a range of support services. Warwickshire,
together with neighbouring authorities and the police, has been successful in
achieving prosecutions in a number of cases concerning exploitation.
carers is not sufficient to ensure stable and lasting placements for all children.
Short- and long-term placement stability is below that for similar local
authorities and has reduced slightly over the last year. A detailed, new threeyear sufficiency strategy has been created in response to this and is due to be
implemented. However, these measures are yet to be implemented and
consequently this remains an area of challenge.
always receive the specialist help they need in a timely way. Clear and effective
referral pathways for children in care are not yet in place. Senior managers
have recognised these concerns and have a clear plan to address them with
refreshed commissioned services due to be put in place in August 2017. There
is some support for foster carers and children placed with them from a
dedicated psychologist post, but this does not compensate for the lack of
sufficient, dedicated mental health provision for children. (Recommendation)
Permanence options are considered for most children at an early stage. Practice
in the adoption service is effective, ensuring that adoption is considered for all
children who would benefit from this. Children who are looked after have
opportunities to get to know their social workers well and build relationships
with them. However, some young people are not prepared well enough for
independence and this limits their ability to succeed after leaving care.
(Recommendation)


sufficiency as high priorities. Many staff spoken to during the inspection spoke
very positively about working for Warwickshire, and identified the support of
their managers as a strength. As a result, social work turnover rates have
reduced from 21% in 2016 to 15% in March 2017. A range of recruitment and
retention initiatives, such as an enhanced pay and training offer, have helped to
reduce the use of agency staff to 9.54%.
target of 15 children for each social worker. However, this is taking too long to
happen and some workers have high numbers of cases. The authority has
taken steps to remedy this by recruiting 26 social workers this year, with a plan
to recruit 40 more over the next 12 months through an invest to save strategy,
which will also help reduce IRO caseloads through additional resources. Most
team managers have some allocated cases and, while there is a rationale for
doing this in the very short term, some team managers have held cases for too
long. (Recommendation)
development programme. They receive enhanced levels of supervision
fortnightly, and benefit from a programme of group case discussions. Many
newly qualified staff were positive about working for Warwickshire. However,
despite the authoritys intentions, it is not effective in ensuring that such staff
have managed and manageable caseloads, and expectations on some of these
staff are currently too high to ensure that they are able to learn and offer goodquality work at the same time. (Recommendation)
capture evidence that supervision is helping to progress childrens plans or that
managers actively contribute to raising practice standards. Senior managers are
encouraging improved practice through targeted training and the recent
creation of eight principal social work practitioners who support staff to work to
practice standards and develop their knowledge and skills.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
Warwickshire Safeguarding Children Board (WSCB) meets its statutory
requirements, but the pace and effectiveness of challenge and progress against all
the boards priorities have been insufficient. The board does not yet have enough
oversight of the quality of practice and services.
A delay in reviewing and evaluating the effectiveness and quality of the current
threshold document means that thresholds are inconsistently understood across
the partnership.
Strengthened governance arrangements are beginning to result in improved
accountability and a greater level of challenge across the partnership. The board is
well attended by a range of partners, and the contribution of lay members is a
strength. Monitoring and evaluation of frontline practice is beginning to improve.
The board has successfully implemented an ambitious programme that has
resulted in a much-enhanced response to child sexual exploitation and greatly
improved awareness across partners and the community.
Some progress has been made in responding to issues of neglect, such as the
publication of a neglect strategy. However, insufficient progress has been made in
ensuring the use of screening and assessment tools, which remain in draft and are
not yet in use.
The board has sought to assure itself that children living in certain geographical
areas of the county, particularly those who have disabilities and those from
minority ethnic groups, are receiving an equitable service. Actions planned by the
board to understand this and take action if necessary have not progressed
sufficiently.
The board has not yet ensured effective monitoring and evaluation of multi-agency
and single-agency auditing of safeguarding practice across all partners.
Greater ownership and commitment across the partnership are making vulnerable
children more visible to partners, providing an impetus to practice and service
improvements as a result.
The board is responsive in identifying and progressing serious case reviews and in
ensuring that learning from these cases is available to a wide range of multiagency staff. It has identified key priorities to further improve outcomes for
children as a result.


Recommendations


Complete a review of the effectiveness of the early help offer without delay.
The board should ensure that a threshold document is in place that helps
partners to understand and apply thresholds when making decisions about their
roles in supporting families or referring to childrens social care.



Ensure effective monitoring and evaluation of multi-agency and single-agency
auditing of safeguarding practice across all partners.



Ensure that the board has a full understanding of any gaps in the provision of
equitable services to children who have a disability or are of a different cultural
and ethnic background, in order to assure itself that services are meeting the
needs of all children.



Ensure that neglect screening and assessment tools are implemented and that
a plan is in place to review their effectiveness.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
arrangements are only just beginning to result in a more effective approach.
Improvements in membership have resulted in most agencies being
represented at an appropriately senior level. Subgroups are now chaired by
board members across the partnership, resulting in greater accountability and
ability to challenge, and these subgroups are beginning to strengthen the
boards influence with partners.
and committed. Mostly well attended, but with the notable absence of NHS
England, the board is able to demonstrate consideration of a wide range of
issues and perspectives. Lay members are appointed and demonstrate
confidence in participation and contribution. An annual self-assessment gives a
greater understanding of strengths and areas for improvement. This
assessment informs the annual report, which identifies areas of strength and
weakness, including lessons from reviews and child deaths. The business plan
includes key priorities agreed by board partners, but not all of these have
progressed with enough pace and impact.
these are not yet formalised in an agreed memorandum of understanding.
Relationships are, however, well established through the work of the board
chair. The board has successfully influenced the work of other boards,
ensuring, for example, that the JSNA includes a focus on child sexual
exploitation, and the CAMHS redesign and development of a combined website
with the local Safeguarding Adults Board.


practice, including a more robust programme of multi-agency audits, has only
recently been put into place. Recent audits have mainly focused on the MASH
and the quality of assessments. Forward plans are now in place to broaden the
scope of multi-agency audits. Additionally, oversight of single-agency audits is
not comprehensive. For example, childrens social care audits had not been
monitored for over a year, nor included in the boards forward plan. The board
does not undertake staff surveys, which would add more depth to the boards
understanding of quality of practice and its impact for children.
(Recommendation)
does not yet have a substantive enough evidential baseline across the
partnership to assure itself of the quality of multi-agency practice. A less than
complete evaluation of local performance is not yet able to robustly influence
and inform the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
(Recommendation)
comprehensive data set by ensuring that it is discussed at the beginning of
each board session. Recent changes to subgroups have resulted in greater
ownership and commitment across the partnership, and are making vulnerable
children more visible to partners. In turn, practice and service improvements
have been achieved, such as mandatory training in child sexual exploitation
awareness for taxi drivers, improved return home interviews for children
missing, making sure that a paediatrician is now always available for child
protection examinations and consultation, recommissioning of young carers
services and strengthening of MARACs.
sufficient, such as proportionate participation of health in the MASH and
completion by health staff of early help assessments. Despite evidence of
challenge in relation to health participation, the chair and board have not yet
been successful in ensuring complete partner ownership of the early help
agenda. For children, this means that those aged under five, in particular, are
not receiving an appropriate level of partnership involvement from health
colleagues at the point of early prevention.
some key messages to professionals from young people. The board has also
accessed Respect Yourself project boards, composed of young people, to shape
a number of child sexual exploitation-related projects, including Respect
Yourselfs communications campaign. This offers a strong basis for further
development of WSCBs work with young people, but the board is yet to
engage young people systematically in evaluations of its work.
geographical areas of the county, particularly those who have disabilities and


those from minority ethnic groups, may not be receiving an equitable service.
However, despite partnership agreement that the quality of data and
information in these areas required improvement, this has not yet been
achieved, and there are continuing gaps in data from some partners.
(Recommendation)
progressing serious case reviews, and ensuring that learning from these cases
is available to a wide range of multi-agency staff. The board has identified key
priorities to improve outcomes for children as a result. These include a neglect
strategy that has informed the development of the Smart Start Strategy,
including use of the HOME Inventory assessment in early help. However,
progress has been slow in developing other screening and assessment tools for
using when children are experiencing neglect, and these remain in draft form
and are not yet implemented. Monitoring of action plans has now passed to the
recently formed business group, which already has a busy agenda and the
capacity of which remains untested. (Recommendation)
submissions from individual services is inconsistent. The board is aware of this
variability through its effective evaluation of action plans and identification of
themes  for example, identifying that there are variable rates of take-up of
safeguarding training and then requiring agency representatives on the board
to respond to issues highlighted.
of the current threshold document due to a court challenge. The board is aware
that thresholds are inconsistently understood across the partnership. The
boards current threshold document lacks clarity, particularly in helping
agencies other than social care understand and decide their own range of
responsibilities in supporting families or referring to childrens social care. This
has contributed to higher levels of referrals and re-referrals. (Recommendation)
membership, purpose and access to a range of key documents. The board
ensures that there are appropriate policies in place, including, for example, a
runaway and missing from home and care joint protocol, providing procedural
clarity for all partners.
children at risk of sexual exploitation in Warwickshire and oversees effective
information sharing and a local strategy and action plan. Successful
implementation of an ambitious programme has resulted in a much-enhanced
response to child sexual exploitation and increased awareness across partners
and the community. In particular, the introduction of the multi-agency child
sexual exploitation team and Sexual Assault Referral Centre ensures a robust
response. Awareness campaigns are well embedded and include mandatory
training of closed-circuit television (CCTV) operatives and pharmacy staff and


campaigns developed in partnership with young people. Young people are
involved in informing and developing the subgroups work. Young people,
trained as relationship and sexual education champions, have developed an
online relationship checker and a clear definition of child sexual exploitation,
and designed and presented at conferences for young people. Importantly,
participation in this work has improved their skills and enhanced individual life
chances of those involved. For example, one young person on the verge of
exclusion went on to become head boy at school.
subgroup for training and development is proactive, providing core training as
well as developing and adapting training as needs emerge, including lessons
from serious case reviews. A range of media are used to maximise impact,
which include training the trainers to facilitate more single-agency training,
newsletters, conferences and workshops. Child sexual exploitation awareness
raising is a particular area of strength. As well as statutory and voluntary sector
partners, the board has reached young people, to raise their awareness of child
sexual exploitation, and faith groups, in relation to female genital mutilation
and honour-based violence. Screening of Chelseas Choice has reached nearly
childrens social care, health, education and the police providing a support
timetable for its delivery. Consequently, pupils and staff have been supported
to respond appropriately to concerns, and this approach has resulted in a
number of disclosures. However, capturing and learning from training feedback
in a more systematic way could be strengthened.
deaths and recommend changes or improvement to services. It operates on a
sub-regional basis across three authorities. A robust approach to tracking and
ensuring that actions are completed ensures shared learning. Development of
profession-specific templates for gathering information has improved
information sharing. The involvement of parents in the process represents good
practice, and this has resulted in improved information and specific actions to
improve services, such as the provision of a goody bag to new parents, with
advice and items to support safer sleeping.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This includes children and young
people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and starting
their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other, and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 10 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Peter McEntee
Deputy lead inspector: Susan Myers
Team inspectors: Lorna Schlechte, Dominic Stevens, Tony Gallagher, Lolly
Rascagneres, Kate Malleson, Andy Waugh, John Roughton, Alison Smale
Senior data analyst: Matthew King
Quality assurance manager: Christopher Sands


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2017


