Wigan
Inspection of services for children in need of help and protection, children
looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board1
Inspection date: 16 January 20179 February 2017
Report published: 31 March 2017

Childrens services in Wigan are good

Requires improvement

permanence

Good


Outstanding


Good


Good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Services for children have significantly improved over the last 18 months as a result
of an ambitious programme of change. Strong and effective leadership identified a
decline in the quality of services since the last inspection in 2012 and has planned
and implemented effective action to ensure rapid improvement in many areas.
The need to improve services, combined with implementation of a council-wide
approach to service delivery, has resulted in The Deal for children. Launched in
tackle the need for sustainable and resilient services against a backdrop of reducing
resources.
The director of childrens services (DCS) is a responsive, enthusiastic leader who
understands services well. Leaders and managers understand local need. They
respond to changing demands and have planned well for the future. This is reflected
in strategic plans and commissioning frameworks.
Significant work by the local authority has strengthened partnerships with other
agencies by developing and implementing a shared approach to multi-agency early
help services, which respond to the needs of children and families when they first
arise. This council believes that this work is helping to reduce the number of children
subject to child in need plans.
Once they are identified, children at risk of child sexual exploitation are swiftly
responded to by a range of agencies to reduce risk and secure their safety. However,
when children who are not considered to be at risk of child sexual exploitation return
home after an episode of going missing, the services that they receive are variable.
Information gathered from these interviews is not systematically collected or
analysed to inform patterns and trends.
Services to help and protect children are improving, and there are some good
examples of children being well supported and risks being managed. This is not yet
the case for all children. At the point of first involvement, the service arrangements
for dealing with contacts and referrals are generally effective. Decisions made are
appropriate and timely. However, not all assessments and plans are informed by
thorough information gathering from all key agencies, and fathers and other family
members are not routinely involved in the assessment process.
Families do not always receive copies of reports in advance of child protection
reviews and conferences. This means that they do not have sufficient time
beforehand to consider and challenge the information. Overall, planning for children
is effective. However, the quality of some written plans does not reflect this or the
good social work practice that is happening with children.


Social workers are supported and supervised regularly by their managers. This is well
recorded on files. However, this does not always result in managers identifying and
giving direction when practice falls short of the expected standards.
Children who are looked after are well supported. Direct work with children is a real
strength in Wigan, and there are many examples of good-quality, sensitive, childcentred work to help them to express their thoughts and feelings. Placement stability
is currently in line with comparators but is declining, and therefore this is an area for
performance improvement. Managers have recently taken steps to strengthen
services for foster carers, including peer support and behaviour management
programmes. At the time of the inspection, it was too early to see the impact of
these. Effective work is undertaken by the local authority in the courts. Care
applications are timely and of good quality, leading to the completion of legal
proceedings within expected timescales.
Achieving permanence is a major strength in Wigan. The adoption service is
outstanding. Effective collaboration between childrens social workers and the
adoption team ensures that timely family finding is based on a holistic understanding
of childrens needs. In cases seen of children with a plan for adoption, childrens
physical and emotional health and their educational attainment had all significantly
improved as a result of the local authoritys intervention.
Care leavers benefit from strong, trusting relationships with their personal advisers,
who make strenuous efforts to keep in touch, helping and supporting them through
the transition to independent living. Young people feel safe where they live, and
there is a good range and choice of accommodation. Pathway planning does not
start for most children until they are 16 years old. Most children would benefit from
this starting earlier to give them adequate time to consider plans for their futures.
Written pathway plans do not always reflect the positive work that takes place with
children leaving care, and information is not easily available for children to access
online.
Strong political involvement from the lead member means that there are clear lines
of accountability and scrutiny. Effective communication between the chief executive,
leader of the council, lead member and the DCS promotes a shared understanding of
priorities. The DCS and senior management team recognise the key actions required
to support further improvement. This includes a plan to increase the capacity in the
senior leadership team to support change and achieve more consistency of social
work practice.
A quality assurance framework has recently been introduced. This work has been
undertaken to shift the focus of quality assurance from compliance to quality of
practice. This is a positive step but it is not yet fully embedded, and the impact of
this work is limited. A strong culture of continuous improvement encourages learning
throughout the childrens social care and early help service. Social workers feel
valued and supported by their managers and enjoy working in the service. Workforce


stability is good, and the local authority ensures that there is a fully staffed service at
all times.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about the local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


Inspection findings


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Inspection findings


Leadership, management and governance


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about the local authority area
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates four childrens homes. Three were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection. One was judged to require
improvement.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding
arrangements/arrangements for the protection of children was published in July
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was published in July 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services has been in post since October 2015.
 The chief executive has been in post since August 2011.
The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
September 2016 and is also chair of the Wigan Adults Safeguarding Board.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 67,767 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Wigan. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 19% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 are living in
low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 16% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 14% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 4% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
of mixed ethnicity.


 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 4% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 3% (the national average is 16%).
Child protection in this area
 At 16 January 2017, 2,050 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 16 January 2017, 224 children were the subject of a child protection plan (a
rate of 33 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 272 children (40 per
 At 16 January 2017, two children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from one at 31 March 2016.
 In the last two years prior to inspection, four serious incident notifications have
been submitted to Ofsted, and two serious case reviews have been completed.
 There were two serious case reviews ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 16 January 2017, 456 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 68 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 485 (72 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
authority area
 six are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months to the inspection start date:
 there have been 42 adoptions
returned to be looked after
living
 no young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in houses
of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that information gathering from family members and partner agencies
is comprehensive to better inform assessments and decision-making.


Ensure that children and families receive copies of documents prior to key
meetings and that written plans consistently describe what needs to happen
and include contingency plans that are clearly recorded for families.


Ensure that children who go missing are offered a return home interview and
that the information gathered is used to inform strategic planning.


Review the current capacity of senior management to ensure sufficient
leadership to support future change, training and improvement.


Ensure that the revised quality assurance framework makes audit work more
effective in analysing the quality of practice alongside compliance, and that
this is evaluated and analysed systematically to inform learning and further
improvement.


Ensure that childrens reviews capture the progress made by families and that
minutes from these meetings are clear about the next steps necessary to
progress the plan further.


Ensure that adult mental health services are involved in all cases where
concerns regarding parent and carer mental health are identified.


Ensure that pathway planning for care leavers consistently starts early enough
for children and reflects the information gathering and assessment that take
place with care leavers.


Ensure that care leavers who are receiving support from child and adolescent
mental health services (CAMHS) are supported to make the transition to adult
mental health services smoothly.


Ensure that a pledge is developed for children leaving care, so that they
understand clearly their entitlements and the continued support that will be
available to them, and ensure that all care leavers have easy online access to
the information that they need.


Summary for children and young people
 When children and their families first have problems, they receive the right help
at the right time from a wide range of good-quality services.
 Senior managers, councillors and social workers are determined to make sure
that children and families take part in the decisions made about them. They want
them to have a say about the help that they get. They listen carefully to what
children say and, when they can, do things differently to make things better.
 Sometimes, not all the people who know a child are asked what is happening in
the childs life. This makes it harder for social workers to properly understand
childrens needs and to make sure that help is focused on the right things.
 Children and families do not always receive information about the plans to help
them before important meetings. These written plans do not explain what is
going to happen to help children and families or what may happen if things do
not get any better. The council knows that this is a problem and has asked
children to help them to design new plans to make them easier to understand.
 Social workers, teachers, doctors, nurses, health visitors, midwives and the police
act quickly together to help to keep children safe. They are very good at finding
out when children are at risk of child sexual exploitation and getting children the
support that they need to be safer. Senior managers make sure that everyone
understands the problems faced by these children and work together to protect
them.
 The local authority helps children and parents to sort out their problems so that
they can continue to live together, when possible. When children are unable to
live with their parents, social workers find them a good home with caring adults.
They always try to help children to see people who are important to them. If it is
safe for children to go home, social workers make sure that families get the help
that they need for as long as they need it.
 The council is excellent at finding forever homes for children who need them.
Many of these children are adopted, including older children and brothers and
sisters who need to stay together. Social workers find the best possible people,
who understand each child, to adopt or be guardians for children. Children
receive excellent support to help them to prepare to live with their new family
and to understand why this needed to happen. Children are told about their own
family and about all the things that have happened to them since they were born.
 Care leavers receive the support that they need to be able to take care of
themselves, to be happy, safe, healthy and confident, and to stay in education
and training or to find a job. The council works really hard to keep in touch with
every care leaver, to make sure that they can get help when they need it. Care
leavers are really well supported by skilled and hard-working personal advisers,
who help them to learn how to do all the things that they will need to do as they
are growing up. Personal advisers also help care leavers to find a safe place to
live that is right for them, and help them to overcome any problems that they
may have.


The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Services for children who are in need of help and protection are improving.
However, the variation in the quality of social care practice means that
assessments and plans are not yet constantly delivering good-quality services.
Children and families benefit from a wide range of effective early help services.
Work is informed by thorough early help assessments of need, and this is
monitored and reviewed regularly to ensure that progress is made and outcomes
are achieved. A recent restructure has resulted in a wider choice of services being
available, which has had a positive impact on childrens progress. Increasing
numbers of early help assessments are being completed by partner agencies that
are taking responsibility to support families when they first need it.
Although thresholds are applied appropriately and immediate risk is effectively
identified and responded to, at times the information gathered is not thorough
enough. Partner agencies do not always attend strategy meetings, which means
that decisions are taken without the benefit of all the available information. The
subsequent investigation and assessment include all personal information to
ensure that the right course of action is taken. Children receive an effective out-ofhours service from the emergency duty team. Responses are thorough and timely
and ensure that childrens immediate safety is secured.
Assessments are completed in a timely way, but the quality of these is not always
good. Some assessments need better information gathering and more analysis if
they are going to purposefully inform planning, and families do not always receive
a copy of them prior to key meetings. Written plans are not always clear about
what needs to change, which means that measuring progress against them is
difficult. Contingency plans are not always specific. Therefore, families are not
clear of the consequences if progress is not made.
Disabled children receive services that are sensitive to their needs. Their views,
thoughts and feelings are clearly represented and heard through assessment and
planning processes. Effective safeguarding arrangements ensure that they receive
the most appropriate service. This reduces identified risks.
Children who are identified as being at risk of child sexual exploitation receive
effective specialist, multi-agency responses. The service ensures that risks to
children are reduced. Children who are missing from home are offered return
home interviews. The local authority is in the process of commissioning specialist
support to ensure that missing children are consistently well responded to.
Children and families who live in households affected by substance misuse or
domestic abuse receive effective specialist services. Children who are young carers
have their needs identified and are offered help and support.


Inspection findings

When required, children and families receive early help in order to meet their
identified needs. This reduces risk and helps to avoid the need for social care
intervention. Clear and effective step-up and step-down arrangements are in
place between early help and social care, ensuring that children continue to
receive the appropriate level of support and intervention as their needs
change. The way in which these services are delivered is influenced by the
views of children and parents.


Clear and detailed early help assessments are completed in a timely way.
Plans lead to effective direct work and support being offered to families by a
wide range of services. Support offered includes work with healthy eating and
bedtime routines, housing issues and mediation between children and
parents. Plans are reviewed and updated to reflect progress and changes
made to encourage families towards achieving better outcomes. The number
of early help assessments completed by partner agencies has doubled in the
past year, demonstrating the commitment to early help from key partners
with a significant contribution from schools.


Children and families referred to social care are risk assessed by the specialist
assessment team. Thresholds are applied appropriately, and immediate risk is
effectively identified and responded to. Information gathering is carried out as
part of this process but it is not always robust. In a very small number of
cases seen, consent had not been sought when required prior to commencing
information gathering. The local authority took action while the inspection
team was on site to ensure that this did not occur again during the time of the
inspection. In some cases seen, fathers were not consulted, nor were key
agencies such as schools. This means that some decisions are made based on
incomplete information. (Recommendation)


There is an effective out-of-hours service from the emergency duty team, for
children and families. Responses are thorough and ensure that childrens
immediate safety is secured. Clear records enable a smooth handover to
daytime staff, who have recently extended their service hours to provide a
more flexible offer to families.


Strategy meetings do not consistently include partner agencies, which means
that decisions are made without the benefit of all the information available.
However, minutes of strategy meetings include a clear record of decisions
taken and agreed actions. Subsequent assessments and ongoing investigation
gather all pertinent information, to ensure that the right course of action is
then taken. When necessary, childrens cases are considered at an initial child
protection conference. These are mainly held in a timely manner, although
attendance of some partners, such as school nurses and the police, is
variable. However, the impact of all information not being available at the


strategy meeting was limited due robust information gathering subsequently
as part of the assessment.

When children are assessed as children in need, they benefit immediately
from intensive packages of support by a social worker and the intensive family
support team. Child in need plans are reviewed regularly and, when a family is
ready, cases are stepped down to the Start Well service if needed.


Overall, the quality of child in need and child protection assessments is
variable, ranging from some outstanding examples to the majority that require
improvement to be good. Historical information informs assessments, but
wider family members are not always included and childrens voices, wishes
and feelings are not always well represented. Some families do not receive a
copy of their assessment before key meetings. This means that they do not
have sufficient time to consider reports or to raise questions or areas of
disagreement. This does not support a good working relationship with
families. (Recommendation)


Planning of multi-agency work packages support for children and families is
timely. This planning and work successfully address the needs of children.
However, written plans are not consistently of good quality. Managers are
aware of this issue and have replaced planning documents to help with the
recording of plans. Contingency plans are not clearly recorded, which means
that children and their parents may not fully understand or be fully aware of
the consequences if changes are not made and sustained. (Recommendation)


Review meetings held to consider childrens plans, either through child
protection, core groups or the child in need reviewing process, are held in a
timely way and are mainly well attended. Those attending the review discuss
the plan, but the record of the progress made by families is not detailed
enough. Therefore, families do not have a clear understanding of the next
steps necessary to enable them to make further progress (Recommendation).
An advocacy service is now available to children to support them to represent
their views at key meetings.


Management oversight through supervision and case discussion takes place
regularly, and notes of these sessions are recorded on childrens files. In some
cases seen, management oversight did not address gaps in either practice or
recording and so did not improve circumstances for children or progression of
their plan. However, in other files it was clear that reflective and purposeful
supervision had taken place and had promoted good practice.


Disabled children receive effective services from experienced and
knowledgeable staff, who undertake detailed and sensitive assessments with
the support and input of partner agencies. Effective safeguarding
arrangements are in place, and packages of support for families are regularly
reviewed to ensure that they meet the childs and familys changing needs.


Work is supported by children and families workers, who are skilled in building
relationships with children at their own pace, ensuring that the voice of the
disabled child and other children in the family informs planning.

Children at risk of child sexual exploitation are identified and receive an
effective specialist service from the child sexual exploitation team. Risk
assessments are undertaken and inform effective individualised direct work,
and plans are regularly reviewed to ensure that risks to children of being
exploited are reducing.


The service received by children who are missing from home is variable.
Children are offered a return home interview, but the service does not collate
information from interviews to analyse patterns and trends to inform service
planning. This has been recognised by managers, and a new service has
recently been commissioned to ensure that this will happen.
(Recommendation)


Children who live in a household affected by substance misuse or domestic
violence receive specialist services. The police clearly identify these issues at
the point of referral, including any impact that this has on children. Effective
work to reduce risk to children also takes place within the multi-agency
partner arrangements for domestic violence, and this is evidenced through the
domestic violence steering group, which completed a multi-agency audit.
Although the authority does not run any programme of support for
perpetrators, this work is commissioned on an individual basis when required.


Multi-agency public protection arrangements (MAPPA) meetings are held three
times a week and are well attended. The responsibility of chairing these
meetings is shared across agencies on a rotating basis to ensure multi-agency
ownership. Medium- to high-risk cases are discussed, and it is the
responsibility of each agency to then action any response that is needed to
safeguarding needs. The panel recently implemented an analysis tool to look
at the impact on children of living in families with domestic abuse are
discussed at MAPPA panels. This work will inform future work of the panel.


Adult mental health services are not asked to contribute to childrens
assessments and plans, even when parental mental health is having an impact
on childrens daily lives. Senior managers are aware of this gap and have
plans to address the issue. They have recognised that some adults will need
specialist mental health support if they are to sustain change and
improvements for their children. (Recommendation)


Young carers in need of help are identified and supported by agencies.
Effective commissioning arrangements ensure that young carers assessments
are completed and a range of targeted support is provided, including young
carers groups.



The support given to young people, aged 16 to 17, who are homeless is
inconsistent. Some young people have had the option to become looked after
by the local authority. It is not clear from the recording on case files whether
this option has been offered to all young people who may require this support.
Direct work to support independence is taking place, and appropriate
accommodation is being provided.


Known instances of female genital mutilation in Wigan are extremely low in
number. A small number of adult women and no children have been
identified. Training is provided to all staff to ensure that identification and
pathways for reporting and offering support are understood. Similarly, staff
have been trained in the identification and appropriate response to the risks of
radicalisation. The Channel panel is responsive to local issues of extremism.


Children in private fostering arrangements are assessed to ensure that they
are safeguarded. In one case, initial checks highlighted concerns about the
carers suitability, and prompt action was taken to assess and manage the
risks. Children are regularly visited and seen alone, and their views are
evident and influence the arrangements. The local authority recognises that
the number of children identified in private fostering arrangements is low, and
further awareness raising is recognised as an area for the service and for the
partnership.


The designated officer arrangements ensure that allegations of abuse and
poor practice are taken seriously and that action is taken to protect children.
The designated officer function has recently been strengthened and is now a
full-time post with additional business support. The designated officer plays a
key role in gathering and coordinating information. Strategy meetings are held
promptly and attended by key agencies, with clear action plans and
reasonable timescales. There is suitable scrutiny and challenge of
investigations completed by partner agencies and relevant liaison with police
and education to monitor progress of cases. Awareness-raising work has been
carried out with faith and community groups, but so far has not resulted in
any referrals.


The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Good

Summary
When children are first identified as at risk of coming into care, effective and
creative edge-of-care services are provided. These services have a positive impact
on childrens lives and reduce the numbers of children who would otherwise
become looked after. As a result, children only become looked after when it is in
their best interests, as all decisions about being looked after are informed by wellinformed comprehensive risk assessments.
Children only return home from care following completion of fully informed risk
assessments, a package of focused support and analysis of parental capacity to
change.
The quality of social work practice with children looked after is consistently good.
Social workers know their children well and, following highly effective direct work,
pursue the best possible outcomes for them. The voice of the child is highly
evident in case notes, and it is clear that their views and feelings are influencing
decisions made about them. Effective arrangements are in place to promote the
physical and emotional well-being of children looked after. Educational outcomes
are prioritised and increasing numbers of children are making good progress in
English and mathematics.
Stability of placements has not improved in the past year. More training and
support of foster carers is required to maintain children in placement, to allow
carers to optimise childrens life chances. Managers in the local authority recognise
this concern and are working with other authorities to explore the potential impact
of the Mockingbird Model, which provides training and peer support.
The local authority is very successful in achieving permanence for children through
adoption and SGOs. This is largely due to the exceptionally high-quality support
that children and their permanent carers receive at every stage of their journeys.
The local authority is persistent and determined to achieve permanency for all
children and has successfully found adoptive families for older children and brother
and sister groups.
Overall, there is good provision for care leavers who especially value the service
that they receive from their personal advisers, who provide good support to help
care leavers gain skills and resources to move to independence. Care leavers
spoken to said that they had received effective help to secure safe housing and
help with setting up a home and their longer-term support needs. However, while
this help is available, it is not captured by a formal pledge by the council to care
leavers.


Inspection findings

Creative and effective services for children on the edge of care are
increasingly supporting children at risk of becoming looked after to remain
safely in their families. There has been a steady reduction in the number of
children looked after because families receive swift help from this wide range
of services. This support includes the provision of short-term respite care for
children as part of a package of intense family support. The family group
conference and mediation service considers all possible extended family and
friend options. A specialist project supporting children and families when there
are complex mental health issues also positively contributes to supporting
children to remain at home. Of the children who were supported by the edge
of care service in the 12 months prior to the inspection, 86% remained living
with their own family.


When children need to be looked after, decisions are timely and appropriate.
Good oversight by senior managers at weekly legal planning meetings ensures
that planning for children is progressed quickly. The Public Law Outline is used
effectively. Letters to families in pre-proceedings are appropriate and clearly
set out improvements that they need to make to care for and protect their
children, and the likely outcome if these actions are not met. This ensures
that families are given opportunities to effect change and safeguards children
if they do not make these changes.


Social workers assessments for court and supportive evidence statements are
of consistently good quality. Risks are defined, and suitable recommendations
are made to promote childrens welfare. Timescales for completion in less
than 26 weeks are now met in the vast majority of cases. The Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and the judiciary report
that social workers are presenting increasingly well-written and analytical
reports for court, which enables quick and robust decision-making.


When there are plans for children to return home, highly effective multiagency work and planning ensure that any potential risks to the stability of
this arrangement are minimised. The local authority supports parents well
once the child has returned home, with clear contingency plans and specific
expectations of care and protection to be provided.


The looked after childrens social work teams knows the children and families
whom they work with well. Children are visited regularly and are seen alone,
which enables the development of positive and trusting relationships. Culturaland identity-sensitive direct work is undertaken to make sense of childrens
histories. As a result, the plans for childrens futures are a particular strength,
and childrens voices, wishes and feelings are evident in social work recording.



If children require further assistance to make their voices heard, the
independent commissioned advocacy service represents their views well. The
local authority listens to these views, and inspectors saw several examples of
direct work reflecting childrens concerns.


The large majority (88%) of children looked after attend education provision
that is good or better. When there is a risk-assessed reason to avoid
disruption to the education of the minority of children in a school not judged
to be good or better, additional support is provided by the virtual school team.
Childrens progress is closely monitored, and pupil premium plus is used well
to support the needs of children who are looked after. Personal education
plans are up to date, and the majority have well-defined and monitored
targets.


Increasing numbers of children who are looked after are making good
progress, particularly in English and mathematics. In 201516, 56% of
children looked after for more than 12 months made three or more levels of
progress in English, and 28% in mathematics at the end of key stage 4. With
mathematics, this is an increase of 18% from the previous year, which is
greater than the increase for the wider population of Wigan. However,
although decreasing, the gap between children looked after and other children
continues to be too wide.


Children missing from education and those electively home educated are
known, and there are detailed and up-to-date records. Managers have a very
clear picture of the whereabouts of these children and take active steps to
ensure that an appropriate level of education is received.


The local authoritys clear commitment to keep children close to home ensures
that a much higher proportion of Wigan children remain within local
boundaries than their neighbouring and national counterparts. The relatively
small number of children who are placed out of area, in most cases within a
from strong reciprocal arrangements with other local authority areas, which
ensure that their health and education needs are met in a timely way.
Residential staff caring for children out of area report positively on the social
work support provided. For example, social workers accompany residential
staff to school meetings to advocate on childrens behalf to ensure that any
additional needs are understood and catered for.


The authority identified that placement stability for some of the more
challenging children had declined, although overall performance remains in
line with statistical neighbouring authorities and is just above the England
average. Work is under way to improve the training and support provided to
foster carers, to enable them to have the skills to support more challenging
children. This includes adopting the Mockingbird Model which, in addition to


training, arranges carer-to-carer peer support. This enables the best working
practices to be shared and children to benefit from stable placements that
optimise their life chances.

Effective and focused support from a team of nurses ensures that 99% of
children looked after are now in receipt of an updated annual health
assessment. This marked improvement from previous years is a result of a
suite of initiatives taken by the authority and its partners in recognition of
previously poor performance, to ensure that childrens health needs are fully
recognised and responded to as quickly as possible. CAMHS provision at the
time of inspection was unable to meet the needs of all children looked after
who had been referred. The service had long waiting lists, resulting in too
many children not having sufficient therapeutic input to support their
emotional and psychological health. This is recognised by senior managers
who have taken action to improve service availability. The impact of the newly
commissioned tier two and three CAMHS provision into one single point of
access is yet to be felt.


When children are unable to remain at home but are able to remain within
their wider extended families, the local authority is effective in promoting
permanence for them through timely use of SGOs. Decisions are well informed
by thorough analytical assessments of carers and childrens strengths and
vulnerabilities. Carers have access to the same good-quality range of training
as adopters and are supported well through tailored individual support from
the Family Friends and Special Guardianship Team (FFAST). This support
includes access to timely help and advice through a dedicated duty service
that also supports family and friends foster carers.


Timeliness of the reviews of looked after care plans by independent reviewing
officers (IROs) and childrens participation are good. IROs are challenging
partner agencies to ensure that reviews take place at a time and location that
is comfortable for the child. When there is any indication of possible drift or
delay in progressing care plans, IROs use practice alerts on Wigans social
care database, which prove effective in immediately refocusing priorities and
quality assuring practice.


IROs consider plans for permanence in most cases by the childs second
review. IROs oversight of plans for permanency are subsequently supported
by visits to children in between reviews and effective and speedy resolution of
any issues by open dialogue with partner agencies involved in progressing the
childs plan.


There is a focus on ensuring that children who have achieved stability in longterm foster care also achieve permanency and, at the time of the inspection,
there were 38 children with a plan to be matched to their current carers that
had not yet been formally discussed and matched at panel. While there is no
negative impact on children not having been formally matched earlier, the


authority understands the need to establish officially sanctioned permanent
arrangements and has already taken action to address this.

While many children thrive in foster homes with carers who understand their
needs well, the local authority recognises that support to foster carers has not
kept pace with improvements in other parts of the service. A service
restructure is imminent, which the local authority anticipates will enhance
arrangements to provide increased support via strengthened professional and
peer systems and additional training opportunities.


Wigan struggles to find placements within its own resources for older children
and brother and sister groups. It makes effective use of good-quality
independent fostering agencies and residential provision. As a result, only one
child is separated from brothers and sisters, and this is not due to resource
issues but is in the childs best interest. Innovative practice in advance
profiling of children and activity days to find placements for children,
borrowed from learning from adoption practice, have resulted in the local
authority finding good-quality foster homes for some hard-to-place children
who otherwise would have to remain in residential settings.


The response to children missing from care and/or at risk of child sexual
exploitation is generally well managed and coordinated by the child sexual
exploitation team, with strategy meetings being convened when concerns
escalate. In cases seen, all children looked after were offered a return home
interview to clarify the circumstances of their being missing and the
consequent risks. When children go missing from care, the vast majority
receive an offer of a return home interview.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is outstanding

Exceptionally high-quality work, seen by inspectors, supports the authoritys
priority of achieving permanence for all children.


The local authority has shared its adoption service, WWiSH, with two
neighbouring authorities since 2012. Wigan recognised in 2014 that these
arrangements were not meeting the needs of children and prospective
adopters well enough. A well-planned and executed restructure brought
adoption services for children back in house and strengthened shared
arrangements for recruitment of prospective adopters and post-adoption
support. As a result of these changes, one second-time adopter told
inspectors that the service had improved beyond all belief between adopting
her first and second child. These changes, combined with increased numbers
of children living with family or former foster carers under SGOs, mean that
the local authority has been highly effective in achieving permanence for
children who need it for a sustained period of time.



Although proportions have differed, the average percentage of children who
left care through adoption and SGO combined in 201516 was 47%. In the 12
months prior to the inspection, half of the 83 children who ceased to be
looked after did so because the local authority had found permanent suitable
homes for them, either through adoption (28.8%) or through SGO (20.8%).
In the first half of 201617, data provided by the Adoption Leadership Board
demonstrates that this trajectory has been maintained, ranking Wigan as first
in the region and second nationally for the percentage of children who had
left care via adoption.


Wigan is particularly successful in achieving adoption for older children and for
brother and sister groups. In the 12 months prior to the inspection, of the 42
adoption orders granted for Wigan children, 21% were for children aged over
five and 37% of all children adopted were adopted with their brothers and
sisters. Decisions about whether children should be placed with their brothers
and sisters are well informed by thorough analytical assessments of their
attachments to each other and to other birth family members. When it is not
in childrens best interests to remain together, decisions about future contact
are well thought out, proportionate and child centred.


The local authority is increasingly effective in reducing placement moves for
children once the plan is for permanence, and in achieving timely adoption
through the use of fostering to adopt placements. Three of the 41 children
who were adopted in 201516 were in fostering to adopt arrangements and
all were adopted within six months. There are currently four children in foster
to adopt homes and one child living with a concurrent carer. While the
number of children who come from Black and minority ethnic backgrounds
and who are adopted is small, this is reflective of the local population.


Although the local authority is very successful in finding adoptive families for
children who need them, the most recently validated adoption scorecard
shows that, while improving, the average time that Wigan takes to secure
adoption for children remains considerably longer than the expected
timescales. These delays are in part due to some legacy issues prior to the
restructure of the service. For others, it reflects the local authoritys
determination to secure adoption for children whose needs mean that extra
time is required to find suitable families for them.


While timeliness at the point of the inspection was close to national targets,
the local authority forecasts that average time taken is likely to deteriorate in
include children who have very complex needs and who are due to be
adopted by foster carers with whom they have lived for a substantial period of
time. This is a highly positive outcome for those children, achieving
permanency for them with carers who understand and meet their needs well
and with whom they have mutually strong positive attachments.



Well-established partnership arrangements through WWiSH and effective use
of regional and national systems ensure that there is a wide pool of
prospective adopters available to Wigan children within the North West. At the
time of the inspection, all children with a placement order had either been
formally matched to adopters, or carers were actively being considered at prematching meetings for them.


Arrangements for the recruitment, assessment and training of prospective
adopters are highly effective and timely. Adopters report that they felt well
supported and well prepared throughout the process. In the 12 months prior
to the inspection, 34 adopters had been approved and 11 are currently
waiting for a match. Regular communication between WWiSH and the local
authority ensures early identification of potential matches and fast tracking to
other agencies when the search needs to be widened either for adopters or
children. In the last 12 months, two adoptive families were referred to the
national register for placements on the day of their approval.


The adoption panel is meticulous in its quality assurance of reports, giving
detailed and constructive feedback. Its activity, combined with training in
writing reports from the childs perspective delivered by the adoption team,
has helped to improve standards. The quality of reports is generally good, and
some are very good. Child permanence reports achieve a balance between
containing sufficient detail to inform decision-making and to allow prospective
adopters to understand the childs lived experience, and remaining sensitive to
the potential impact on the child reading their story in later life. Prospective
adopters reports and adoption placement reports contain detailed relevant
information and a clear, well-informed analysis of prospective adopters
strengths and any vulnerabilities. Due to the high quality of reports, the
adoption panel, the agency decision-maker and courts are able to make wellinformed and proportionate decisions at every stage of the adoption process.


Timely matching of the vast majority of children to prospective adopters is
achieved through early, comprehensive and effective profiling of childrens
needs. Co-location of adoption workers with locality teams promotes early
consultation. Pre-matching meetings between the childs social worker and
adoption worker are effective in identifying the best possible match to put to
panel. As a result, matches are swiftly approved, reducing anxiety for
prospective adopters and minimising delay for children. At the time of the
inspection, all children with a placement order had either been formally
matched to adopters, or carers were actively being considered at prematching meetings for them.


Adoptive families in Wigan have access to high-quality, effective adoption
support through WWiSH. Adopters spoken to were well informed of a wide
range of support and activities available to all. Adopters spoke of the
invaluable support that they had received from buddying arrangements that


had put them in touch with other adopters who had experienced similar
circumstances.

When children and families need additional help, it is timely, based on a
comprehensive updated assessment of need and provided by highly skilled
workers. Additional specialist therapeutic help is commissioned when needed.
As a result, children are supported to cope with a range of problems, and
adopters and professionals, such as schools, are helped to understand and
respond to their needs more effectively. One adopter told inspectors that the
post-adoption support provided by Wigan is second to none.


Age-appropriate direct work to help children to understand their histories and
to form secure attachments to their new families is a significant strength at
every stage of the adoption process. For example, the direct work undertaken
by workers with older children to explore their wishes and feelings and to
prepare them for adoption is highly skilled and sensitive. In cases seen, this
was helping children to accept and move on from their histories and to form
positive and secure attachments with their new families.


Life story books and later life letters to children give a clear and child-centred
account of childrens birth families and histories. Adopters have access to
good-quality training. However, a small number of adopted children and their
families have experienced delays in receiving them, due to capacity issues in
the adoption team. The local authority anticipates that the small minority of
children still waiting will have received them by March 2017.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good

Care leavers are supported well by their support workers. They value the
support and encouragement to take greater responsibility for their lives. Many
are clear that support has made a considerable difference to them, even to
saving my life, when re-engaging with the service after a period of
homelessness.


The care leaving service has very effective links with a wide range of agencies
to support care leavers, including financial, housing, health and employment
services. Personal advisers work flexibly to negotiate the right support across
agencies for the specific needs of young people to move their lives forward.
Examples were seen of well-managed serious risk, highly effective work with
the courts, police and adult mental health services, supporting young people
into safe accommodation and enabling them to re-enter employment.


Last years restructure of the care leaving service has resulted in increased
staffing and a move to more suitable premises. These changes have provided


the right conditions for staff to provide good services and to go the extra mile
to support care leavers to become independent adults.

Only one care leaver is not in regular contact with the care leaver service, but
support workers still maintain a connection with him. All other young people
are in contact and are confident that, when they need it, they will receive
appropriate support even if their usual worker is not available. They feel safe
and value the easy access to support from the service in times of need. Good
work is done with young people when risk is identified, especially in relation to
child sexual exploitation, when staying safe work is carried out. This results in
a significant reduction in risk. Care leavers who do not live in Wigan receive a
good service from the team, including face-to-face contact whenever possible.
The team establishes effective links with local services for care leavers who
live too far away for this.


The majority of care leavers have their plans reviewed at least twice a year.
Young peoples needs are identified and met well, either directly through the
service or through the wide range of links with relevant agencies. Managers
have good oversight of plans, but the documents are cumbersome, and too
many do not pull all information affecting the care leaver into a clearly
recorded plan. Recently introduced risk assessments are detailed but are not
yet being used to identify work to help to improve particularly vulnerable
areas of their lives, for example future relationships with family members.
Although joint work starts in some cases before young people are 16 years
old, this is not the case for all care leavers. Pathway plans are routinely
started at 16 years. Some children would benefit from their plans starting
earlier, to fully consider their needs as they move towards independent lives.
(Recommendation)


All care leavers have health assessments, and most know that they can have
access to their health records. They are not given a formal health passport,
but support for health needs is effective. Young parents have good support
through the Family Nurse Partnership in Start Well. Young people who have
mental health issues have good access to and support from CAMHS, which
provide a range of services, but too many experience difficulties when they
have to transfer to adult mental health services. (Recommendation)


The transition to independence is managed well, to be sure that it happens at
the right pace and time and meets the specific needs of young people.
Disabled care leavers or those who have learning needs are offered especially
positive support, which reflects their additional vulnerabilities. As a result of
good support from their workers, foster carers or staff in supported
accommodation, care leavers gain the skills and resources to help them to live
independently.



Most young people report that they have received support to understand their
life stories and to ensure that they are equipped to move forward into
adulthood.


Support into post-16 education or training is good, and planning starts in year
in care on leaving school entered education, employment or training with upto-date education plans. Continuing support, beyond initial entry into post-16
education or training, is improving with the use of progression workers, but
care leavers at risk of becoming not in employment, education or training
(NEET) are not always identified soon enough. Data on the numbers of care
leavers who are still in employment or education at the ages of 17, 18 or 19 is
not closely monitored. In 201516, only 56% of all care leavers were in
employment, education or training. This is an improvement on previous years
and slightly above regional levels, but, as in many other local authorities
nationally, is still low in comparison to the care leavers peers. Too few care
leavers go onto higher education. There are currently only four, although
support for them is good, including accommodation arrangements in holidays.


There are 14 care leavers who are apprentices within the borough, in a range
of vocational areas, including business administration, housing, and hair and
beauty. Over half of young people on Wigans Aspiring Futures programme, a
good progression rates to apprenticeships and employment. The Princes Trust
works very effectively with young people who are unsure of their future
directions.


Young people spoken to are self-confident and most are proud of their
achievements. Many are actively involved in volunteering opportunities, for
example training and selection of foster carers, and are particularly keen to
improve the experiences of younger children who are looked after. At a recent
corporate parenting event, several care leavers made relevant contributions
on what life is like for them. Attendance at the Care Leavers Council is high,
and good progress is made on developing an improved offer for care leavers.


All but two care leavers, who are in custody, are in suitable accommodation.
Plans are in place for those two young people. Care leavers have access to a
good range of accommodation options to meet individual needs. These
include staying put, semi-independent provision, supported housing and sole
tenancies. The local authority housing service prioritises care leavers for
tenancies. The dedicated housing officer works closely with the leaving care
service, attending the reviews of young people as they approach 18 years of
age. The number of care leavers staying with foster carers has increased
significantly, with 20 young people currently staying put, compared to only
eight in the previous year. Links with Shared Lives ensures that disabled care
leavers and/or those who have learning difficulties continue in appropriate
accommodation as they become adults.



Although care leavers do not recognise any formal offer to them in the form of
a pledge from the local authority, all care leavers spoken to think that their
needs to move to independence, for example support with accommodation,
grants for household equipment, leisure passes, birth certificates and
passports, are provided for. The range of entitlements and support for care
leavers is on the local authoritys website but is not easily accessible. The local
authority has recognised the need to develop a pledge for care leavers.
(Recommendation)


Leadership, management and governance

Good

Summary
Since the last inspection in 2012, and following changes in senior leadership, the
local authority recognised that services for children did not have the capacity to
improve and that the quality of some key services had declined. Significant work
over the last 18 months has improved many areas of service and created the
environment that will provide a sound basis for further change.
Services for children looked after and for care leavers are good, and the service for
children who need adoption is now outstanding. Early help has been the focus of a
complex and ambitious transformation, working with partners to establish a new
service during 2016, which is already demonstrating some positive impact. The
establishment of a multi-agency child sexual exploitation team and a joint
innovation project has also improved the quality and consistency of response to
child sexual exploitation. However, while some aspects of the response to children
in need of help and protection have improved, the quality of practice is not yet
consistently good. The quality of assessments and planning needs to be improved,
and work with children missing from home requires further development.
The chief executive leads a clear strategic vision for services, with priorities well
aligned across multi-agency partnerships including the Health and Wellbeing Board
(HWB), childrens trust and Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB). Strong
governance arrangements are in place to deliver effective planning.
The involvement of children, families and communities in service planning is a
central feature of the strategic approach, with extensive consultation and coworking taking place to design and reform services.
The local authority has an accurate understanding of the quality of services and is
clear about the action that it needs to take to ensure that they improve for all
children and young people. This includes strengthening the quality of audit activity
to reduce reliance on external evaluation and increasing senior management
capacity to lead practice improvement.
Effective workforce planning and good support and training have resulted in staff
who are highly committed and enthusiastic about their work with children as well
as the wider strategic vision. While all staff receive supervision, the quality of
oversight by frontline managers needs to improve to result in all children receiving
a consistently timely and good-quality service.



Since their permanent appointment in October 2015, the DCS has led an
ambitious programme of partnership, staff and stakeholder engagement,
service redesign, restructure and workforce development. This has created the
environment for improvement in the quality of services received by children
and young people.


Restructure of the directorate has brought quality assurance, independent
reviewing functions and some LSCB functions under the management of
childrens social care. Restructure of services has resulted in locality teams
configured on better understanding of the community, children in care teams
strengthened and reduced spans of responsibility for frontline and middle
managers across the service. Caseloads for social workers across all teams
have reduced, although there remains further work to do to ensure that
workloads in assessment teams remain at a consistently low level.


The local authority is aware that the restructure of services has resulted in
there being many new and some inexperienced managers, particularly in help
and protection. Despite the training provided, the impact of their oversight of
casework is not yet consistently effective in ensuring good decision-making
and consistent standards of practice. The local authority has yet to fully
implement its plans for further training, increased support and oversight from
senior managers. (Recommendation)


Despite the pace of change and of transforming some areas of service, senior
and political leaders have recognised that translating this approach into
effective, consistent and good-quality social work that ensures the protection
of children is complex and requires careful planning. Senior leaders and
managers are taking time to learn from other models of practice and from
their ongoing innovation projects, as well as ensuring that they have sufficient
practice leadership in place prior to implementing any further significant
change.


The clearly articulated vision for childrens services has enabled the strategic
partnership to develop shared priorities supported by clear lines of
accountability and governance. Regular formal and informal meetings support
effective communication between the chief executive, lead member and DCS,
who demonstrate effective working relationships with each other and with key
strategic partnerships, such as the HWB, the childrens trust and the LSCB.


These effective partnerships have driven ambitious reform of service provision
for children and families, to develop a fully integrated, locality-based Start
Well service to deliver early years, early intervention and prevention services.
Operational since July 2016, the design of these services, informed by
research and innovative community engagement activity to test out
alternative ways of working, has supported effective, meaningful integration.
Although still in the early stages of implementation, some improvement in
quality and reach of early help services is evident. The next stages of


implementation, involving integration of healthcare provision, are well under
way.

To inform the programme of change, the local authority has led significant
work to understand the needs in its communities at a neighbourhood level,
and this is effective in informing service planning and commissioning to
support improvement. In addition to the development of the Start Well
service, the strategic needs assessment has informed commissioning of a wide
range of service provision, including edge of care services, parenting support
and the recommissioning of emotional health and well-being services.


The implementation of a clear workforce strategy has been successful in
enabling effective recruitment and retention and stabilising the social care
workforce. The council has proactively engaged in schemes such as Frontline,
Step up to Social Work and first graduate programmes, resulting in significant
numbers of new well-trained staff joining the service. The updated supervision
and appraisal policy reflects the values of the corporate approach, and audit
work ensures its implementation. There is a clear continual professional
development programme, with good access to internal and external training
and an annual Pride in Social Work conference to share learning and celebrate
achievements in practice. Senior leaders facilitate regular listening into action
sessions with staff to encourage feedback and sharing of ideas and to
promote a culture of learning and development. As a result, staff turnover is
low and job satisfaction is high, and inspectors found impressive levels of
enthusiasm, commitment and passion among all staff.


Wigan demonstrates significant commitment to learning from new ways of
working and has two innovation programmes currently under way. The child
sexual exploitation innovation project (ACT), jointly undertaken with Rochdale,
has successfully completed action research and pilot model co-design phases,
and is offering support to a small number of children and young people. The
Specialist Health and Resilient Environment (SHARE) is a partnership between
Wigan Council and Wigan Clinical Commissioning Group. It offers children and
young people specialist support at a time when they have significant mental
health concerns, such as self-harming or thoughts about taking their own
lives. Both projects are effective in providing a new approach to children who
have complex needs and are providing opportunities for learning that can be
shared across the council, regionally and nationally.


The local authority has a sound understanding of its areas of strength and
areas for development, because of externally commissioned reviews (during
more effective and systematic evaluation of the quality of practice, rather than
measuring compliance, has been recognised. Feedback from an independent
peer review undertaken by the local government association (LGA) has
informed an improved but only recently implemented quality assurance
framework. The local authority is aware that there is work to do to ensure


that the new framework delivers its potential, including ensuring sufficient
senior management capacity to drive improvement. (Recommendation)

An established performance management framework provides a good range
of useful data to all managers, to enable them to manage their services. The
quality and availability of data has improved since 2012 and has resulted in
improvements, with most performance indicators now in line with statistical
neighbours and England averages. When data has highlighted issues, in many
cases, for example in respect of re-referrals or of children subject to child
protection plans for a second time, this results in action to investigate the
cause and to plan improvement. However, in some cases, this has not been as
robust, for example in comparing performance between teams or in the
evaluation of return home interviews.


While some good summary and analysis have been developed for senior
leaders and elected members, a more regular and systematic evaluation of
performance data provided to senior and middle managers would support
more effective focus and response to these issues. (Recommendation)


Political leadership in the council demonstrates commitment and ambition to
children and young people and real engagement with the programme of
improvement. The council is an effective corporate parent with senior officers
and elected members working together to improve all aspects of service
provision for children looked after and care leavers.


The lead member, who is an active participant on the HWB and LSCB,
including chairing a subgroup, demonstrates good understanding and
knowledge about the priorities for childrens services.


An experienced elected member, who is also a member of the adoption panel,
chairs the childrens and young peoples scrutiny committee. They are leading
further development of the committee to be more informed and effective in its
challenge. This includes better-quality performance reports, members of the
scrutiny committee spending time at the front line, additional training and the
committee also forming task and finish groups to look in more detail at
specific issues affecting children, such as placement stability and domestic
abuse.


Utilising feedback, research and intelligence from children, young people and
the community as part of service development and redesign is a real strength
in Wigan. It forms a significant strand in the strategic vision and is well
evidenced throughout work seen during inspection. In addition to the codesign of the child sexual exploitation innovation project, young people have
been central to the redesign of personal education plans, influenced the
development of The Deal and been consulted about the service review of the
targeted services.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
The governance and structure of the board meets statutory requirements. The
board is now aligned more closely with the Adult Safeguarding Board and is
developing its strategic links with a range of partners, including the HWB. The
recent appointment of a new independent chair in September 2016 is enabling the
Board to take stock of progress so far. This is supporting a journey of
improvement.
The chair is aware of the areas that need to improve and is working to drive the
changes required. Currently, strategic priorities do not fully reflect local issues and
demands, and the boards business plan is not yet measuring key objectives
sufficiently well. Until recently, overall progress had been slow. The annual report
is detailed but does not provide a clear assessment of safeguarding arrangements
across the partnership. The Board is now beginning to challenge and hold partners
to account, but it needs to evidence the impact of this more clearly.
The multi-agency audit programme is wide ranging and has addressed local areas
of concern but has taken too long to complete and share learning. Section 11
audits have been completed but not analysed in a timely and effective way, to
ensure that learning can influence planning and priority setting across other
strategic partnerships. A review of the threshold document to reflect changes in
early help through the Start Well model is under way.
The learning and improvement framework enables the board to monitor its
effectiveness through a range of quality assurance activity, but it does not yet
provide a clear rationale for deciding when to undertake a serious case review.
A strength of the board is its strong focus on understanding childrens journeys.
The board engages well with children, and the voice of the child is evident in Board
and subgroup meetings.


Recommendations

The Board should develop its strategic priorities to reflect local safeguarding
issues, which can be monitored and measured effectively. The annual report
should demonstrate this by clearly identifying strengths and weaknesses in
local safeguarding practice and including learning from the range of serious
case reviews within the reporting period.


The Board should ensure that it provides robust oversight of business plan
objectives in order that the pace of progress is effectively monitored and work
plans are completed in a timely way.


The Board should evidence that it is holding partners to account and offers
effective challenge that leads to improved outcomes for children.


The Board should strengthen the learning and improvement framework to
ensure that it provides clear criteria for the serious case review and local
learning review process and disseminates the learning from case reviews in a
timely way.


The Board should ensure that it applies rigorous and timely evaluation of
multi-agency audits, which leads to effective learning and improvement, and
that the schools comply with auditing requirements.


The Board should ensure that the protocols for children who are missing or
absent are compliant with statutory guidance and that robust performance
data is collected.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

Following the recent appointment of a new independent chair, the Board has
sought to implement learning from a peer review. Actions have included
reviewing its governance arrangements and aligning itself more closely to a
whole-life agenda with the Adult Safeguarding Board. The Board is
appropriately constituted and there is evidence of joint strategic agenda
planning with the HWB and childrens trust. Two lay members attend the
Board, and the chairing of subgroups is at the appropriate strategic level to
drive core business.


The Board chair is well regarded by partners and is offering increasing
challenge on attendance issues. The operational implementation of the
business plan at the executive group provides increasing oversight of
subgroup activity. The chair is held to account via regular meetings with the
DCS and chief executive in the local authority. Partner inspection reports are
shared at the Board to allow scrutiny and oversight. Partner commitment to
the Board is evident, and all agencies have maintained funding levels.


Although a risk register is in development, the Board recognises that it needs
to evidence challenge and the impact that it makes on practice more
effectively. (Recommendation)

The annual report is presented at the HWB. However, it could more clearly
identify strengths and weaknesses in safeguarding practice, to ensure that it is
used more effectively to influence the planning of services for children. There
is limited reference in the annual report to strategic links with the childrens
trust or HWB, and more focus is required on the learning from serious case
reviews. (Recommendation)


A business plan is in place but it lacks clearly measurable objectives. There
needs to be greater focus on ensuring that the work plans for all subgroups
link directly to the Boards priorities. Partners recognise that there have been
insufficient challenge and pace in driving the business plan forward. Serious
case review action plans have taken too long to be signed off, the review of
key documents has been delayed and learning from case file audits has not
been considered in a timely way. This has lessened the impact that such
activity has on driving forward practice improvements across the partnership.
(Recommendation)


Early help arrangements are in place to support children and families. The
Board has recently facilitated graded care profile training, and there are plans
in place to provide additional training once the threshold document is
relaunched in March 2017.


Work is under way to develop a local neglect strategy, and there are clear
links to strategic partnership groups on domestic abuse. However, priorities
need to align more clearly with local practice challenges and fully reflect local
issues or specific groups of children, such as the high number of those
experiencing domestic abuse or neglect. (Recommendation)


The Board is engaging well with children and seeks to ensure their
involvement in business plan objectives. For example, lunchtime engagement
sessions take place in a local school prior to every Board meeting, and
childrens views are incorporated. A young person plays an active part in the
work of the Board, conducting a survey with young people on digital
communication methods. The website provides a good level of accessible
information to parents, children and professionals, and work is under way to
develop it in order to raise the profile of the Board in the wider community.


The arrangements to protect children from the risk of child sexual exploitation
are effective, and there are good partner engagement and strategic oversight.
A multi-agency strategy holds partners to account, and there is a developing
data set to inform strategic planning on prevention, prosecution and
protection. The child sexual exploitation subgroup is represented by a range
of partner agencies and has been important to the development of an


operational team and a range of training initiatives to local hotels, taxi drivers
and schools. Strategic links with the Greater Manchester Project Phoenix are
in place. An innovation project is in the early stages of development.

A learning improvement framework is in place and reflects the Boards quality
assurance framework, but it does not include clear criteria for the serious case
and local learning review process. The independent chair is offering an
increased level of scrutiny, and one learning review led to a joint initiative with
local rugby league clubs and schools on suicide prevention. However, reviews
are not always completed in a timely way. Locality briefings take place twice a
year to share lessons learned, but these are not supported by more regular
events to keep the work of the Board visible or to evidence the impact of the
Boards work. (Recommendation)


The Board has made progress towards a multi-agency data set, but gaps
remain. Data for disabled children and missing children is not robust, and the
Board does not sufficiently analyse how well the needs of such vulnerable
children are met. There is a lack of clarity about definitions of missing and
absent, which needs to be resolved in order to ensure that the local going
missing protocol is fully compliant with statutory guidance and that
performance data is strengthened. (Recommendation)


A broad multi-agency programme of quality assurance is in place, which
increasingly gives the Board a good overview of frontline practice. However,
there has been a delay reviewing the analysis of section 11 audit findings and
thematic audits, such as domestic abuse. The section 175 education audit was
undertaken for the first time last year, but only half of schools completed it.
Quality assurance activity should ensure rigorous and timely evaluation of
learning, which informs the priorities for the Board. (Recommendation)


Training is valued and responsive to emerging issues and accommodates the
needs of the children and adult workforce. The Board recognises that the
evaluation of training could be more effective and now produces evaluation
reports of key training events. The Board has also introduced ratification
panels to review the quality of training. A draft training strategy incorporates
a clear model of evaluation and is soon to be implemented.


The Board has good strategic oversight of operational arrangements on the
Prevent duty, which ensures that risk is identified and responded to
effectively. The Board has delivered Prevent duty training to 1,500 staff
members across the partnership, and it provides bespoke training to
governors and designated safeguarding leads in schools as part of wholeschool training. A Channel panel is established, a Prevent Strategy Group is in
place and a joint policy is now on the website.


The Board links into Greater Manchester policies and procedures on female
genital mutilation, which are available on the website. Level 1 and level 2


safeguarding training incorporates key themes in relation to female genital
mutilation. The Board has also delivered training via a locality briefing in
November 2016 on private fostering, although there has been limited focus or
campaigning on this issue.


Tripartite child death overview panel (CDOP) arrangements are well
embedded. The CDOP annual report is clear and detailed and has presented
key data and learning to the Board, which is in the process of being taken
forward as part of the Boards business plan. Child deaths are being
monitored. In the last year, the focus has remained on safe sleeping and
neonatal health. Partner engagement in CDOP is positive, and a leaflet
explaining coronial and CDOP processes is available to parents.

Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Sue Myers HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Paula Thomson-Jones HMI
Team inspectors: Shirley Bailey HMI, Stella Elliot HMI (designate), Rachel Holden
HMI, Lorna Schlechte HMI, Kath Townsley (OI)
Additional inspector: Nick Veysey
Senior data analyst: Clare Atkinson
Quality assurance manager: Simone White Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for children looked after and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2017


