Wiltshire Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 22 June 2015  16 July 2015
Report published: 1 September 2015
Childrens services in Wiltshire require improvement
There are no widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being
harmed or at risk of harm.
The authority is not yet delivering good protection and help for children, young
people and families.
The authority is not yet delivering good care for children and young people looked
after.
Leadership, management and governance require improvement when any
widespread or serious failures have been identified by the local authority and are
being effectively addressed, but the characteristics of good leadership are not in
place.

Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Executive summary


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates a childrens home for short break respite which was
judged to require improvement at the most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in July 2013. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for safeguarding and
looked after children was in March 2012. The local authority was judged to be
adequate for children looked after and inadequate for safeguarding.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since December 2006.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since October 2012.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 103,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Wiltshire. This is 22% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 11.4% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 9.4% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 6.8% (the national average is 14.6%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 5.3% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Other White background and Mixed background.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 4.5% (the national average is 18.7%)
 in secondary schools is 4% (the national average is 15%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 Wiltshire is a large rural county with one of the highest military populations in the
country. In July 2015, 8.2% of the school population came from military families.
Child protection in this area
 At 30 June 2015, there were 3,038 open cases where children had been identified
through assessment as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service.
This is an increase from 2,819 at 31 March 2014.
 At 30 June 2015, 381 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a similar to 396 at 31 March 2014.
 At 30 June 2015, 32 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from 11 at 31 March 2014.
 Nine serious incident notifications have been submitted to Ofsted in the previous
three years and no serious case reviews have been completed or were on-going
at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 30 June 15, 400 children were being looked after by the local authority (a rate
of 39 per 10,000 children). This is similar to 395 (38 per 10,000 children) at 31
March 2014. Of this number:
 eight live with parents, of whom 25% live out of the authority area
 seven children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 28 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
 no children and young people who ceased to be looked after are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Executive summary
An inspection of safeguarding and looked after children in March 2012 judged
services for looked after children as adequate and safeguarding as inadequate. This
resulted in the local authority implementing a comprehensive improvement
programme. An inspection of local authority arrangements for the protection of
children in July 2013 judged services to be adequate. While the formal Department
of Education intervention arrangements ended in early 2014, the local authority has
maintained an improvement board to ensure that the improvements are sustained.
The trajectory for improvement is positive.
There is clear political support to the Childrens Services Leadership Team (CSLT) in
Wiltshire. This is further enhanced by the level of support and oversight provided by
the Lead Member and Director of Childrens Services (DCS), who proactively
challenge and scrutinise performance. There is a strong culture of learning and
ongoing self-evaluation in Wiltshire and this has ensured that the local authority has
a good understanding of its strengths and weaknesses. However, the pace of change
and development has been adversely affected by the challenges of recruiting
permanent staff at most levels. Recent appointments at strategic and operational
level have been strengthened by additional funding for increased social work staff
across the service, coupled with an increasingly stable and experienced workforce.
Until recently too many children helped by two of the safeguarding and assessment
teams in Wiltshire have experienced frequent changes of allocated social worker.
Despite this, most social workers know their children well and now make timely,
purposeful visits to them. Social workers are now undertaking more good quality
direct work with children and this is contributing to improving outcomes.
The impact of management oversight is not yet consistently leading to improved
outcomes for children. While quality assurance processes are now well embedded
and have contributed to improvements in casework, performance information is not
consistently analysed or used effectively to target activity and improvements.
Clear and continuous improvement in the overall management and delivery of early
help services in Wiltshire is evident. The local authority has worked well to improve
the quality and oversight of these services but the quality of assessments remains
variable and partners understanding of the early help offer remains too limited.
Children in need of help and protection receive a responsive and proportionate
response to their identified needs. Immediate risk to children receives a prompt and
effective response. Child protection enquiries are timely and robust. Information
sharing is effective and an area of good practice. The quality of recent assessments
is improving and the quality of plans continues to develop to ensure that they are
specific and succinct. However, childrens ethnicity, language, race and sexual
orientation are not always well considered by social workers. Child protection chairs
monitor the progress of child protection plans and ensure that drift and delay do not
occur. However, step down arrangements to early help are not monitored robustly.


Until recently arrangements in Wiltshire for coordinating multi-agency responses to
children missing from home or school have not been effective. Missing return
interviews have not always been routinely offered and information has not been
collated and analysed in order to target resources and inform practice.
While the local authority and its partners were initially slow to implement
arrangements to support children and young people at risk of child sexual
exploitation, young people now receive a timely and well-coordinated protective
response. The child sexual exploitation screening tool has been revised in order to
make it simpler and easier to use and is about to be re-issued. The Wiltshire Risk
Management Group (WRMG) is well-embedded and effective in monitoring risks and
coordinating multi-agency responses to the most vulnerable children and young
people, including those who are at risk of radicalisation. Prior to the inspection the
recording of investigations into allegations against professionals was not sufficiently
robust, though no children were found to be at risk as a result.
The local authority has sound arrangements in place for children who are on the
edge of care. Decisions to look after children and young people are appropriate and
mostly timely. Children and young people now enter care when they need
to.Timeliness of care proceedings has significantly improved over the last year
following targeted management activity. Arrangements to drive forward the
permanence plans for all children are not robust and management oversight is not
yet having a consistent impact on the quality of practice. While placement stability
for looked after children is good, placement choice for older children is limited.
Outcomes for the majority of children in care are improving through good quality
education and leisure provision. While children in other areas of the service
experience frequent changes of social worker, most children in care have had a
consistent social worker with whom they can build a relationship. The role of the
independent reviewing officer (IRO) is too limited. Recommendations at reviews are
not well monitored or recorded in a timely way and IROs are not routinely monitoring
arrangements for children between reviews.
Children in care now receive an improving level of support in their transition to
adulthood. The number of care leavers in employment, education and training is now
good, with effective use of apprenticeships across the council. Pathway plans are not
always comprehensive and care leavers lack information about their health history.
This does not help them make informed decisions about their health needs.
While some children experience a sensitive and effective service from the adoption
team, others experience delays in permanence planning and the identification of
suitable adoptive placements. Although the timeliness of assessments of adopters is
not always sufficiently rigorous, the recruitment of potential adopters has been
appropriately targeted in the last year. The local authority has an understanding of
where improvements in permanence planning and matching need to be put in place
but progress has not been fully demonstrated.


Recommendations

Review the use of data and other sources of performance information to ensure
it is used systematically across all areas of the service to improve outcomes and
services for children and young people.


Ensure that all children and families who need early help are assessed and that
their identified needs inform timely plans that are outcome-focused, specific
and measurable, and that lead professionals are identified promptly.


Ensure that step-down arrangements from childrens social care to early help
are robust so that children and families receive the right level of help and
support when they need it.


Provide all social workers with access to good quality management oversight
and reflective supervision.


Monitor and evaluate the use of the child sexual exploitation screening tool to
ensure that risks that children and young people may be exposed to are
appropriately identified and responded to.


Improve social work practice so that childrens and young peoples age,
disability, ethnicity, faith or belief, gender identity, language, race and sexual
orientation are fully taken into account.


Ensure that all children who go missing from care and home are offered a
return interview, and that information gathered during these interviews is
collated and analysed to identify patterns and trends to ensure children receive
the support they need and further missing episodes reduce and stop.


Strengthen the impact of the independent reviewing service to improve the
monitoring of recommendations between reviews and timely completion of
review minutes, ensuring that more effective and timely challenges are made to
tackle drift in permanence planning.


Improve the timeliness of adopter assessments and matching process to
minimise delay for those children who require adoption and target the
recruitment of adopters for children with more complex needs, family groups
and older children.

development of an effective pathway plan that responds to their needs. Ensure
they are provided with a copy of their health histories and made aware of their
entitlements.


leaving services and use this information to develop effective strategies to
combat perceived barriers.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children who need help and protection in Wiltshire were found to be
inadequate in 2012. Since then, council leaders and managers have worked hard
to improve services and have made progress. Inspectors found they still need to
do more to make services good and have judged them as requiring improvement.
 While there are some good services for children and young people not all of those
who need extra help get it as soon as they need it.
 Where there are serious worries about a child, social workers act quickly to help
make children safe.
 Social workers spend time talking to children and young people to understand
what they need to do to help them but too many children have had lots of
changes of social worker. The local authority knows this is hard for children and
managers are working to make sure that they have enough permanent staff so
that social workers do not change so often.
 Young people, parents, social workers, teachers, police officers and other
professionals have all been given lots of information about how to help keep
children and young people safe from sexual exploitation. Managers need to do
more to make sure they keep track of this work.
 Until very recently, when children went missing they were not always given a
chance to talk to an adult, when they returned, about why they ran away. This
means professionals did not always know how to help keep them safe.
 There are not enough foster carers living in Wiltshire. This means that not all
children cared for by the local authority live near to their friends and families.
Children and young people who are cared for by the local authority get good
support for their emotional and mental health needs.
 Care leavers who spoke to inspectors said they feel safe but not all of them are
fully involved in making plans for their future or properly understand what the
plans for them are.
 Social workers work hard to find adoptive families for children who need them
and more children are now moving to live with an adoptive family. Some children
wait too long before moving to live with their new families.
 Children and young peoples views are important to the local authority. They have
listened to children and as a result have made changes to the way they do things.
The Children in Care Council works well with the local authority. The shared
guardianship meetings help the council understand what is important for the
young people they care for.
 The local authority knows what it is good at and what it needs to do to improve
services for children and young people.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Senior managers and leaders have taken, and continue to take, decisive and
effective action to create a stable workforce, strengthen management oversight,
establish effective partnerships with other agencies and drive up practice standards.
The variable quality of early help work and the reluctance of some partners to take
on the lead professional role mean that children do not always get the right help and
support at the right time. Some partners do not understand the threshold criteria for
access to childrens social care.
Decisions taken in the Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH) are appropriate.
Immediate risk to children receives a prompt and effective response. The way in
which child protection strategy meetings are organised is an area of real strength.
The rate of re-referrals following a step-down from childrens social care has reduced.
In the absence of a permanent and stable workforce, practice standards have
suffered. In some teams, repeated changes of social worker have made it difficult for
some children to form meaningful relationships with them and have contributed to
drift and delay in implementing plans. Until recently, management oversight by some
team and assistant team managers has been poor. While social workers feel well
supported by managers who are accessible and are now receiving regular
supervision, this is generally task-focused, is rarely reflective and does not
consistently address workers professional development.
The quality of assessments is variable; weakness of analysis is a common feature of
those that require improvement. Social workers do not always make effective use of
chronologies to understand childrens and families histories. Families are well
supported by a range of services where domestic abuse is an issue.
Child protection plans are outcome-focused, specific and measurable but are not
always easy to understand. Some plans are too adult-focused. Child in need plans
are not always regularly reviewed and in some teams some children in need do not
have a plan. Senior managers are taking action to strengthen step-down
arrangements from childrens social care to early help. The arrangements for the
management of allegations by the designated officer have recently improved.
The vast majority of children who go missing are now offered missing return
interviews (MRIs). However, while information and intelligence from MRIs is used to
safeguard individual children it is not systematically collated and analysed to inform
the Wiltshire profile and to date the local authority has not been effectively
monitoring the use of the child sexual exploitation screening tool.


Inspection findings
committed to the new early help strategy, the direction of travel and the way in
which the strategy is being implemented. Coordination has been strengthened
through the creation of a number of early help officer posts within the local
authority, designed to improve communication and oversight of early help
work. However, these changes are new and it is too soon to evaluate their
impact on outcomes for children.
work well to provide help and support to children and families. Outreach
workers, all of whom are trained in the local authoritys domestic abuse support
approach, are effective in responding to the needs of families and are making a
positive difference. For example, the rate of re-referrals following a step-down
from childrens social care has reduced.
information and ideas, exploring problems and mobilising support for families
when problems first emerge. The countywide Gateway Panel is effective in
matching children and families with services that are most likely to be able to
help them. This includes referral to the Wiltshire Families First programme,
which has had considerable success in turning around troubled families. These
arrangements have also contributed to the reduction in re-referrals following a
step-down from childrens social care.
improve outcomes for children and young people. While some early help
assessments are good, especially those completed recently, some lack sufficient
analysis and early help plans are not always sufficiently outcome-focused,
specific or measurable.
some partners to take on the lead professional role, means that children and
families do not always get the right help at the right time. The number of
referrals to childrens social care that are appropriately re-directed to early help
or closed at the point of referral also demonstrates that some partners do not
fully understand the threshold criteria for access to social care services.
access to social care services are applied consistently. Information is shared
appropriately. The issue of parental consent is taken seriously and routinely
sought. Social workers effectively filter, assess and analyse information in order
to identify risks and strengths before making a recommendation about the level
of intervention required. Good management oversight and appropriate checks
and balances ensure that decision-making is appropriate.


from the MASH on a no names basis. Arrangements are robust and queries are
escalated to social workers appropriately. Until recently there was a backlog of
outcome letters waiting to be sent to referrers confirming the action taken in
response to their concerns. This has now been remedied following more
effective management scrutiny and decision making. An education liaison
officer has recently joined the MASH and ensures information from schools and
colleges is shared effectively to support assessments and planning.
timely. Strategy discussions are effective, appropriately attended, well-chaired
and the recording of decisions is clear. A dedicated team of minute-takers
means that decisions taken and actions agreed are circulated promptly ensuring
that section 47 investigations are timely, well-informed and thorough.
at evenings and weekends. Safeguarding arrangements for children with
disabilities are well understood, implemented and effective with robust
examples seen by inspectors.
communication and other tools to engage children and ascertain their wishes
and feelings. However, the high turnover of staff in some teams has made it
difficult for children and families to build meaningful relationships with their
social worker. In some cases, this has contributed to drift and delay in
implementing plans. While caseloads are reducing and the average is now 24,
some social workers caseloads continue to be high at up to 33 children.
good. Immediate risks are identified and social workers clearly recognise
significant harm. However, in some cases, the way in which risks and strengths
are described is not sufficiently explicit or succinct and less acute risks are not
always fully explored. Inspectors saw a small number of assessments that had
either not been completed or were significantly delayed and not sufficiently
analytical and this did not enable risk to children to be assessed in a timely
manner.
families, they are not making good or effective use of chronologies to get a full
picture of the childs experience. This has adversely affected the local
authoritys response, and that of its partners, in some cases of child neglect. In
a small number of cases seen, there was evidence of a failure to recognise the
cumulative impact of emotional harm and neglect and identify disguised
compliance of parents early enough. This has now been rectified and more
recent casework is robust and purposeful. The Wiltshire Safeguarding Children
Board (WSCB) is in the process of developing risk assessment tools to
strengthen and improve multi-agency recognition of, and response to, neglect.


inspectors were not sufficiently child-focused. This adversely affects the core
groups ability to evaluate whether risks to specific children are reducing. A
minority of plans were not sufficiently explicit to enable parents, carers and
children to easily understand expectations of them. There was limited evidence
of well-developed contingency planning.
ensures that they are effective forums for professionals to share information
and assess levels of risk and need. Most are well chaired and parents report
that they feel involved and included. Where appropriate, conference chairs
escalate issues and concerns about practice, and this is followed up by senior
managers. However, some review child protection conferences are not held on
time which means that progress in reducing risks is not evaluated soon enough.
affected by high levels of staff turnover, a small minority of children do not
have a formal, written child in need plan and while these childrens needs have
been met, this has not been achieved through a well-coordinated plan. Others
have plans that are not regularly reviewed. Rigorous scrutiny by senior
managers, involving a recent review of all open child in need cases in those
teams, provides assurance that children are not being exposed to significant
harm. The performance of these teams is closely monitored and recent
casework has significantly improved, leading to better outcomes for children
and young people.
consistently following step-down procedures from childrens social care to early
help, the local authority is in the process of setting up a number of step-down
panels, beginning in the north of the county. The north panel coordinates and
monitors step-down arrangements and provides consistency of decision making.
Senior managers plan to roll out that approach across the county to ensure
that, as problems recede, children and families continue to get the right help
and support.
supervision, it is generally task-focused. There is little evidence of reflective
supervision. In a small number of cases, until a very recent improvement in
management intervention, a lack of rigorous and robust management oversight
led to drift and delay in meeting childrens needs.
effective in sharing information, identifying risks and developing appropriate
protective responses for those children and victims affected by domestic abuse.
However, while childrens social care is fully involved, not all key partners are
fully engaged. Multi-agency public protection arrangements (MAPPA) work well.


domestic abuse is an issue. For example, male perpetrators of abuse are
engaged in programmes to tackle their abusive behaviour, and children who
have witnessed domestic abuse are well supported. Inspectors saw examples of
decisive and effective intervention in families where parental mental health
problems were having a damaging effect on children and young people.
Approximately 89% of children and young people with emerging mental health
problems are now seen by Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services
(CAMHS) within 12 weeks. Although this is an improving picture it means that
some young people have to wait too long for this service.
protection from sexual exploitation. The local authoritys child sexual
exploitation strategy action plan was signed off in May 2015. While a child
sexual exploitation manager has been appointed, two specialist social workers
have yet to take up their posts. Currently, the local authority does not have a
systematic way of monitoring the use of the child sexual exploitation screening
tool, or evaluating its impact on referrals. However, the screening tool, which is
about to be reissued, has now been revised in order to make it simpler and
easier to use and the MASH referral form has been amended to include a
specific question about sexual exploitation. In 2014, 111 young people were
identified as being potentially vulnerable.
monitoring risks and coordinating multi-agency responses to the most
vulnerable children and young people, including those who are at risk of
radicalisation. Inspectors saw evidence of well-coordinated multi-agency
responses to child sexual exploitation, for example in the case of children in
care who are living in Wiltshire having been placed there by other local
authorities.
exploitation reports have improved significantly over the last four months, there
is still a discrepancy between the number of missing incidents, the percentage
of missing return interviews offered and the percentage of those completed.
The fact that completion rates are calculated against offer rates, as opposed to
missing episodes, is unhelpful. Information about children who are missing from
home or care, or at risk of child sexual exploitation, is not sufficiently closely
aligned to information about children who are absent from school. Information
and intelligence gathered from missing return interviews are not yet being
systematically collated and analysed. However, the local authoritys own figures
show that, in June 2015, 90% of missing episodes resulted in the young person
being offered a missing return interview.
children who are missing education. They are currently working with 56 active
cases.


and detailed records of the 355 children who are currently electively home
educated and works effectively with families. The local authority works well to
ensure that most children in alternative education receive at least 25 hours of
education per week and those who do not are all working towards the target of
reporting, the number of private fostering arrangements is low. Ten children
are currently living in private fostering arrangements and receive effective
support. The local authority has effectively assessed the children and their
carers to ensure private fostering placements are appropriate and safe. The
local authority works well with local language schools to ensure that
assessments of arrangements are completed and visits undertaken with
children and their carers in a timely manner. This has resulted in the
identification of a further 22 private fostering arrangements. Performance in
relation to known private fostering arrangements is variable; in 201415 100%
of statutory six-weekly visits to children living in private fostering arrangements
were completed on time but only 41% of initial notifications were responded to
within timescales. Not all practitioners understand the criteria that defines a
private fostering arrangement.
effective and well monitored. Good quality supported accommodation is
available to young people and this work is underpinned by a robust and well
implemented working protocol between the local authority, local housing
charities and the Wiltshire Accommodation Service. Young people are well
supported by childrens social care following timely assessments of need.
However, case sampling demonstrated that joint assessments with housing are
not completed in every case.
against adults who work or volunteer with children and young people although
this was not seen to place children at risk. This issue had been identified by the
local authority and a plan recently developed to tackle them, although this work
had not begun. During the inspection, senior managers took immediate action
to strengthen arrangements. Action included the implementation of
improvements in the recording of casework, as well as ensuring authorisation
for appropriate staff to access the allegations management database.
Additionally, the local authority has identified lessons learnt and this has
resulted in improved practice such as circulating information on allegations
management arrangements to local faith groups.
and young people. Very few children take advantage of the advocacy support
available to them should they wish to complain. They are, however, making
good use of advocacy support to express their thoughts, wishes and feelings as


part of the child protection conference process. The local authority is taking
account of, and acting on, feedback from children and families.
and direct work with families, the exception being children with disabilities.
Parents and carers of children with disabilities have access to good quality
information about services and sources of support. Staff within the children
with disabilities teams work in a very child- and person-centred way.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Outcomes for children in care are not yet good in Wiltshire. The pace of
improvement, following an earlier Ofsted inspection in 2012, which identified some
similar areas for improvement, has been slower. The service has only recently
commenced implementing essential improvements, particularly in permanence
planning, the sufficiency of local placements and the response to children in care
who go missing. The impact of recent improvements is not yet demonstrated.
The Public Law Outline is used effectively. Decisions to take children into care are
appropriate. However, in a small number of cases, proceedings involving children
cared for under a voluntary arrangement were initiated too late, thus delaying
subsequent permanence planning for children.
While social workers know children in care well, the experience of children in the last
foster placements and benefited from sustained relationships with foster carers and
social workers, some children have experienced an inconsistent approach to securing
permanent homes for them. Comparatively more children in care in Wiltshire are
looked after on a long term basis under voluntary arrangements than the national
average. The response to children in care who go missing has, until very recently,
been limited, with a large majority of children not being offered return interviews.
Children in care did not do as well academically in 2013/14 as in previous years. The
proportion of children making expected progress during secondary school was much
lower than the average for children in care nationally, and attainment gaps between
children in care and all children in the county have increased.
While there are good elements to the service being provided to care leavers, the
quality of pathway plans is not consistent. While the vast majority of care leavers are
effectively supported and monitored, they are not provided with information about
their health histories and entitlements. Young people spoken to by inspectors
reported that they feel safe in their accommodation. Robust arrangements are in
place to support young people to begin their transition to independence early.
While the local authority adoption performance is better than that of comparators,
performance has deteriorated in the last year. The timeliness for placing children for
adoption from care, while improving, is slower than national timescales. Recent
senior management scrutiny and review of adoption practice evidences an
understanding and knowledge of where improvements in permanence planning and
matching need to be put in place but progress has not been fully demonstrated. The
Children in Care Council exercises demonstrable influence on the development and
delivery of services.


Inspection findings
significant improvement since the last inspection. The rate of children in care in
Wiltshire is below comparators, although rates have remained constant over the
last three years. At the time of the inspection, 414 children were in the care of
the local authority. Decisions to look after children and young people are mostly
timely and appropriate. Decision-making by the edge of care panel is careful
and considered, with children and families receiving intensive multi-disciplinary
interventions to reduce risks and prevent entry to care where appropriate.
authority is in the process of developing a looked after commissioning strategy
and a placements marketing development plan to address identified
weaknesses. Senior and middle management arrangements have been
strengthened and this is leading to improvements in relation to a legacy of
inconsistent permanence planning, placement sufficiency, care planning and
reviewing for children in care.
reviewing provision and in proposing innovations which are closely considered
at shared guardianship meetings with the Corporate Parenting Panel (CPP)
which are chaired by young people. A strong vein of accountability to young
people is evident through You Said, We Did responses and other mechanisms.
The Children In Care Council has contributed to information leaflets for children
in care as well as to services for children with disabilities and this has led to
improved advocacy arrangements.
weeks. In the vast majority of cases the Public Law Outline is used well to
ensure timely improvements are achieved, where possible, for children living in
families with a high level safeguarding concerns. However, a small minority of
children are cared for voluntarily with inappropriate parental agreements where
care proceedings should have been issued earlier. This has delayed subsequent
permanence planning for those children who did not return to their parents
care.
good, with very few additional assessments requested by the courts. The
Wiltshire specialist assessment team produces authoritative parenting
assessments, particularly of parents with learning difficulties, which are highly
regarded by the judiciary. The quality and timeliness of viability assessments of
extended family members are reliably good.
evidenced work with parents to evaluate whether originating concerns had
been addressed and reduced. However, clear, time-bound plans setting out
work prior to and following their return home were not always apparent. Few


children in care were placed at home in 201415 (2% of the total). Wiltshires
rate of children who ceased to be looked after in 201415 was also below other
local authorities. Management information made available to inspectors did not
demonstrate that managers had analysed the reasons for these low numbers.
As a result this has hampered managers ability to assess whether reunification
of parents and children is considered in all appropriate cases.
voluntary arrangement under section 20 of the Children Act 1989 (34%) is
lower than the statistical neighbour (38%) but higher than the national average
(28%). Half of these children have been looked after for over a year.
Correspondingly fewer children in care are the subjects of interim care orders.
A significant number of children in care in Wiltshire (60 or 14% of the total
population of children in care) do not have legal permanence arrangements,
particularly approved long-term fostering or care order applications where a
legal order would be in their best long-term interests. The effectiveness of
management scrutiny and oversight has increased very recently, but a minority
of children in care lack certainty about their futures.
Order (SGO) has increased year on year from five in 201112 to 30 in 201314,
demonstrating Wiltshires effective permanence planning for this cohort of
children. The number reported for 201415 is 25, a slight decrease. However,
the number of children leaving care through SGOs at 16% in 201314 was
higher than comparator averages of 10% and 11%. Special guardianship
arrangements are based on good quality assessments and carers are well
supported.
communities. Placement sufficiency is the primary factor limiting the availability
of local placements. A longstanding management objective to increase the
number of local Wiltshire foster carers remains unrealised. Wiltshire is providing
foster placements through independent fostering agencies, purchased through
a regional commissioning framework that does not supply enough local
placements. Moving to these placements means that many children experience
changes in schooling and difficulties in maintaining contact with friends and
families. Of those 118 children who live in distant placements, 73 live outside
Wiltshire, creating additional complexities in the arrangement of effective health
and educational provision from host local authorities. Only 34 of 118 children in
distant placements have an advocate. This is concerning in a context where
childrens access to local professional and family networks is more limited.
multiple missing episodes between June 2014 and May 2015 were not offered
missing return interviews. More recently the local authority has taken effective
action to ensure that all children are now offered return interviews making it
possible to analyse and collate findings from them to reduce both individual and


collective risk. The impact of the new arrangements cannot yet be fully
demonstrated.
sexual exploitation response was slow to be implemented. While a child sexual
exploitation screening tool has been in use since 2014, the lack of completed
missing return interviews in some cases indicates that any associated risks of
child sexual exploitation may not be identified or addressed. However, in cases
seen by inspectors, the risks of child sexual exploitation, missing episodes and
substance misuse were effectively addressed, including children placed out of
county and distant placements within Wiltshires borders.
with none in custody or secure institutions. An effective multi-disciplinary panel
meets regularly to track and reduce offending behaviours. Proportionately
slightly more children in care in Wiltshire than in other local authorities have an
identified substance misuse difficulty. While the numbers of young people
involved is 15 and this is low, effective arrangements are in place to support
them.
where the outcomes were broadly in line with the low national averages for
children in care. For example, progress between Key Stage 2 and Key Stage 4
is well below the national average for all children in care. The proportion of
children making expected progress during secondary school was much lower
than the national average for children in care nationally, and attainment gaps
between children in care and all children in the county increased. However, the
virtual school has analysed the reasons and school data predict that outcomes
for 2014/15 will rise again. For example, the proportion of children in care who
got five good GCSEs in 2013/14 was 11%. Predictions are that this will rise to
improvement, performance remains low.
increased the number of staff. Eight virtual schools officers work effectively
with schools and with individual children in care and improvements in the
virtual school are being sustained. The large majority of personal education
plans are good, with detailed assessment and analysis, which staff use well to
help individual children in care. A small number of the cases sampled require
improvement in that they do not contain sufficient detail to identify progress
and plans to meet individual childrens needs and aspirations.
funding. Schools are required to bit for this funding, in line with government
guidelines, and the virtual school uses funding effectively, for the benefit of
children in care generally. The local authority has worked well to improve the
attendance of children in care, from a poor level to performance that is broadly
in line with the national average for all children. The rate of unauthorised


absences for children in care is lower than that nationally. The local authority
has been effective in increasing the proportion of children in care and care
leavers who are in education, employment or training from 62% in 2013 to
overall. For example, for those Wiltshire children in care educated within the
county the proportion making expected progress is 8% higher than for those
educated outside the county, but the local authority had not identified this. In
addition, while the local authority records the destinations of children in care
when they leave school at age 16, it does not record their progress and
attainment on their post-16 programmes.
completed in line within required timescales. A majority of initial health
assessments (61%) are completed within 28 days, which is comparable with
performance elsewhere although requires further improvement. Careful
attention to monitoring and improving the physical health of children in care
was apparent in the majority of cases seen by inspectors, including those in
distant placements. The early identification of initial health needs of a small
number of unaccompanied asylum-seekers was assisted by the routine use of
interpreters. All first health reviews for children in care were completed within
three months.
through a blend of CAMHS provision. Therapeutic support to foster carers,
kinship carers, special guardians and adopters is provided through the family
placement service by seconded CAMHS staff. Up to 44 families have received
this service, which provides specialist support and strategies to help manage
the difficult behaviour of some children in care, assisting in the prevention of
placement breakdowns. This support is an important factor in the relatively low
number of moves for children in care in Wiltshire, despite the limited sufficiency
of foster care placements. Referrals to the service are managed promptly with
direct outreach support to 34 children in care, including an offer of out of hours
interventions.
after teams, where 75% of children in care are allocated, have reduced
considerably over the previous year and are now manageable. The quality of
case recording seen by inspectors was mostly good, with clear accounts of
childrens views, concerns and wishes. Case recordings addressed key outcome
improvement areas such as education and the quality of attachments with
carers, but did not consistently report how outcomes were progressing between
regular statutory visits.
with family members were carefully documented and reviewed to ensure they


were balanced and beneficial for children. Contact meetings were arranged to
minimise disruption to the daily routine of children in care, although
inconvenience was inevitably greater for the considerable number of children in
distant placements.
with a plan for permanence. This work is completed by social workers who
know their children well and foster carers are well engaged in this process. Life
story books and memory boxes are well used to ensure childrens memories are
preserved and well recorded for the future.
generally too superficially explored, particularly in relation to emerging sexual
identity and the formation of positive gender, racial and ethnic identities.
encouraged by their carers and documented in their case records. Additionally,
the Aspire centre provides a dedicated resource for children in care in
Wiltshire, housed in a pleasant building offering further educational support by
the virtual school, an IT suite, activities, groups and a meeting venue for the
Children in Care Council.
and this is contributing to the development of more informed care plans. A
majority of care plans contained clear outcomes, refreshed following children in
care reviews with specific time-bound actions. A minority of single assessments
and care plans were not updated within statutory timescales and were
insufficiently focused on evaluating childrens progress over the preceding year.
caseloads of 60 to 70 children. Some looked after children reviews are not
completed within statutory timescales. However, recent improvements in
recording mean that at the time of the inspection 89% were completed on time
compared with 44% in January 2015. The majority of review minutes are not
written or circulated within 20 working days, with some examples of protracted
delays seen by inspectors. The implementation of permanence plans for some
children in care is adversely affected by this lack of timeliness. Evidence of IROs
meeting children before their looked after reviews, and monitoring the progress
of review recommendations and care plans between reviews, was apparent in a
minority of cases seen, but was not consistently evident for the majority of
children and is likely to be a further factor in delayed permanence planning.
There were determined efforts by IROs to improve their influence in the
formation of robust care plans in care proceedings, illustrated through more
effective liaison with the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support
Service (Cafcass).


demonstrate that regular visits to carers by supervising social workers,
including unannounced visits, take place to monitor placement arrangements.
focused attention on obtaining meaningful contributions from children in care.
Training provision for carers is regular and comprehensive. The majority of
foster carers have completed their initial training and development standards.
inspectors, and placement plans contained information that was too basic to
provide carers with the necessary background knowledge of children they were
starting to look after.
their supervising social workers, family placement therapeutic staff and the
virtual school. The service has undergone a net loss of foster carers recently,
primarily through a management review of those who were offering few or no
placements. The service has set ambitious recruitment targets, led by a new
manager, to increase considerably the number of in-house foster carers
recruited annually, gradually reducing the disproportionate number of distant
placements.
experienced members and decision making is robust and clear. The quality of
assessments of prospective foster carers is good and ensures children are
placed with carers whose skills and expertise have been well identified and
evaluated. Careful efforts are made to place brothers and sisters together and
exemptions are appropriately sought to enable this.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement.
birth families and who need a permanent alternative home. However, children
are not always placed for adoption in a timely way. From 2011 to 2014
Wiltshire performance for the average time between a child entering care and
moving in with its adoptive family was 637 days. This is 90 days longer than
the national target of 547 days. For 201215 it was 602 days, which was 115
days longer than the national target of 487 days. For 201516 the provisional
figure is 578 days, which will be 152 days longer than the national target of 426
days. Compared with statistical neighbours, in 201314, Wiltshire was the third
lowest performer, indicating that children wait too long before being placed
with adopters. While Wiltshire is missing the target by more in each three-year
cycle, the average number of days taken has reduced year on year.


result in effective matching with carers. A small number of children experience
delay in being matched with a family. Clear plans are in place for these
children. However, they have not been sufficiently well driven and waiting times
range from 33 to 88 days from the making of the placement order. The local
authority has identified that family finding plans are not always effectively
driven and has recently increased the management oversight and scrutiny to
reduce delays for children.
aware of all children who may require adoption, so that it is considered in the
early stages of childrens care planning. Permanence planning arrangements
have been the subject of well-targeted management scrutiny and this has led
to a drive to improve performance and to minimise delay for children.
plan were variable, with some cases evidencing a linear approach, where one
plan is followed and concluded before other alternative plans are actioned.
However, practice has recently improved following well targeted management
scrutiny and purposeful oversight. While tracking and monitoring processes are
now in place for children requiring adoption, to improve timeliness of
placements, the impact of this is not yet fully embedded. In 201415, only two
foster-to-adopt cases and no concurrent placements were made. The local
authority has identified this as an area for development and is now effectively
considering these arrangements for children where this is appropriate.
information about the childs needs and history, a thorough assessment and the
reasons the birth family is unable to care for the child. These reports ensure
that childrens needs are effectively identified and considered and used
appropriately for matching considerations. The process for family finding and
matching with adopters is not always sufficiently purposeful or well driven. For
example, on occasions individual profiles are not circulated in a timely way,
leading to delay in children being matched and placed.
effective and well-targeted. For example, 12 children had adoption care plans
appropriately rescinded between April 2014 and March 2015 because adoption
was no longer the appropriate plan. Scrutiny of these cases reflects clarity of
planning and robust assessments that have contributed to appropriate decisions
not to pursue adoption plans.
data include the lack of assessment timeframes for adopters as well as the
numbers of children from a minority ethnic background who are adopted. This
does not provide the adoption service or senior managers with accurate
information to complete a strategic analysis and assess overall performance.


While the authority has identified this as a key area for development, action
taken to address it is very recent and has not yet had an impact on children.
time between a local authority receiving court authority to place a child and the
local authority deciding on a matching adoptive family. However, performance
is variable and not consistently improving. In 201215, the national target was
at 121 days for 201316 and the provisional Wiltshire performance is estimated
at 151 days. The local authority has, however, recently strengthened
arrangements to identify families at an earlier stage and ensure delays are
avoided.
training to understand the reality of adoption and the needs of the children who
may be placed with them. The quality of assessment work sampled was good,
identifying the adopters strengths and weaknesses with appropriate analysis of
what they could provide for a child, and was compliant with regulatory
standards. This enables the adoption service to make well informed and well
matched placements that will be clearly able to meet the needs of the children
placed.
the more complex needs of the children waiting for adoption, although some of
the adopters recruited in 201314 in response to the national drive to recruit
have very limiting requirements for the children they are willing to be matched
with. As a result some prospective adopters are still waiting for children to be
matched with them. The service has placed four sets of brother and sister
groups appropriately, and only separates siblings where it is in their best
interests. Sensitive and appropriate matching of cultural and ethnic needs as
well as placements with same sex couples demonstrate that the service actively
considers who is best placed to meet childrens needs.
small minority of adopters had not been referred to the national adoption
register, leading to unnecessary delays in being matched with children waiting
nationally. All adopters were referred to the South West Adoption Consortium.
effectively matched with the most appropriate families. The adoption panel is
well run and managed and promotes good practice through its work. The chair
is very experienced in adoption work, providing helpful insight to the adoption
agency decision makers and managers on a quarterly basis about issues arising
from work presented to the panel. The agency decision makers were seen to
provide appropriate decisions, and have taken action to improve timeliness in
relation to should be placed for adoption decisions so that family finding for
some children can start earlier.


help was provided to adopters and special guardians in 201415. In addition to
support groups, three annual social events and on-going training, the team
coordinated 369 post box exchanges, and 597 helpline contacts were taken.
There were 58 referrals for adoption support services, all of which were
progressed. There is currently a waiting list of 16 adopters and five special
guardians waiting for an assessment of need, due to a higher volume of
referrals and staff absence. There are appropriate plans in place to manage
this.
improving its offer to families who require more intensive support. It is
appropriately using the adoption support fund and providing support for six
families with child on parent violence. Feedback from adopters was positive,
particularly about the family placement therapeutic service, adopters support
groups and assistance with life story work. Two disruptions in 201415 were
dealt with appropriately and lessons learnt were effectively disseminated across
the service.
The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care
leavers is that it requires improvement.
to keeping in touch with care leavers. The vast majority of the 204 care leavers
are now effectively supported and monitored. However, the local authority has
chosen to close the cases of 10 care leavers (5%) whom they consider to be
settled and no longer to want or need a service, rather than maintain periodic
written contact with them.
accommodation and that they have had some choice in where they are
currently living. Young people who go missing are routinely identified and
receive a timely response to their needs for protection. Care leavers report that
the local authority keeps track of them when they go missing and they are
reassured by the level of support they receive from personal advisors. Personal
advisers are alert to risks in relation to child sexual exploitation and those at
risk are supported effectively. Risks are identified in a timely way and
thoroughly assessed, with plans and interventions leading to reduced risk and
increased resilience. Inspectors saw effective work being undertaken both to
reduce offending and to rehabilitate care leavers into the community after
periods in custody. There are currently two care leavers in custody, with the
local authority reporting a comparatively low offending rate of 3% among its
care leaver group.
transition to independence early. Personal advisors are allocated alongside


social workers to work with 16- and 17-year-olds, focusing particularly on
independence skills. Young people are benefiting from a range of life skills
training; for example, budgeting and cookery sessions are provided by their
personal adviser. Additionally, the local authority commissions the services of a
semi-independent accommodation provider who has three sites across
Wiltshire. This service undertakes needs-assessed independence skills training
with young people, eventually assisting them to apply for their own
independent accommodation.
inconsistent and this limits the extent to which they are able to impact
positively on the lives of young people. The majority of plans lack analysis, do
not thoroughly consider identity and are not specific regarding action to be
taken, by when and by whom. The pathway planning process is cumbersome
and frequently duplicates work. Arrangements for reviewing pathway plans are
not reliable, and do not consistently involve the young person and the wider
network. Young people spoken to during the inspection reported not feeling
well engaged in their pathway plan.
good. Designated looked after children nurses have good links with the leaving
care teams, providing support and guidance to young people and personal
advisors about how to access relevant community services. Effective
arrangements are in place for young people with mental health needs to make
the transition to adult services without disruption. Arrangements to support
young people who experience drug and alcohol problems are well developed.
However, care leavers do not currently have access to their health histories and
this limits their ability to make informed decisions about their health
requirements. The local authority has plans to address this.
Young people are risk assessed and closely monitored in their accommodation.
There is a range of accommodation to meet the diverse needs of care leavers in
Wiltshire. Securing placements close to where the young person has links, for
young mothers and for young people with disruptive behaviour, remains a
challenge to the local authority, which has responded by spot purchasing timely
bespoke packages of care when required.
even in an emergency, with no young people placed in this type of
accommodation over the last year. There are currently no young people placed
in multiple-occupancy housing. Effective commissioning arrangements for care
leavers are in place to ensure that this is consistently achieved and that care
leavers can enjoy both suitable accommodation as well as some degree of
choice.
foster carers. These arrangements have been individually negotiated in each


case. The local authoritys strategic arrangements to support such opportunities
for all care leavers have only recently been introduced through a Staying Put
policy
in education, employment and training, which has increased from 35% in 2014
to 50% in 2015. This is now better than comparators (41%) and the national
average (45%). This work is effectively driven by the virtual school, which has
two workers with a post-16 specialisation who have strong links with colleges
and employers. As of 31 May 2015, 18 care leavers are attending university,
representing 11% of care leavers, which is higher than the national average of
training, of whom nine are in apprenticeships with the local authority. Young
people who are at university reported that they feel well supported.
people spoken with during the inspection did not get information about what
the local authority should be providing them with. However, the Children in
Care Council has recently developed a leaflet clearly setting out the support
which is available to care leavers, including a leaving care grant of 2,000, but
this has not yet been systematically shared with young people.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Improvement since the 2012 inspection was focused on child protection and the
the service had been slower. In the last 1218 months, the local authority has made
determined efforts to improve services for children and young people and these have
been well driven and purposeful. Elected members and senior managers are
informed and knowledgeable about the quality of services children and families
receive and there is clear political support to the Childrens Services Leadership Team
(CSLT). Wiltshire operates a tri-partite arrangement to perform the function of Chief
Executive, with this role shared between the Director of Childrens Services (DCS)
and two other corporate directors.
The senior leadership team now has a comprehensive overview of the strengths and
weaknesses across the service. The ability of the senior leaders to drive
improvements and embed consistent good practice has been adversely affected by
the challenges in recruiting experienced permanent social workers and managers
across the service. Staff at all levels have now been appointed, reaping
improvements in practice as well as effective and decisive leadership and drive.
Senior leaders are ambitious and, while they acknowledge that their focus has been
on safeguarding services, improvements to children in care services are now also
evident. Senior managers and leaders have taken, and continue to take, decisive and
effective action to establish constructive partnerships with other agencies.
The re-configuration of services, level of financial investment and increased size and
stability of the workforce have led to improvements in the timeliness and quality of
the services children and young people receive. Improvements are not yet
consistently established across all areas of service and, in some instances, where
improvements have been made, these are very recent and not yet having an impact
on improving outcomes for children and young people. Senior leaders are aware
there is more to do and recognise the areas for improvement identified in this
inspection.
Management oversight of casework is improving and staff have recently experienced
more consistent, effective supervision. While average caseloads of 24 continue to be
higher than the target of 18 that senior managers are striving for, these are
reducing. Social workers feel well supported by visible leaders who visit social work
teams regularly to understand the challenges faced by social workers.
Performance management processes are limited, although this is currently a key
priority for the local authority. Quality assurance and scrutiny arrangements have
significantly improved recently and are now finding improvements in casework and
outcomes for children and young people.
Senior leaders are demonstrably committed to the needs of children in care in


Wiltshire and corporate parenting is developing. Arrangements to engage children
and young people and to enable them to contribute to service development and
planning are improving.
Inspection findings
performs the role of Chief Executive on a rotating basis with the two other
Corporate Directors has been subjected to an independent scrutiny both by a
Local Government Association peer review and an independently commissioned
auditor. Both reviews found the arrangement to be satisfactory and to meet
statutory functions. While this arrangement is unusual, it has facilitated an
increased profile and understanding of childrens services at corporate director
level.
and responsive in identifying solutions and resources. One example is in
relation to the funding of social work bursaries from the public health budget,
for the grow your own social worker scheme. This will be rolled out in the
autumn through the newly established Wiltshire Institute for Health and Social
Care (WISC). Corporate directors working with the DCS conduct annual
appraisals of the independent chair of the LSCB.
take place between elected members and senior leaders, in addition to formal
scrutiny arrangements. The Health and Wellbeing Board is chaired by the
Leader of the council who promotes an appropriate focus on childrens issues.
Investment from the Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) has funded the health
representative in the MASH.
information on the population of Wiltshire at a very local level. The nature of
the military community in Wiltshire and the future planned changes in
deployment are well understood. The DCS is a member of the Wiltshires
Military Integration Partnership which provides a forum to identify and respond
to the military footprint in Wiltshire.
and review. They have undergone a peer challenge on neglect and a Local
Government Association diagnostic for services for children in care.
Recommendations from these reviews have been incorporated into the relevant
service area improvement plan. A strategy in relation to neglect is not yet in
place and a number of strategic plans are very recent and have not yet
demonstrated impact on outcomes for children and young people.
young people. Health and social care priorities are aligned, with an emphasis on


early intervention which will inform the redesign of community health services
for children and young people. Consultation with children, young people and
families underpin arrangements to commission services. One notable success
has been the Special Educational Needs and Disabilities (SEND) service, which
was designed with the active participation of the Wiltshire Parent Carer Council.
Commissioned services have not, however, been sufficiently responsive to
childrens needs in relation to providing a choice of local foster homes for
children and young people in care.
arrangements to review, monitor and improve practice. The DCS chairs the
improvement board, which the authority chose to continue following the end of
formal intervention. In addition, all escalations from the child protection and
reviewing team are reviewed by the DCS. Team performance review meetings
have been an effective vehicle for senior managers to understand some of the
issues that are impacting on performance in individual teams. This includes
soft cultural issues as well as staffing, data, audit, case escalation from child
protection chairs and performance indicators. The trajectory for improvement is
good, with demonstrable improvement in the quality of practice and outcomes
for children and young people already achieved in some teams where there has
been a legacy of poor practice.
does not consistently make systematic and effective use of all resources
available to it to monitor and improve practice and outcomes for children and
young people. Data to interrogate and improve performance are not sufficiently
sophisticated across all areas of the service. For example, analysis and learning
from complaints is limited and there is no formal system for the collation of
comments or compliments that could inform practice development and
improvement. Similarly, managerial scrutiny of practice has not sufficiently
addressed shortfalls in relation to children in care where permanence is not
secured in a timely fashion or where care proceedings have not been instigated
promptly. The virtual school does not analyse data sufficiently to identify trends
such as the progress of children educated outside the authority. The local
authority is aware that the manual systems used to track performance in the
adoption team are complicated and time consuming and is taking steps to
address this.
of practice as well as compliance and now incorporates feedback from children
and families. The local authority is confident in the judgements now made by
managers when auditing case work. The reliability of these judgements is
supported by their congruity with the judgements of inspectors during this
inspection. Learning from auditing activity has led to the revision of policies and
procedures in relation to supervision and visiting timescales. The local authority
can also demonstrate improvements in the quality of practice. For example,
authority in November 2014 were found to be inadequate. During the


inspection in July 2015, inspectors only identified three inadequate cases with
no children at risk as a result of weaknesses. Additionally, cases judged to be
good by the local authority improved from 12% in November 2014 to 45% in
June 2015.
their direct involvement with young people. However, strategic corporate
parenting arrangements are not yet sufficiently developed, have lacked
direction and clear business plans and as a result have not had sufficient impact
on improving services and outcomes for children and young people cared for by
the local authority. Action is being taken to address this.
of whom have contributed to the shape of services. Childrens wishes to reduce
the number of changes of social worker they experience have led to the current
model of service provision. You Said, We Did demonstrates meaningful
engagement with the Children in Care Council, and result in positive changes,
based on young peoples views, result. Examples include young people
contributing to training for foster carers, induction training, changes to foster
carer review forms, the redevelopment of early help assessments to improve
the childs voice and continued commissioning of youth groups.
improved the consistency and quality of practice. The establishment of the
MASH has been effective in providing a single point of access and prompt and
appropriate responses when children are referred to social care. The early help
service has been re-configured but is not yet sufficiently developed, though the
partners are reportedly welcoming the recently revised strategy.
and sufficient workforce. Cross-party political commitment has led to
considerable investment in developing the service despite the current financial
constraints on the council. Such investment has increased the number of social
worker posts by 27, increasing capacity and supporting the aspiration of the
authoritys promise to reduce social workers caseloads to 18.
features in the professional press and senior leaders appearances in the media
and at recruitment events. This has led to the local authority receiving a
significant increase in applications. In phase two of the current campaign,
October 2014 to March 2015, 425 applications were received, compared with
these, 75 applicants have been offered and accepted posts. Despite this, 38
vacancies remain, 17 of which are in the safeguarding and assessment teams.
Six of these vacancies are in just one of these teams which, as a result, has a
disproportionate number of agency staff within it. This arrangement has,
however, been closely monitored to ensure agency workers are of high quality
and experienced.


most established social workers described reducing caseloads to inspectors.
This is allowing them to spend more time with children and families. However,
some social workers, including some in their assessed year of practice, continue
to have caseloads that are too high.
senior managers have given thoughtful attention to stabilising and
strengthening them. Improved managerial oversight is in place to ensure that
thresholds are applied correctly and that risks are managed until stability and
consistently good practice are achieved.
fully developed although young people now receive a timely and effective
response to their need for protection from sexual exploitation. The local
authority has been proactive in promoting awareness with elected members,
communities and partners but its strategic and operational approaches are
insufficiently robust. The local authority acknowledges that the commissioned
service for completing missing return interviews for children and young people
who go missing has not been sufficiently rigorous. New arrangements to
complete these interviews have been recently made and early signs of
improvement are evident.
Family District Judge and Cafcass. This has had a significant positive impact on
the timeliness of proceedings which currently stand at 24 weeks.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.
A Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) requires improvement if it does not yet
demonstrate the characteristics of good.

Executive summary
The Wiltshire Safeguarding Children Board (WSCB) has made slow progress from a
low base, but has benefited from increased partner engagement. Governance and
accountability arrangements are in place. However, capacity issues, restructuring and
changes of subgroup chairs and membership of the board and subgroups have
reduced the timeliness of developments. Effective monitoring has not yet been
sufficiently established across the partnership. As a result the board does not yet
have an evaluative oversight of the performance and impact of all services on
outcomes for children.
Safeguarding practice is scrutinised by the board through the use of single and multiagency audits, section 11 audits and the annual schools safeguarding audit. These
have led to action plans, which the board and partners are monitoring to ensure
these lead to improved front-line practice. The WSCB is still developing its multiagency performance dataset, aligned to the Wiltshire Performance Web and board
priorities. Although the WSCB does make judgements about front-line practice across
agencies, the absence of a developed framework impacts on the boards ability to
fully identify, challenge or escalate concerns about practice in frontline services
delivered by all partners.
The WSCB has played a key role in engaging partners in the safeguarding agenda
and coordinating their response to missing children and child sexual exploitation. The
boards monitoring of the effectiveness of partnership practice in this area is
underdeveloped.
The WSCB has disseminated learning from serious case reviews and other serious
incidents across the partnership. Most agencies have responded positively and there
have been discernible improvements in practice as a result. However, learning from
these reviews within childrens social care is not as well evidenced.
Peer reviews across the partnership have highlighted areas for improvement,
including the need for a neglect strategy, work on an operational multi-agency child
sexual exploitation group and a greater focus on children in care. These areas are
yet to be developed and reflected in the boards business plan.


Recommendations
with improved partner agencies data.
procedures creates a joined-up partnership approach, scrutinising the timeliness
and quality of missing return interviews to analyse intelligence and develop a
better understanding of missing behaviour and wider child sexual exploitation
profiling.
clear multi-agency procedures that are widely disseminated and implemented
across the partnership.
responses, to review progress, evaluate impact on practice, analyse themes and
share wider learning to all partners.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
effective and help the board carry out its statutory responsibilities. The
Executive Directors, in their rotating chief executive role, hold the chair of the
WSCB to account and ensure that safeguarding is a key priority across the
partnership in Wiltshire. There are effective links between the WSCB, the
Health and Wellbeing Board (HWB) and the Lead Member and this has further
strengthened the delivery of the boards statutory responsibilities.
has undergone significant structural redesign, appropriately reducing from 17 to
nine subgroups. This has streamlined key activity on priorities identified by the
board and enabled more decisive and robust coordination of services and
evaluation of safeguarding performance across Wiltshire. The roles and
responsibilities of many partner agencies are common to both Wiltshire and
Swindon, with the child sexual exploitation strategic group and child death
overview panel (CDOP) subgroup working effectively under pan-Wiltshire
arrangements.
sector, a lay member and young people. The majority of board members are of
sufficient seniority to have influence and effect change in their own
organisations and across the partnership. The Chair has succeeded through
challenge in improving consistency of representation at board meetings of most
partner agencies and sectors including headteachers and the military. All WSCB
partners make suitable financial and resource contributions.


purpose, are reviewed effectively and reflect changes in practice. The board
has challenged partners on issues such as performance information data,
financial contributions and dissemination of learning across the partnership.
However, this level of challenge and sustained focus has not always been
sufficiently rigorous or well driven. For example, the board does not keep a
formal record of challenges and responses and as a result it is difficult for it to
effectively review progress, analyse themes or share wider learning to all
partners to evidence positive changes in practice.
reports. Young people from the Children in Care Council regularly attend and
pose questions and challenge partners, ensuring the wishes and feelings of
young people remain constantly considered by the board.
across the partnership is underdeveloped. The multi-agency dataset is not yet
comprehensive and the board is therefore unable to scrutinise performance
information effectively. While the board is in the process of addressing this area
for development, this currently inhibits the WSCBs ability to assure itself of all
safeguarding performance across the partnership. For example, the missing and
child sexual exploitation subgroup are not using all relevant data. This weakens
the boards ability to analyse data and assure itself that partners approaches to
children at risk of child sexual exploitation are meeting need.
effectiveness of local practice to safeguard children through training and
development sessions on performance information. However, until the dataset
is a fully functioning tool and scrutinised robustly, this learning is limited and as
yet is not sufficiently influencing practice and outcomes for children and young
people in Wiltshire.
have developed a comprehensive audit framework and commissioned a range
of multi-agency and single-agency audits to review practice. These audits are
scrutinised at the quality assurance and performance subgroup and regularly
presented to the board. Audit findings and recommendations are identified and
implemented by partners, and learning from audit activity is widely
disseminated across the partnership. Partners were able to demonstrate how
audits have contributed to improved safeguarding in Wiltshire, for example the
implementation of changes to the policy on non-mobile babies following a
partnership review.
in the audit cycle. Section 11 audits have been scrutinised and feedback about
the quality of audits, is used to shape partners action plans. The board has
made further developments in section 11 audits. For example, it has added
specific child sexual exploitation questions for 201415 and will add specific


questions on female genital mutilation and radicalisation in the 201516 audits.
The annual schools safeguarding return has shown improvements in practice
through the work of the board, for example, the increase in appropriate
referrals on the management of allegations against staff and volunteers
following well-attended multi-agency training.
capacity issues have adversely affected the boards ability to effectively review
and update the framework. The board has not yet undertaken a multi-agency
training needs analysis to inform the future training plan and ensure a closer
alignment between needs and delivery. As a result the board cannot currently
assure itself that training needs across the partnership are effectively met. The
board has, however, ensured that there are improvements in multi-agency
training attendance and evaluation and these are monitored effectively through
a regular training report. The WSCB has recently implemented a training
programme on responding to individuals who are vulnerable to messages of
violent extremism under the Prevent strategy, with train the trainer workshops
being rolled out to partners. It is too early to see the impact of this on practice.
statutory guidance. Learning from serious case reviews is a key priority for the
board and lessons are disseminated effectively across the partnership. While
representatives from partner agencies are able to demonstrate how this
learning has improved their practice, learning within the childrens social care
workforce is limited. Training and implementation of Social Care Institute for
Excellence (SCIE) methodology for serious case reviews and partnership
reviews have received positive feedback from partners. The board has
integrated learning from several peer reviews, and key messages from these
have been used to target key areas for development. For example, one peer
review has led to the current development of the neglect strategy and this was
accompanied by the delivery of high quality multi-agency training on neglect.
Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) and Health Trusts. This has resulted in
improved focus and understanding of safeguarding responsibilities across the
health partnership. For example, the commitment to safeguarding is increasing
general practitioners participation in safeguarding training and improving the
quality of single agency audits to evaluate practice. The CCG actively monitors
performance for compliance and quality, and this information is now
contributing to the new WSCB performance dataset.
processes and practice across the partnership, for example updated rapid
response procedures are in place. The stability of the partners and chair on the
subgroup has led to sustained development, with regular comprehensive
analysis of cases to understand incidents of child death, themes and patterns.
Joint campaigns with police, public health and other partners on specific issues


such as learning for health visitors on environmental health issues has further
strengthened responses to child death incidents.
safeguarding procedures. While all WSCB policies and procedures are in place,
and reviewed at regular intervals to ensure they are fit for purpose, some
policies have not been updated to make them compliant with Working Together
to Safeguard Children 2015. For example, the information sharing policy
continues to refer to Working Together to Safeguard Children 2013. This area
for development has been identified by the board, although work has yet to be
initiated.
sexual exploitation. Partners are now actively engaged in this agenda and are
routinely contributing to service improvements and awareness-raising. For
example, 25 of the 29 secondary schools in Wiltshire have run a child sexual
exploitation awareness raising event. The recent targeted focus from the board
has contributed to strengthened arrangements to identify and support children
at risk of sexual exploitation. For example, Wiltshire police have led on the
development of a pan-Wiltshire initiative to tackle child sexual exploitation
(Project Gemstone) and this has resulted in the development of a newly
established multi-agency child sexual exploitation team (Emerald). Information
gathered from this activity has further contributed to the boards ability to
analyse intelligence and themes and use key messages from local intelligence
to target resources.
missing return interviews is not used to develop a better understanding of
missing behaviour and wider child sexual exploitation profiling. This challenge
has now resulted in an improving awareness on the part of practitioners to
offer return interviews. Additionally, the police have commenced awarenessraising activities, including visits to taxi drivers and fast food outlets. However
this activity is not sufficiently established to ensure local businesses are aware
of risk, intelligence is gathered and disruption activity undertaken. A range of
awareness raising activity, information and training on female genital mutilation
has recently been widely disseminated with partners including health and
schools, although it is too early to see how well this learning is used.
provide a rigorous assessment of local performance and effectiveness of
services. The report is not sufficiently evaluative and does not reflect a
comprehensive overview of the quality and impact of services delivered across
Wiltshire to children and young people. There is a limited analysis of some
issues, for example children in care and private fostering. This has been
identified by the board and the forthcoming annual report, while not yet
published, and seen by inspectors only as a draft, does contain a critical
analysis of achievements and sets out a clear rationale for future priorities.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 10 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Emmy Tomsett
Deputy lead inspector: Janet Fraser
Team inspectors: Nigel Parkes, Nick Stacey, Louise Warren, Derrick Baughan, Chris
Luke, Tara Geere
Quality assurance manager: Pauline Turner


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


