Wokingham
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 12 October 2015  5 November 2015
Report published: 5 January 2016
Childrens services in Wokingham require improvement to be
good


Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Wokingham require improvement to be good. The leadership
and governance arrangements in Wokingham are robust and effective and
demonstrate many elements of good. However, first and second line management,
which are vital, are not sufficiently rigorous in challenging, monitoring and driving
social work practice to ensure that all services for children and young people are
good.
The senior leadership team in Wokingham has a clear vision for service improvement
and many of the essential components are in place to ensure further progress.
Inspectors did not find serious or widespread concerns in the experiences of children
and young people. However, the quality of practice remains variable and is not
consistently good. Inspectors found that weak management oversight and
supervision were common features in too many cases. Ensuring robust case
supervision, management oversight and decision making by first and second line
managers is crucial to improving social work practice and improving outcomes for
children and young people in Wokingham.
Improvements achieved since the last inspection of child protection services in 2012,
and safeguarding and looked after services in 2010, include well-coordinated services
that provide targeted and specialist help at an early stage, reduced caseloads, early
signs of the workforce stabilising and good adoption services. Senior leaders have
been instrumental in effectively pursuing opportunities to secure additional funding
through government-funded innovations and collaborative working arrangements.
Adopt Berkshire and Signs of Safety innovations project are two positive examples.
A robust workforce strategy has begun to reduce a previously heavy reliance on
agency workers, but a legacy of high turnover among social workers and managers
has impacted on the quality of social work practice, management oversight and the
timely progression of care plans. Staff have good access to training and are
committed and positive about working for Wokingham. Performance information and
quality assurance systems are under-developed and not sufficient to provide a clear
picture of practice and to identify where action needs to address shortfalls and drive
up performance. Joint commissioning of childrens services is under-developed,
although some key areas have been agreed as strategic priorities between partners.
In the vast majority of cases, children and young people in need of help and
protection receive an effective and prompt response from the duty, assessment and
triage team. Thresholds for services are clear, understood and applied effectively in
most cases. In a small minority of cases, delays in holding strategy discussions and
instigating child protection procedures resulted in children remaining in situations of
unassessed risk. When referrals do not meet the threshold for childrens social care,
the early help hub, overseen by a social work manager, is ensuring that appropriate
services are in place to support children and their families. The domestic abuse
repeat incident management group provides an effective arena for additional multi-


agency scrutiny and risk assessment.
Where the Signs of Safety model is used to assess childrens needs, there is an
emphasis on risk factors and children are central to the assessment. Where it is not
used, assessments are too adult-focused and overly optimistic, leading to drift and
delay for some children. Assessments and planning processes for unborn babies and
children under the age of three years are not sufficiently robust. Most children are
seen and seen alone by social workers, and benefit from direct work using a range of
tools to explore their experiences and perceptions. However, children do not always
know how to contact their social worker or receive a prompt response when they do.
Transition planning begins too late for disabled children.
When children need to be looked after by the local authority, decisions in the
majority of cases are prompt and appropriate. There are, however, delays in
considering plans for childrens permanence. Foster carers are well supported but do
not always receive the written decisions from children looked after reviews quickly
enough. Work with partner agencies is not always effectively coordinated by social
workers and their managers. There are insufficient local foster carers, despite
extensive efforts to recruit more. As a result, almost half of children looked after are
placed more than 20 miles from home. Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services
are not sufficient to support all the needs of children looked after and care leavers
with direct support or intervention. Life story work for children looked after is underdeveloped.
The virtual school has made significant progress in improving support to children
looked after, including improved personal education plans. Placement stability for
children looked after is good. The local authority appropriately considers placement
of children looked after within their wider family and has encouraged and enabled
the use of special guardianship orders. Arrangements to enable children to live with
their foster carers after their 18th birthday are established and working well. Children
for whom the plan is adoption receive a good service, with adoption plans pursued
for all children who would benefit from it. Fostering to adopt is considered
appropriately to avoid delay. Post-adoption support services are strong.
The quality and support to care leavers varies, with some not receiving the frequency
of visiting they require or the level of help they need to develop independent living
skills. A good choice of accommodation is available to meet the needs of care leavers
with the vast majority living in suitable accommodation. The local authority is in
touch with all their care leavers. Children looked after are able to have their voice
heard and are well represented through the Children in Care council, with strong
involvement with corporate parents.
Good progress has been made to tackle child sexual exploitation, with a multi-agency
operational forum ensuring that information is effectively shared and children at risk
of child sexual exploitation are identified and robustly assessed. Extensive
awareness-raising has taken place with children in both primary and secondary
schools. However, when children return after going missing, return interviews are
not completed promptly enough and information from interviews is not collated to
identify pattern and trends.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home. It was judged to be
outstanding at its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in November 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in July 2010. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since February 2014.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
September 2014.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 36,497 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Wokingham. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 7% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 5% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 5% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 18% of all
children living in the area compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian/Asian British and Mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 14% (the national average is 19%).
 in secondary schools is 13% (the national average is 14%).
 There is a large settled Gypsy, Roma and Traveller population, some of whom are
still travelling. There is also a newer Eastern European population resident in the
area.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 12 October 2015, 523 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 12 October 2015, 67 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 95 at 31 March 2014.
 At 12 October 2015, one child lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from none at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection, one serious incident notification has been submitted to
Ofsted. No serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at the
time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 12 October 2015, 69 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 20 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 75 (20 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014. Of this number:
 two live in residential childrens homes, of whom 100% live out of the
authority area
 seven live in residential special schools3, of whom 100% live out of the
authority area
 none lives with parents
 two children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been two adoptions
 two children became subject of special guardianship orders
returned to be looked after
 two children and young people ceased to be looked after and moved on
to independent living
 one young person ceased to be looked after and is now living in a house
of multiple occupation.
 The local authority uses Signs of Safety as their social work model for child
intervention work.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or fewer per year.


Recommendations

Monitor and improve the frequency and quality of management oversight
and supervision to all staff to ensure that they are regular, reflective and
challenging and focused on ensuring good outcomes for children with
rationale for decisions made clearly recorded (pages 13, 31, paragraphs 19,


Improve the quality of casework audits, practice development tools and
performance management information. Ensure that it is used effectively by
managers to improve the quality of social work practice (page 32, paragraph


Accelerate the implementation of the joint local authority and clinical
commissioning group emotional health strategy to ensure better and quicker
access to emotional and mental health support for children and young people
(page 21, paragraph 53).


With partners, ensure that there is an effective integrated service pathway
for all children and for young people in transition (pages 15, 26, paragraphs


Improve the quality of assessments and plans by:
 ensuring that assessments include consideration of absent significant
adults (page 13, paragraph 20)
 ensuring that assessments are of a consistently good standard,
supported by good analysis of risks and protective factors (page 13,
paragraph 20)
 ensuring that they consider and reflect equality and diversity factors
(page 13, paragraph 21).


Put in place a pre-birth protocol and improve the assessment of vulnerable
unborn babies and their families (page 13, paragraph 20).


Ensure that when a child goes missing from home or care, a timely return
visit is completed and information from interviews is collated and analysed to
inform service delivery (pages 15, 21, paragraphs 28, 51).


Ensure that strategy discussions include all relevant agencies (page 13,
paragraph 18).


Ensure that children looked after can contact their social workers and that
they receive prompt response to contacts (page 20, paragraph 46).


Ensure that early permanence planning is in place for all children (page 19,
paragraph 38).



Ensure that care plans and actions agreed at reviews for children looked
after are promptly disseminated and carried out and that work with partner
agencies is effectively coordinated by social workers and their managers
(page 23, paragraph 62).


Improve the quality of services to care leavers by ensuring that:
 visits to care leavers are purposeful and visiting frequency is according to
their individual needs (page 26, paragraph 76)
 care leavers have access to opportunities to gain good quality
independence skills (page 26, paragraph 75).


Summary for children and young people
 Inspectors found that services for children and young people in Wokingham
require improvement to be good. Managers know what they need to do and plans
are already in place to make most of the improvements that are needed.
 Social workers act quickly when children and young people need help and
protection.
 Managers do not always make decisions quickly enough or pay attention to the
progress or what needs to happen next for all children. This means that some
social workers are not sure what they have to do and some children wait too long
for support.
 Children and young people are listened to and the majority meet with their social
workers regularly, but not all know how to contact them when they need to.
 Some children and young people have had too many different social workers.
This makes it hard for them to get to know and trust their social workers.
 Families, children and young people are able to get the support they need when
they are facing difficult problems. This helps them to make positive changes that
improve their lives.
 Wokingham does not have enough local foster carers. This means children and
young people live too far away, which makes seeing their family and friends
difficult.
 Plans for children and young people who are in care or are care leavers vary.
Some children and young people are not clear about what should happen, who is
going to do it and by when. Planning for the future, especially for disabled
children, does not take place soon enough or include what would happen if things
do not work out.
 Most care leavers report that they feel well supported by their personal advisers.
Opportunities for care leavers to remain living with their foster carers until they
are ready to leave are successfully encouraged.
 Nearly all children looked after go to good schools and most attend well. Schools
are well supported by the virtual school team to do their best for children looked
after.
 Permanent families are not always found quickly enough for some children who
cannot continue to live with their own families.
 When children need help to understand their life stories, this has not happened
quickly enough.
 When children need to be adopted, this happens quickly. Children and their
adoptive parents are well supported.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
The local authority knows that it needs to improve and develop frontline
management oversight in order to effectively challenge the variability of social work
practice. Nevertheless, children and young people who are in need of help and
protection are identified and swift action is taken to make sure they are safe.
Strategy discussions mean that correct decisions are made when there are concerns
about risks to children, but they do not always involve all the appropriate people.
Children and young people benefit from effective early help and specialist services.
Staff across the partnership are trained in Signs of Safety. This is ensuring that
children across all age groups and their families benefit from appropriate help at the
right time to reduce escalation of concerns. Skilled multi-disciplinary staff in the
family resource team provide interventions that are making a difference to childrens
lives and preventing family breakdown.
The quality of assessments varies greatly, with particular weaknesses in the
assessments of unborn and younger children. Where the Signs of Safety model is
used, assessments are robust, identify risks and include safety plans.
Social workers use a range of tools to understand childrens experiences. This helps
social workers to build relationships with children. However, multiple changes in
social workers and managers has contributed to drift and delay in implementing
plans to support some children and has affected childrens ability to sustain positive
relationships with adults.
Effective multi-agency arrangements are in place for identifying and monitoring
children and young people missing from home and care and those at risk of sexual
exploitation. However, return interviews for children who go missing are not
completed quickly enough and information from interviews is not analysed to form a
picture of patterns and trends.
A specialist team works with disabled children and provides appropriate child-focused
work from skilled practitioners. Co-located services enable timely access to early
help. Transition arrangements to adult services need to be strengthened to ensure
collaborative early planning.
Effective arrangements are in place for young people aged 16 to 17 years who
become homeless.


Inspection findings

Children and young people in Wokingham benefit from a range of wellcoordinated services that provide targeted and specialist help, underpinned
by a coherent multi-agency early help innovation strategy. There is good
partnership working and full commitment to developing the Signs of Safety
model. Appropriate training is in place for all partners who are involved in
supporting children and young people who need early help.


The local authority has continued to invest in a good range of effective and
targeted youth support services as part of its early help offer. Skilled multidisciplinary staff in the family resource team (FRT), childrens centres and
youth workers provide interventions that are making a positive difference to
childrens lives. Youth workers provide effective support for young people
who need targeted short-term support to help them develop positive skills
and behaviours. For example, some well-focused work with young people in
danger of exclusion from school through misuse of drugs has helped them to
remain in mainstream education.


A recently refreshed threshold of need document is understood and
effectively applied by agencies and practitioners. The early help triage
provides a clear pathway to early help services. The early help hub,
established in August 2014, provides robust multi-agency consideration of
the most appropriate early help support for children and their families. A
well-coordinated weekly multi-agency meeting gives timely consideration to
all requests and promptly identifies the most relevant agency to support the
family. Good oversight from the referral coordinator helps to determine
progress for children and young people from the time of the referral.
Between June 2014 and June 2015, 1,412 children and young people
received early help services, delivered directly with either the child or young
person or through family-based interventions designed to improve outcomes
for those children. The local authoritys own data show that 61% children
had improved outcomes as a result of this intervention.


The majority of early help assessments sampled during the inspection were
good. Recent assessments, which used a new format developed as part of
the work to introduce the Signs of Safety, were particularly good. In a small
number of cases, assessments required improvement due to poor recording
of the voice of the child, delay from initial contact to assessment and delayed
provision of parenting courses. Step-up and step-down processes are
effectively ensuring that children and their families get help at the right time
and right level.


Troubled families work in Wokingham has been positive in achieving results.
By May 2015, 110 (100%) troubled families identified had been worked with
and their circumstances improved. Phase two has been launched and the
target of identifying 60 families out of a group of 350 has been achieved.


Children and young people who are at risk of actual or likely harm are
appropriately identified and responded to by the duty assessment and triage
team. The response to concerns and the provision of services is timely and


appropriate. In most cases, risk is reduced effectively. Efficient arrangements
are in place to respond to requests to childrens services for information and
advice. Referral coordinators receive contacts and referrals overseen by
experienced and suitably qualified social work staff. An experienced, qualified
manager undertakes all decisions in the team effectively. Parental consent is
appropriately sought before carrying out agency checks. In most cases seen
by inspectors, the use of the Signs of Safety model has resulted in a greater
clarity of risk and need, ensuring that the right interventions are in place.

When child protection referrals lead to strategy discussions, they generally
take place between police and social care only. This means that information
from other agencies is not always available to inform decision-making. The
local authority, in partnership with police and other partners, has started to
address this. Quality standards have been agreed and the associated training
days secured, although it is too early to evidence impact of these changes.
The recording of strategy discussions is variable, with some lacking historical
information. This compromises opportunities to fully understand risks to
children and young people. In a small number of cases referred to the local
authority, delays in holding strategy discussions resulted in children being
left in situations of unassessed risk. By contrast, strategy meetings observed
by inspectors were prompt, with appropriate agencies present. Managers
chaired the meetings well. They resulted in good-quality decisions and
subsequent work that was focused on risk and the needs of children.


While management decision-making and oversight of casework is evident in
the majority of cases seen in the duty assessment and triage team, practice
in the long-term neighbourhood teams is weak. Management oversight is
documented on childrens case files. However, the frequency, quality and
rationale for decisions made is insufficient, with some having significant gaps
in case records. This means that previous actions are not robustly reviewed
for their completion or effectiveness and management direction is not
available to social workers when risks to children increase.


Chronologies are available and maintained in most cases, although the
quality is variable. More recent chronologies are good and have been used
effectively to inform assessments. The quality of assessments varies greatly.
In nearly all assessments, the voice of the child was present and their wishes
known. However, the majority required improvement, as they failed to
assess the impact of fathers and other significant males in childrens lives,
and were overly optimistic in parental motivation to change. In particular,
the assessments of unborn and younger children lacked sufficient analysis of
risk to inform effective planning.


Issues of equality and diversity such as ethnicity, sexual orientation and faith
are commented on but the impact is not sufficiently considered within
assessments and plans.


Social workers are knowledgeable about the children they are working with.
Children are visited and seen alone frequently. Social workers use a range of
tools to understand childrens experiences. This helps social workers to build


relationships with children. However, frequent changes of social workers
hamper this work and have contributed to drift in meeting the needs of some
children promptly.

Child protection conferences and reviews of child protection plans are timely
and attended by an appropriate range of agencies. Most social work reports
for initial child protection conferences provide a good assessment of risk and
protective factors, leading to appropriate decisions. However, reports
prepared for review child protection conferences are not always timely and
vary in quality, resulting in poor planning for a small number of children.
Where practice falls below standards required by the local authority, child
protection chairs take effective action to compensate or escalate to
responsible managers.


Wokingham independent reviewing officers (IROs) also chair child protection
conferences. They have manageable caseloads that include both children
looked after and those subject to child protection plans. Inspectors observed
effectively and sensitively chaired conferences, with participants views
sought and good engagement with parents. Parents and young people report
that they are clear why professionals are worried and what they need to
change. Overall, child protection plans identify the appropriate action that is
needed to reduce risk and meet childrens identified needs, but not all
actions are specific and measurable.


A commissioned service provides advocacy support to 28 children and young
people to attend conferences and ensure that their views are captured. Core
groups and children in need meetings are held within or close to timescales
set by child protection plans, and reviewed regularly. They measure progress
against actions effectively. Business support staff comprehensively record the
minutes from meetings. This is a valuable resource and ensures that actions
and plans arising from meetings are readily available to social workers,
children and young people, parents and professionals involved.


Childrens social care and police have a good, shared understanding of the
risks to children from domestic abuse. This understanding is set out with a
clear range of actions in an up-to-date domestic abuse strategy, sponsored
by the Community Safety Partnership and the Local Safeguarding Children
Board. Robust arrangements for the screening of domestic abuse
notifications are in place. The domestic abuse triage  involving staff from
childrens social care, a voluntary organisation working with women who
suffer from domestic abuse, and the police  meet daily to effectively
prioritise referrals. Multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARAC)
enable an effective coordinated multi-agency response and approach to risk
in relation to children living in households where there is domestic abuse.
The domestic abuse repeat incident management (DARIM) group adds
additional multi-agency scrutiny and risk assessment. This proactive
approach provides earlier coordinated intervention to lower-level repeat
domestic abuse cases that do not meet the MARAC threshold. Cases are
escalated effectively and access to a good range of services is available.
Case sampling demonstrated good information-sharing, shared analysis and


robust action to secure the safety and well-being of children. The domestic
abuse strategy is comprehensive and includes female genital mutilation as a
form of abuse, although Wokinghams known prevalence rates are low.

A specialist team works with disabled children and provides appropriate
child-focused work from skilled practitioners. Co-located services enable
timely access to early help. For example, the Bridges team provides a range
of short breaks and outreach services to young people with learning
difficulties. However, transition planning to adult services begins too late for
disabled young people, with some not being assessed by adult services until
they are almost 18. These arrangements need to be stronger to ensure
collaborative early planning with adult services for young people with
complex needs.


The arrangements for responding to the needs of children and young people
who go missing have been strengthened, with an operational panel in place
and a commissioned service providing independent return interviews. Staff
make contact with all children and young people who go missing to offer a
return interview. The team received 22 referrals between July and
September 2015. Of these, only one young person was visited within 72
hours. A further 14 children declined an interview despite persistent efforts
to engage them. In cases sampled by inspectors, interviews included the
views of young people and an analysis of risk. Return interviews completed
by individual social workers were timelier. The local authority is now taking
effective action to improve the timeliness of return interviews for all young
people.


Children missing education are carefully monitored and tracked. Of the 66
children who have been missing from education over the last academic year,
only 27 have periods of missed education during the current term which is a
significant improvement. Managers are notified by schools when a child
misses education and timely checks are made with appropriate agencies.
Plans are in place to improve the links between children missing education
and children missing from home panels, which has the potential to improve
the scrutiny of those absent from school.


The multi-agency child sexual exploitation and missing persons operational
group meets monthly. Management oversight and assurance is secured
through a child sexual exploitation strategic and operational governance
structure shared jointly and co-chaired between childrens social care and the
police with regular reporting to the Local Childrens Safeguarding Board.
There is effective alignment to the early help hub and the children missing
from education panel. Panel members routinely review individual childrens
circumstances and the levels of risk they are exposed to. Rigorous scrutiny of
information is used to plan and to provide services designed to reduce risks.


At the time of the inspection, the child sexual exploitation panel was
monitoring six children. Cases reviewed by inspectors demonstrated
interventions were proportionate to the assessed risk. The numbers have
remained low and are in keeping with the profile of the local authority. The


prevalence of risk is predominantly from lone offenders targeting adolescent
girls through social media and through friendship groups. Child sexual
exploitation champions are actively disseminating good practice and available
to social workers for consultation. Members of the champions group are
piloting a revised assessment tool to assist in the assessment, analysis and
planning for young people deemed to be at risk.

The local authority maintains a list of children and young people who are
electively home educated (EHE). Currently, 77 young people are EHE.
Appropriate agencies checks are completed to identify any concerns. To
date, 57 children and young people have been visited at home to ensure the
appropriateness of their education. There are plans in place to visit the
remaining 20 children. A very small minority of EHE children are known to
childrens social care. Nine children have started or resumed mainstream
education because of the constructive support provided by the local
authority. Only one child out of 29 who are in alternative educational
provision is looked after. The majority of children who are in alternative
provision are there because of medical issues. Plans are in place for all to
return to full-time education.


The emergency duty service (EDS) is effective and shared with six
neighbouring unitary authorities across Berkshire. It has sufficient capacity to
respond to all children who need help and protection out of hours. In the
cases seen by inspectors, the EDS had responded well, with appropriate
direct intervention with families, clear and timely decision-making and
prompt two-way communication with daytime services.


Arrangements for responding to allegations about risk presented by adults in
a position of trust in relation to children are satisfactory. The recently
appointed designated officer initiates action appropriately in respect of such
allegations, in accordance with established systems. Cases seen by
inspectors demonstrate a good response, with prompt and appropriate steps
taken to protect children and active follow-up to ensure that outcomes for
children are good.


The local authority received no notifications of known or suspected private
fostering arrangements between 2011 and 2014. In the last year,
considerable efforts have been made to sharpen inter-agency awareness of
children and young people who are privately fostered. At the time of the
inspection, a small number of children were living in a private fostering
arrangement, having had an assessment that was thorough and culturally
sensitive, with a plan of support to both child and carer. Robust
arrangements are in place to review private fostering arrangements. Children
living under private fostering arrangements are reviewed every six months
by an IRO. This provides additional scrutiny to such arrangements.


Effective arrangements are in place for young people aged 16 to 17 years
who become homeless. Good collaborative arrangements with the
Wokingham housing service mean that assessments take place swiftly and
appropriately. When necessary, young people become looked after or
appropriate accommodation is provided.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Outcomes for children looked after in Wokingham are not yet good because services
are not consistently meeting the needs of all children.
Effective action is taken to ensure that children and young people looked after are
promptly supported and there is no delay in progressing matters through the courts.
However, permanence planning has not been considered at an early enough stage.
This has led to drift and delay for some children and young people.
Some children looked after and care leavers seen by inspectors reported poor
experiences with their social workers. Overall, they did not feel that social workers
respected or listened to their views. They felt that social workers often did not keep
their word or keep appointments made with them. The legacy of difficulties in
recruiting and retaining social workers and managers for children looked after has
adversely impacted on the consistency and quality of work, the progression of care
plans and the ability of children looked after to form trusting relationships with social
workers. The local authority has worked hard to stabilise the workforce, which is
beginning to reduce the number of changes of social workers children experience.
Overall, the educational needs of children looked after are well supported. However,
until recently, their health needs have not been promptly assessed or reviewed and
they do not always receive prompt support for their emotional health.
The local authoritys foster carers are well supported. However, the number of local
carers is insufficient, despite extensive efforts to recruit more. As a result, almost
half of children looked after are placed more than 20 miles from home. This
adversely impacts on their contact, relationships and travel time.
When children go missing from care, return home interviews are not completed
quickly enough to understand the childs experience and to reduce the risk of further
missing incidents.
Children looked after are able to have their voice heard, and are well represented
through the Children in Care council, with strong involvement of corporate parents.
Adoption is appropriately considered as a permanent option for all children who
cannot live with their birth family. There is a good range of post-adoption support to
meet childrens needs.
The quality of pathway planning for care leavers is too variable, with some plans not
sufficiently outcome-focused or providing enough detail about who will do what, and
by when. Care leavers would benefit from greater levels of support through more
frequent visiting from their personal advisers.


Inspection findings

At the time of the inspection, the local authority was looking after 69
children. Thresholds for entry to care are applied appropriately in almost all
cases. There were no cases seen where children had been put into care
inappropriately. In most cases where children were looked after on a
voluntary basis, this was appropriate. However, during this inspection, the
local authority had to take legal advice to ensure that the care status of two
children was secure.


Undue delay in considering permanence planning has negatively impacted on
too many children and young people looked after and their ability to have a
clear understanding of what is likely to happen to them. It also means that
care plans are not as effective as they should be in securing permanence as
soon as possible. This has been recognised by the local authority, which in
June 2015 established a permanence planning panel. The panel is
systematically reviewing children looked after cases to ensure that the
permanence planning is robust. This focus has ensured that permanence
planning for those children received into care in recent months is now more
robust.


In the few cases where children were looked after with plans to return home
from care, all demonstrated careful planning supported by assessments, with
review arrangements in place and appropriate continuation of plans after
care.


Childrens cases that are subject to letters before action, the pre-proceedings
phase of the public law outline (PLO), are regularly reviewed. Letters before
action are clear, stipulating the concerns and the actions required by
parents/carers and by when. Tracking meetings between managers and the
local authoritys legal services provide robust oversight. The local authority
engages effectively with the local courts and is an active participant in the
work of the Local Family Justice Board. This has enabled cases to progress
through the courts without undue delay, with an average for the area of 30
weeks in 2015. However, this does not meet the national requirement of 26
weeks. The local authority with advice from the legal team has reviewed all
children who are looked after on a voluntary basis to ensure that these do
not warrant intervention through the courts; all were assessed to be
appropriately accommodated under section 20 of the Children Act 1989.
While aware of the changes in social workers in some cases, the courts had
not experienced any negative impact of this on timetabling or the quality of
social work in the courts.


The local authority considers placement of children looked after within the
wider family appropriately, and has encouraged and enabled the use of
special guardianship orders. During 201314, 10 special guardianship orders
were achieved, but in 201415, only two were achieved. The local authority
is reviewing relevant children, through the permanence panel, to ensure that
special guardianship orders are consistently considered.



Assessments of children looked after are regularly updated in almost all
cases and contain a clear analysis of issues affecting them and their needs.
However, some assessments lacked detail or were insufficiently focused on
the immediate needs of that young person. Assessments did not consistently
consider diversity issues for children looked after. This was stronger where
diversity issues were prominent, such as for disabled children, where those
needs were thoroughly assessed and taken into account in case planning.


Work with children looked after between reviews was not consistently well
coordinated. Those cases that were good had effective joint working to
further the care plan, but others showed a lack of coordination and failure to
share information or fully involve all relevant agencies, which impacted
negatively on how plans were progressed. This was exacerbated where there
had been changes in social workers.


Overall, social workers visit children looked after regularly and see them
alone where appropriate. However, in some cases, the purpose of the visit
was primarily to meet minimum visiting requirements, with little evidence of
purposeful direct work. Children and foster carers who met with inspectors
confirmed this. In a small number of cases, where children had moved
placement, minimum visiting standards set by the local authority had not
been met. This was because of social workers not being clear about the
required frequency of visits. This was identified and addressed by managers.


Social work caseloads for children looked after are manageable. This enables
them to undertake direct work including life story work. However, a number
of children looked after, foster carers and IROs have voiced the need for life
story work for children and young people who have not received it. Despite
being well resourced, with manageable caseloads, high turnover among
social workers and managers for children looked after has impacted
adversely on the consistency and quality of practice, management oversight
and the timely progression of care plans. This also negatively impacted on
the relationships that social workers were able to establish with young
people, their carers and families.


Children looked after and care leavers seen by inspectors said they did not
feel that social workers always respected or listened to their views. They felt
that social workers often did not keep their word or keep appointments
made with them. They gave many examples of trying to contact their social
workers, but not receiving a response. They expressed particular concern
about frequent changes of social worker and that often social workers did
not inform them directly or say goodbye to them when they left or changed
roles. The local authority has made significant progress in stabilising the
workforce and has more recently successfully reduced the number of
changes of social workers for children looked after. However, some children
looked after are still affected by the legacy of previous workforce instability.


Young people value the support from advocates, with 42 children and young
people looked after being supported by this arrangement.



Reviews for children looked after are timely and are well attended by the
appropriate range of agencies. The meetings are well structured and chaired
to ensure that information is considered in all key areas affecting the young
person. Overall, plans are clear, with updated measurable outcomes, and
they include the views of young people. However, not all had actions that
were specific and measurable. Some showed drift in permanence planning or
contingency planning, with not all actions completed in a timely way. Some
plans were too vague or lacked clarity or detail.


Contact arrangements between children looked after and their families were
clear, with due consideration of safeguarding issues. However, young people
seen by inspectors reported that they seldom understood the reasons for
their contact arrangements. Strengths and difficulties questionnaires are
completed in most cases but are not consistently used to maximise planning
for children looked after. For example, they are not routinely shared with
health partners to inform health assessments.


The small team of permanent IROs demonstrates a robust understanding of
how effectively the needs of children looked after are met. They meet
regularly with children and with social workers in and outside of reviews and
maintain the same reviewing officer, where possible, to provide consistency
for the young person. Where practice falls below required standards, IROs
initially use informal methods to address these. Where this does not resolve
the matter, appropriate use of dispute resolution notifications is made.


A commissioned service undertakes return interviews following incidents of
children and young people going missing. However, the interviews are not
timely and the take-up by children and young people is low. Between July
and September 2015, 14 children out of 22 referrals received by the service
declined an interview and only one was within 72 hours of the child returning
from a missing episode. As a result, important information is not captured
and the risk of repeat episodes is not reduced. Inspectors saw more timely
return interviews where individual social workers had completed them. The
Pan Berkshire child sexual exploitation indicator tool is used to identify and
assess risk. Cases seen by inspectors demonstrated clear risk assessments
and issues being presented to the child sexual exploitation and missing
operational panel.


The health needs of children looked after have not been consistently
addressed. Initial and review health assessments were significantly delayed
between March 2014 and May 2015 as a result of staffing issues in the small
looked after children health team. This has recently improved, with all health
assessments being brought up to date at the time of this inspection.


Children looked after are prioritised by local Child and Adolescent Mental
Health Services (CAMHS) for assessment. However, few are provided with
direct support or intervention. CAMHS do provide advice and guidance to
children looked afters social workers and foster carers, which is greatly
valued, and all expressed a need for much more therapeutic support to
address the complex emotional and behavioural needs of the looked after
young people. Where CAMHS intervention is not available, alternative


bespoke therapeutic provision is commissioned by the local authority. The
local authority and its partners were developing the range of emotional and
mental health provision for children and young people at the time of
inspection.

Following re-launch in April 2015, the virtual school has made significant
progress in improving support to the educational needs of children looked
after. Key improvements include improved personal education plans (PEPs)
that are reviewed and updated for every child on at least a termly basis. A
member of the virtual school team attends every PEP meeting. Plans that are
more recent are of better quality. Further improvement is required in the
analysis of the impact of the Pupil Premium on improving progress.


The vast majority of children looked after are in good or better schools. The
three children in schools that require improvement are carefully monitored to
ensure that they get the support they need, where broader permanence
factors outweigh the benefits of moving them to a good school.


The educational attainment gap between children looked after and all
children is closing at Key Stage 4. Half of the small number of children at this
level achieved at least five GCSEs at grades A* to C, including English and
mathematics, which is well over twice the national rate for children looked
after. Just over half of children looked after have identified special
educational needs. Overall, the majority of children looked after make
expected or better progress, although those in Key Stage 2 do not do as well
as others.


Sufficiency of local placements is a priority for the local authority. A clear and
detailed sufficiency strategy to meet the placement needs for children looked
after and care leavers for 2014 to 2017 has been reviewed. However, despite
the extensive and wide-ranging campaigns in recent years, the local
authority has not achieved its own targets for the recruitment of local foster
carers and supported lodgings for care leavers. Efforts to recruit local carers
were being renewed at the time of this inspection.


In the past 18 months, the local authority has renewed efforts to place
children looked after more locally and within 20 miles of the area. This has
resulted in around half of children looked after being placed closer to home.
While every effort is made to ensure that the needs of those young people
are promptly met, the distances have a negative impact on the ability of
those young people to maintain local contacts. Also the distance adversely
impacts on how readily social workers and IROs see children, with excessive
time taken up with travel.


Placement stability for children looked after is good and almost all are living
in high-quality placements, in suitable accommodation, that take account of
the wishes of the children and young people. Overall, children looked after
are in foster or residential placements that are meeting their needs. Clear
arrangements are established for managing situations where standards in
residential or foster placements are not of the level required by the local


authority. Arrangements to enable children looked after to remain in
placements beyond their 18th birthdays are now well established and are
working well for those young people.

The fostering panel is well established, with diverse representation from a
range of people, including a former looked after person. New members and a
new chair were appointed in early 2015 and have received training to
underpin their role. The panel meets regularly and carries out its core duties
robustly. Information provided to the panel is of a high standard, with few
cases being deferred for further information. Social workers and foster carers
presenting to the panel are consistently able to respond to questions, which
enables the panel to reach its recommendation immediately. Over the past
year, appropriate and prompt action has been taken to de-registered foster
carers in a very small minority of cases.


Foster carers report that they generally feel well supported by the local
authority and by their supervising social workers. Almost all report that they
received thorough induction training and were able to access further training,
or information, to enable them to support the complexity of needs of the
children and young people they care for. Foster carers are able to raise
concerns with their supervising social workers and are confident of how to
escalate these with managers. However, foster carers expressed frustration
at the frequent changes of social workers that children in their care
experience, often without notice, and the negative impact that this had on
the young persons willingness to trust or engage with other social workers.
Foster carers report that often actions or care plans are delayed where social
workers are temporarily allocated to children.


Foster carers report that they are clear about the plans for children looked
after and that they are able to contribute to these, particularly through
children looked after reviews. However, they often do not receive the
minutes from these reviews until the next review. When they are not able to
attend, they are not always aware of any changes in the plan or actions
required from them.


Children looked after who met with inspectors report that they are well
represented by the Children in Care council and that it enables their voice to
be heard by the local authority. Those on the council feel that they are
listened to and are treated with respect. Young people looked after receive
free passes to the local authority commissioned leisure provision and are
supported to participate in Duke of Edinburgh programmes and in running a
football team. Children and young people looked after actively participate in
the corporate parenting board and are involved in the development of
information for young people, such as the pledge, the care leavers charter
and health passport. They have undertaken questionnaires with peers to
gain wider views that influence the work of the corporate parenting panel.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

Adoption is appropriately considered as a permanent option for all children
who cannot live with their birth family. The local authority is part of Adopt
Berkshire, a collaborative arrangement with three other neighbouring local
authorities. The agency decision maker (ADM) arrangements are effective,
with each local authority participating in a tenure taking responsibility for
oversight of the panel. The head of service for Wokingham, informed by
relevant legal and specialist advice, effectively determines all decisions in
Wokingham childrens cases. Decisions are documented in childrens files
supported by clear rationales.


Berkshire Adoption Advisory Service (BAAS) administers the adoption panel,
which serves six local authorities across the county. The panel adviser is the
service manager for both Berkshire Adoption Advisory Service and Adopt
Berkshire and provides an effective link between the panel and senior
managers in the local authority. The adoption panel is chaired well. It meets
twice a month to avoid any delay and provides effective scrutiny and
oversight of the approval of adopters and matching recommendations.


The local authority performance against the Department of Education (DfE)
adoption scorecard of the average time taken from when a child enters care
to moving in with their adoptive family has deteriorated from the 201114
figure of 600 days to 669 days during 201215. This is outside the
government target of 487. This performance reflects a small number of
harder to place children, staffing challenges and the transitions
arrangements to Adopt Berkshire. Performance over the last year has
significantly improved, with the local authoritys own data demonstrating an
average time of 425 days. The time between the granting of a placement
order and children moving to their adoptive family is 92 days. This is
significantly better than the government target of 121 days, the national
average of 217 days and statistical neighbours average of 196 days. This
means children are placed quickly with their new families once a placement
order has been made.


Decisions not to pursue a plan for adoption are carefully considered and
timely alternative permanence plans are progressed. Rigorous and effective
oversight by managers and the adoption agency manager mean that child
permanence reports (CPRs) help agency family finders to secure the right
family for a child. The CPRs seen by inspectors were well written and
provided a good standard of information about the child, their history and
the circumstances that led them to be considered for adoption. They identify
the childs current and potential long-term needs.


Adopt Berkshire recruit, prepare and assess all Wokingham adopters. During
months, with the average length of time from application to approval being


application to approval. The majority of these delays were due to the
individual circumstances of prospective adopters and the transition
arrangements to Adopt Berkshire. The timeliness of applications during
governments six-month target. Adopt Berkshire actively promotes fostering
for adoption placements to reduce delay for children. Prospective adopters
are encouraged to consider this option. Adopt Berkshire has arranged five
fostering for adoption placements to date including two from a neighbouring
authority. However, the local authority is not sufficiently promoting
concurrent placements as a potential option for children locally and
nationally.

A social enterprise company, sponsored by the DfE and run by adopters,
provides peer mentoring for prospective adopters through the period of
assessment to matching. They provide a range of support, which includes
specialist individual support, therapeutic parenting and group training, which
continues after approval. Adopters spoke highly of the training and support
they receive.


The quality of prospective adopters reports is good. They are clear, concise,
and evaluate adopters experiences and their suitability to adopt. Adopters
told inspectors that they found the approval process appropriately
challenging, it was facilitated by staff who were knowledgeable and reliable
and supported them sensitively.


Adopt Berkshire has a sufficient number and range of adopters available to
meet the needs of children with a plan for adoption. Currently, there are
adopters waiting to be linked to children, which is a national trend.
Wokingham adopters receive timely referral to the adoption register and
adoption link. Adopters who are waiting are prepared and supported well.
This support is enhanced by the agencys placement officer, who has regular
contact with adopters both informally and through monthly profile meetings.
The service is working actively to help adopters to develop their confidence
in caring for children who are older or who may have needs that are more
complex. As a result, no children are currently waiting to be linked or placed
with potential adopters.


Good preparation for children with plans for adoption is in place. Children are
effectively supported by social workers and foster carers and have access to
therapeutic support to assist in the transition. This high level of support has
enabled children with significant complex needs to achieve permanence
through adoption. Therapeutic life story books and later-life letters are of
good quality and routinely addressed as part of the reviewing process for all
children considered for adoption. As a result, children live in adoptive
placements where their adopters have material available to them to support
children to make sense of their past experiences. Childrens racial and
cultural heritage are well considered in plans.


Good post-adoption support is available for both adopters and children to
ensure the future stability of adoptive families. Adopters confirmed that they
are aware of the range of services available within the partnership and


externally. Twelve requests for assessment for post-adoption support
resulted in all families receiving support services. Four successful applications
have been made to the adoption support fund for individual specialist
support packages. There have not been any recent adoption breakdowns.
Inspectors also saw evidence of good-quality support offered to older young
people living in Wokingham who had been adopted in other areas. These
young people benefited from effective help because the authority is informed
about the needs of adopted children and adopters at all stages in the
adoption process.

The local authority offer support services to birth parents, with the service
supporting 13 adults since 2012. Letterbox arrangements are in place for
over 100 cases and a small of children are supported with ongoing direct
contact with their birth family.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement

The local authority children looked after and care leavers team, Here4U,
currently works with 29 care leavers. Personal advisers have manageable
caseloads and work with young people to support them emotionally and to
secure housing and independence. However, the quality of this support
varies, with some care leavers not receiving the level of help they need to
develop independent living skills. As a result, a small number of care leavers
are not adequately prepared for a successful move to adulthood. Planning
and progress towards independence is also hindered for some disabled
young people by a lack of timely coordination and joint planning with adult
and specialist services.


Personal advisers visit young people in line with statutory requirements, but
many visits lack purpose and do not meet the young persons needs. In
some cases seen by inspectors, young people would benefit from greater
levels of support through more frequent visiting. Young people themselves
identified this in a survey conducted by the Children in Care council to
determine whether the promises set out in the Care Leavers Charter had
been delivered. Overall, there is insufficient management oversight and the
standard of service young people receive is too variable.


Care leavers spoken to expressed their frustration about frequent changes of
social worker, which prevents them from developing trusting relationships.
Some young people were more positive about the work of their personal
advisers, with one describing her personal adviser as a rock. Another care
leaver was very unhappy with the service received from a succession of
social workers and said that the service received now, from their personal
adviser, demonstrated to them what they should have received previously.



The quality of pathway planning is too variable, with some not sufficiently
outcome-focused or providing enough detail about who will do what and by
when. Too many plans are not reviewed according to the changing needs of
the young person or in line with statutory guidance. As a result, young
people are not consistently challenged when they make poor choices or
decisions or when their needs and circumstances change. Plans and reviews
lack contingency planning and, as a result, personal advisers are not always
as responsive as they should be to the changing circumstances of young
people. There is also a lack of independent oversight in reviewing pathway
plans. The introduction of 16-plus PEPs is, however, a very positive addition
to the planning pathway for care leavers.


The local authority is in touch with all their care leavers. The vast majority
live in suitable accommodation and have a good choice of accommodation,
with the offer of additional help and support from tenancy sustainment
officers. Young people who met with inspectors advised they felt safe and
were satisfied with their accommodation. There is no set limit on the number
of housing offers made to young people through the well-developed
arrangements with the housing department, which include access to housing
association and privately rented property. Young people are encouraged to
remain in their foster placements after their 18th birthday through stayingput arrangements, which are also available to young people placed with
independent fostering agencies. Currently, two young people are benefiting
from this arrangement. At the time of the inspection, no young people were
homeless or living in bed and breakfast accommodation.


Young people are actively encouraged to pursue healthy lifestyles and to
address unhealthy choices. Sexual health workers take part in care leavers
events to encourage young people to access services and information is
provided on health promotion and substance misuse. Personal advisers are
aware of the risk of child sexual exploitation and of the local authoritys
procedures for investigating and addressing this risk. The children looked
after health team undertakes the assessments for those aged 16 and over.
Young people have the opportunity to discuss their health histories with a
specialist nurse at their final health assessment. A health passport is
available to young people and for those who decline the offer the
information is kept securely until they are ready. However, young people do
not have timely and effective access to CAMHS and therapeutic services to
meet their assessed needs. The co-location of a CAMHS worker in the service
for part of the week is a positive development but has not yet had a
significant impact and care leavers wait too long for CAMHS services.


The enhanced midwifery and health visiting service supports care leavers
who are parents or expectant parents and works closely with personal
advisers. A high number of care leavers are parents (31%); these young
people are actively encouraged to engage in activities and programmes on
offer in childrens centres through a special project undertaken this year.
Childrens centre staff make contact with all care leavers who are parents
and encourage them to engage in the activities and services on offer. These
include parenting and support groups and education and training to help


young people to plan for their futures. The local authority is actively working
to increase the support offered to these young people with plans to improve
the link to Family Nurse Partnership support for care leaver parents. There
are also plans to develop a targeted positive activity and sports service for
female care leavers, prioritising care leavers who are mothers.

The local authority football team for care leavers, Here4U United, has been
particularly successful in engaging young people who had previously
withdrawn from their personal advisers. Here4U has had a positive impact on
young peoples health and self-esteem, with young people having secured
employment or training linked to potential employment opportunities.


Good written information is available to young people to help them
understand their financial rights and entitlements. Young people spoke
positively about the pledge and the support they receive from the childrens
rights officer who actively advocates on their behalf. The authority celebrates
the achievements of young people by running events that included care
leavers. Young people have access to leisure provision and participate in
Duke of Edinburgh programmes.


A broad range of well-coordinated support is available to care leavers to help
them successfully transition to employment, further education or training.
This includes access to good information, advice and guidance throughout
the care-leaving transition period.


The destinations of all care leavers are tracked effectively and the majority
are in education, training or employment. The 10 care leavers who were not
in education, employment or training (NEET) at the time of inspection were
continuing to receive support and managers knew their individual, mainly
challenging, circumstances very well. Although this represents a
comparatively high proportion of care leavers, inspectors could not identify
any specific lack of support that had contributed to these young people being
NEET.


Wokingham has one care leaver apprentice and has set improvement targets
to employ seven vulnerable young people as apprentices next year. Although
care leavers form part of this group, none of these planned apprenticeships
is specifically targeted to help Wokingham care leavers. Apprenticeship
opportunities are also identified within commissioned services, for example
six apprenticeships for care leavers working in leisure centres.


Having secured funding through City Deal in autumn 2014, the authoritys
Elevate initiative has successfully established a much enhanced, easily
accessible one-stop-shop that supports young people into work, education
or training. Innovative approaches to linking with local employers to develop
the skills that meet the needs of local employers help improve employment
prospects.


Links with local colleges and training providers have been established and
have enabled a range of opportunities for care leavers to develop their work-


related skills so that they are ready for traineeships, apprenticeships, or
further education courses. These include work placements with local
employers, courses that develop work-related skills and a project that
provides training and support to help young people set up their own
businesses. One care leaver was on a higher education course.

A notable strength of the local authority is listening to and acting on the
views of children and young people. Following feedback from care leavers,
the local authority has funded an additional part-time post to support care
leavers aged over 21.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
The director of childrens services (DCS) shows strong and tenacious leadership that
has impacted positively on the service, the local authority and wider partnerships
since she came into post in February 2014. As well as a clear vision, she holds an
accurate picture of the service she leads. With the support of her senior leadership
team, she is driving plans to strengthen the service. A comprehensive annual report
and updated self-assessment identifies many of the deficits seen in this inspection.
Good use has been made of findings from external audits and a peer review to help
target priority areas for improvement. A quality improvement plan with clear
priorities is in place and is used effectively to monitor and review progress. However,
these elements of good leadership and governance have not yet secured consistently
good outcomes in social work practice and frontline management.
The DCS, chief executive and lead member discharge their statutory responsibilities
effectively and are well known to frontline staff in the service. Partners are confident
in the DCS, with evidence of police, health, and education working closely together
to implement the early help model. As a result, a robust early help offer and a front
door to childrens services are in place that effectively assess risk and ensure that
the needs of children and families are correctly identified and timely services put in
place. Thresholds for services are clear to agencies and operate effectively.
The local authority has taken significant steps to stabilise its workforce and is able to
demonstrate success, both in reducing its reliance on the use of agency staff
significantly and in retaining staff. There is strong multi-agency partnership working
in relation to children at risk of child sexual abuse and those who go missing and a
range of policies, procedures and practices in place to minimise that risk. However,
further work is required to improve the timeliness and take-up of return interviews.
Quality assurance arrangements are under-developed. Internal case audits are not
demonstrating rigour in judgements about the quality of work carried out. The
quality and frequency of social work supervision is too variable and not in accord
with the local authoritys policy standards. As a result, a small number of children
experience delay in having their needs met. The corporate parenting board is
ambitious about the service and opportunities provided to children looked after.
Corporate parenting arrangements are strong, with appropriate challenge to partners
to improve services for children looked after. The local authority has an established
Children in Care council and the local authority listens and learns from the
experiences of children and young people.


Inspection findings

The DCS shows strong and tenacious leadership that has impacted positively
on the service, the council and wider partnerships since she came into post
in February 2014. As well as a clear vision, she holds an accurate picture of
the service she leads. With the support of her senior leadership team, she is
driving plans to strengthen the service. A comprehensive annual report and
updated self-assessment, identifies many of the deficits seen in this
inspection. Good use has been made of findings from external audits and a
peer review to help target priority areas for improvement. A quality
improvement plan with clear priorities is in place, and is used effectively to
monitor and review progress. However, these elements of good leadership
and governance have not yet secured consistently good outcomes in social
work practice, and frontline management.


The local authority has been instrumental in effectively pursuing
opportunities to secure additional funding through government-funded
innovations and collaborative working arrangements. The Adopt Berkshire
and Signs of Safety projects are two positive examples. The practice
framework underpinned by Signs of Safety is leading to stronger
assessments with a clearer focus on the voice of the child, reduced caseloads
and increased parental understanding of what needs to change. Adopt
Berkshire is showing early indications that children referred to the service are
being matched to prospective adopters more quickly, reducing delay in
children securing permanence through adoption.


Performance information is not yet sufficiently developed to provide a clear
picture of practice and to identify where action needs to be taken to address
shortfalls. Managers have access to weekly performance information but the
format of the data does not allow quick assimilation and is not in a userfriendly format. Some fundamental performance information, which is central
to frontline practice, is not included  for example, statutory visiting to
children and the time taken from child protection enquiries to initial child
protection conference. As a result, managers are not able to fully scrutinise
the data to ensure that quality is maintained and improved. Monthly
performance scorecards are tailored to meet the needs of senior managers
and report on a range of national and local performance information.


Quality assurance arrangements are in the early stages of development. The
quality assurance framework has the right components for the development
of a practice-improvement culture but is yet to be sufficiently embedded to
address the variability in social work practice. A newly formed commissioning
board, set up in July 2015, provides additional governance to support
improvement and drive operational priorities to ensure a golden thread from
strategic priorities through to operational delivery. However, it is too early for
it to have had a measurable impact.


Frontline management oversight is weak in teams where the new practice
framework has not yet fully established, in particular within the
neighbourhood teams. Supervision records are of variable quality, with some
lacking sufficient detail. The regularity of supervision is also insufficient, with


some significant gaps. Developing and ensuring robust supervision and case
management oversight and decision-making by first and second line
managers remains crucial to improving social work practice and outcomes for
children and young people in Wokingham.

The local authority triangulates performance, intelligence, practice and user
feedback to establish an accurate self-assessment of practice strengths and
weaknesses. The internal management audit programme has not robustly
scrutinised case file audits as set out in the quality assurance framework. As
a result, core audit activity is not rigorous in its evaluation of the quality of
social work practice. By contrast, the audits for the purpose of this inspection
were good, using a comprehensive audit tool and moderation process not in
place prior to the inspection. Inspectors agreed with the local authority
judgements and, where deficits in practice were found, appropriate plans
had been put in place. A further component, the use of quality circles as an
audit tool, has not been rigorous in its application or resulted in any tangible
action plans.


A principle social worker and four practice consultants are in post to drive up
practice standards through the delivery of learning on topics identified from
audits, complaints, and individual staff appraisals. They also support newly
qualified social workers in their assessed social work year of education
(ASYE) and lead the step-up programme. Action plans to drive this work
forward are not robust and lack specific, measurable actions and targets. As
a result, learning from this approach is not effective in driving and rolemodelling good practice and securing improvements.


The local authoritys key strategic priorities have been to stabilise the
workforce and implement a model of change exemplified by the early help
and innovations programme. Although it is too early to evaluate impact, early
signs are positive. The pace of change is now gathering momentum to
ensure that progress achieved is sustainable. However, the legacy of an
unstable workforce means too many children have experienced serial
changes of worker, which has negatively affected the quality and consistency
of practice.


The DCS and elected members are acutely aware of the detrimental impact
of an unstable work force on the quality of support to children and young
people. They have worked hard to strengthen the workforce and have placed
a significant emphasis on being a learning organisation, with regular
stocktakes, peer reviews, commissioned external audits and themes from
complaints as sources for practice improvements.


The workforce strategy is comprehensive, ambitious and realistic and has
been effective in reducing a previous heavy reliance on agency staff. A range
of strategies, including overseas recruitment, has begun to stabilise the
workforce and has seen a significant reduction in the previously high
turnover of staff from 33% in 201314 to 14% by March 2015. Information
on why staff leave is being used to consider barriers to successful
recruitment and retention. Interim staff of good quality are afforded the


same conditions and training opportunities as the permanent workforce.
Senior managers track social work caseloads weekly, with average caseloads
being on target at 18. Sickness rates are relatively low.

The management of individual performance is in place with a clear system of
appraisal to ensure that social workers and managers understand their
priorities and the expectations of the organisation. The local authority is
proactive in developing potential social workers through a number of
different routes  for example, being part of a regional commitment to the
step up to social work programme, sponsoring three places at the Open
University as an alternative pathway to social work qualification and home
grown future managers. Morale is generally good within childrens social
care, with social workers and managers speaking positively about working
for Wokingham.


The DCS, chief executive and lead member have a strong presence within
frontline services, making regular visits to teams and ensuring that they
meet children and young people to inform and evaluate practice. They have
a good knowledge of individual children and young people, including highprofile cases, those in care proceedings and those placed outside of
Wokingham.


Links between the chief executive, the DCS and the Local Safeguarding
Children Board (LSCB) Independent Chair are clear, with regular meetings in
place. The chief executive meets regularly with the LSCB chair and respective
roles are clear and understood, which helps to ensure that the needs of
children are effectively prioritised.


Senior managers have developed effective strategies and led their
implementation, although the full impact is yet to be established. There are
examples of effective commissioning and re-commissioning of services.
However, joint commissioning of childrens services with partners is underdeveloped. Pooled funding arrangements are not well established, although
the local authority has agreed development work, key priorities and
strategies with partners and commissioning actions are being progressed as
a result. For example, a joint review by the Clinical Commissioning Groups
(CCG) and local authority of CAMHS has resulted in significant additional
investment from partners and change in service specification. Partners have
also developed a joint children with disability strategy for approval, but it is
too early to assess any impact.


The local authority has strengthened its commissioning function over the
past year and introduced performance monitoring and quality assurance
functions. A small number of targeted services, such as independent visiting
and advocacy services, are commissioned. While recent, these are beginning
to show improved take-up. The local authority commissions bespoke
packages for individual children and families on an individual needs basis.
The local authority has reviewed its grants to the community and voluntary
sector. Several groups that support children and their families have received
funding to promote key areas, such as awareness of child sexual


exploitation, support for disabled children and opportunities for young people
to act as volunteers in the community.

Most of the key recommendations from the safeguarding and looked after
childrens inspection (SLAC) 2010 and the child protection inspection in 2012
have been successfully implemented, although some, such as improving the
quality of chronologies and stabilising the workforce, continue to be work in
progress.


Corporate parenting arrangements are strong. The lead member chairs the
corporate parenting board effectively and has good representation from
elected members. The board exerts appropriate challenge to partners to
improve services for children looked after. For example, health reviews for
children looked after were not sufficiently up to date, which has led to
significant recent improvement. The childrens scrutiny panel is also active in
ensuring challenge to senior officers and the lead member.


The Children and Young Peoples Plan (CYPP) sets out the priorities for
children and young people, is aligned with the Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA) and is driven by an active Childrens Partnership.
Vulnerable children are a high priority, including those who have mental
health problems and those who are looked after. The Childrens Partnership
is the sponsor and accountable body for the innovation programme practice
framework Signs of Safety project in Wokingham and a number of other
projects linked together under the single brand Wokingham for Children. As
a result, an established programme of activities across the full range of
childrens services is being delivered in partnership.


Partners are committed to working together and have a clear vision for
improving outcomes for all children in Wokingham. The DCS and partners
hold one another to account appropriately. There are clear and established
links with the Health and Wellbeing Board (HWB), Clinical Commissioning
Group (CCG), the Childrens Partnership and the LSCB. The DCS is an active
member of all four.


Wokinghams levels of need and intervention guidance explains thresholds
for services clearly and is understood by practitioners and partner agencies.
A re-focused approach to early help with joined-up early help services,
delivered through the early help hub provides a range of intervention to
support children and their families based on assessment of need.
Arrangements for stepping up from early intervention to statutory
intervention, or stepping down when needs are reduced, are sound.


There are effective relationships with the Child and Family Court Advisory
and Support Service (Cafcass), the family courts and the local Family Justice
Board. This has resulted in improved timescales in private and public law
proceedings, reducing delay for children and young people.


A strong multi-agency partnership and an agreed child sexual exploitation
strategy and action plan are in place. Management oversight and assurance


are in place through a child sexual exploitation strategic and operational
governance structure shared jointly and co-chaired between childrens social
care and the police with regular reporting to the LSCB. Child sexual
exploitation champions have been developed across every childcare team,
have received specific training on all issues relating to child sexual
exploitation and provide effective consultation and guidance to their
colleagues. Commissioned child sexual exploitation training has been
comprehensively rolled out across all agencies in the borough, providing
greater awareness of the many guises and risks of child sexual exploitation.

The local authority has an established Children in Care council that is
supported by the childrens rights officer. The local authority listens to the
experiences of children and young people. For example, they have
established a post for a care leaver over the age of 25, after care leavers
said they are not always ready to listen to advice and accept help at an
earlier age.


The local authority collates data relating to complaints and aggregated
information is fully utilised to inform service developments. It is positive that
resolution at an early stage. The response to individual complaints is timely,
with the childrens rights officer sensitively supporting children and young
people.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
The Local Childrens Safeguarding Board in Wokingham requires improvement to be
good. Wokinghams Local Safeguarding Children Board complies with its statutory
responsibilities and the requirements of Working Together 2015. The chair of the
Board and its members work closely together. The Board has a number of joint
working arrangements with other LSCBs across Berkshire and exercises robust
oversight of that work. The Board has been able to demonstrate a range of
improvements since the chair was appointed in October 2014, but there is further
work to do in order for the board to have a consistent overview of practice and
practice developments in safeguarding across Wokingham.
The LSCB business plan does not adequately reflect all the work of the Board and
progress made in its priorities. The plans lack of inclusion of the partnership adopted
Signs of Safety model, intended to enhance safeguarding practice across
Wokingham, reflects a weakness in governance arrangements, with the Board poorly
represented at both the Health and Wellbeing Board and the Childrens Partnership
Board. This challenges the LSCBs ability to influence and set agendas and secure a
complete overview of safeguarding developments. Multi-agency training for staff is
poorly evaluated for its impact on practice and improving outcomes. As a result, the
Board cannot determine whether training offered is as effective as it should be.
The Board, however, is able to demonstrate a range of purposeful activity. This
includes a wide range of multi-agency audits seeking to evaluate practice and from
which there is a comprehensive action plan designed to improve partners practice
and safeguarding in Wokingham. The Board is active in ensuring that there is a
partner-wide understanding of child sexual exploitation and that there are processes
and policies in place that ensure that need and risk are recognised and appropriate
services offered including early help interventions.
The Board has a willingness to challenge poor services and can evidence
improvements as a result. The Board focused on key areas of concern such as
domestic abuse, early help and child sexual abuse. It has assured itself of individual
agencies understanding of these issues and how their services work to offer help
and reduce risk through a series of multi-agency challenge days. The Board has
ensured agency compliance with safeguarding policies and procedures through
section 11 audits.
The Board has been able to work closely with young people, including those most
vulnerable, identifying issues of concern to them in Wokingham. As a result, reducing
bullying is now designated as an LSCB priority. The Board has issued a pledge to
young people to use its influence to improve how they are heard and the responses
they receive. Two young commissioners attend the Board to ensure that young


peoples voices are heard.

Recommendations

Review the LSCB business plan to ensure that it contains sufficient detail in
relation to its priorities and their progress against clearly identified
timescales. The plan should also include explicit reference to Signs of Safety
and its implementation across the partnership (page 38, paragraph 119).


Ensure that its program of multi-agency training is subject to long-term
evaluation of its impact on practice and outcomes (page 39, paragraph 123).


Ensure that the assessment of training needs from agencies is robust and to
also include information from long-term evaluation to better enable the
board to commission future training needs (page 39, paragraph 123).


Ensure that there is an appropriate pathway from the LSCB to both the
Health and Wellbeing Board and the Childrens Partnership in order to
maximise the ability of the Board to influence strategic priorities and ensure
that the Boards priorities and concerns are heard and considered (page 38,
paragraph 121).

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The LSCB complies with its statutory responsibilities as defined in Working
together 2015. The Board is appropriately constituted and has the further
benefit of two young commissioners attending relevant meetings. The Board
has been revitalised since the appointment of a new chair in October 2014
and is now on an improving trajectory. Arrangements for conducting the
Boards business are complicated by four out the eight board sub-groups
covering multiple local authorities across Berkshire. In some instances, this
allows Wokingham to benefit from wider learning and a greater range of
professional inputs. However, the learning and development sub-group has
struggled to function across six local authorities. The chair of the LSCB is
also chair of two other Berkshire LSCBs and this has allowed her to
undertake some rationalisation of the Board structure, reducing the learning
and development sub-groups coverage to three LSCBs and focusing the
quality and assurance sub-group on Wokingham only. Sub-group chairs are
from a range of partner agencies, demonstrating cross-agency commitment
to the Boards management and functioning. The Board has one current lay
member and a recent vacancy from July for a second lay member.


The LSCB has set out a business plan for 201516 that identifies five key and
appropriate priorities. However, in a number of areas, these are insufficiently
detailed, with aspirational rather than quantifiable aims. For example, in
relation to the child sexual exploitation, there is no measure to assess the
effectiveness of the communication priority. There is insufficient detail in
relation to the child sexual exploitation priority within the business plan. The
child sexual exploitation strategic plan and action plan are not attached. This
limits the business plans usefulness. The business plans stated aim of use is


as a tool by frontline staff and managers. However, there is insufficient
information and detail in the plan to assist this group in meeting the priorities
of the Board. This is further compounded by a lack of a progress and ragrated section for all the priorities.

The plan does not identify Signs of Safety as a key priority for the Board or
the need for the Board to have a demonstrable overview of its rollout across
agencies. The Board priorities were established based on need prior to the
programme launch, however, the Board should review the plan to set out
clearly how the programme will support delivery of key objectives  for
example, identification of domestic abuse and associated risk and enhanced
numbers of children and parents who say they have been listened to. The
LSCB has undertaken a challenge session to consider the impact of the
model on the learning and development of staff and gathered some other
information about activity and impact of services using this model. However,
there remains a significant gap in not establishing more formal reporting and
governance procedures on the progress of the implementation to the Board
from the Childrens Partnership.


Governance arrangements to ensure that partners, such as the Health and
Wellbeing Board and the Childrens Partnership, are able to assess whether
they are fulfilling their responsibilities to help, protect and care for young
people are challenged by a lack of appropriate representation from the LSCB
on these bodies. The LSCB chair only attends the Health and Wellbeing
Board annually and there has been a recent change in LSCB representation
on the Childrens Partnership Board with the business manager being
prioritised away from Partnership attendance. LSCB members do sit on the
Partnership from across statutory partnership agencies and understand the
dual role they perform. Although Wokingham is a relatively small local
authority, where partners know each other well, it is important that there are
clearly identified formal pathways enabling the LSCB to influence priorities
and actions. Currently, some of these are informal and undefined, potentially
limiting the Boards effectiveness in this area. For example, the lack of formal
pathways to underpin the current representation on the Childrens
Partnership board, which is responsible for Signs of Safety rollout, further
limits the LSCBs overview of this area of safeguarding development.


The LSCB has a training improvement programme overseen by the learning
and development sub-group, a joint sub-group covering three local authority
areas across the county. It ran 22 courses in 201415, with 355 candidates
attending and two e-learning courses: one on universal safeguarding and the
second on child sexual exploitation. The completion rate of both courses was
poor at 21% (73 out of 337 for the child sexual exploitation course). Reasons
for the high drop-out rate have been analysed and indicate poor course
design. Other well-designed training was offered, including e-learning and
Lottie. The Board recognises that significant further development is
necessary in order to assure itself that staff are being supported and
equipped to respond effectively to safeguarding and protection needs. The
annual training needs assessment to inform future training planning is underdeveloped with insufficiently assessed information on future training needs


obtained from partners by ad-hoc means such as e-mail and phone, rather
than a more detailed and planned approach to assessment. Partners have
been asked to complete a written needs assessment for 201617, although
not to a common template.

The LSCB has not yet ensured that it is able to fully evaluate the
effectiveness of multi-agency training and its impact on practice. Evaluation
of training courses is under-developed and apart from those courses hosted
by another local authority, little or no evaluation of impact on a medium- or
long-term basis is undertaken. Immediate evaluation provides insufficient
analysis of course usefulness and none on impact on practice and outcomes.
The Board has recognised this deficit and is taking steps to ensure that
longer-term impact information will be available to it during 2016.


The LSCB has undertaken work in relation to the understanding of thresholds
for service among partner agencies. It has ensured that a revised LSCB
levels of mandated need document, that included Signs of Safety, was
disseminated to partner agencies and published in January 2015. The Board
successfully conducted an early help challenge session in March 2015. This
looked at thresholds and levels of need and the ability of services to
evidence outcomes as a result of early help services being provided. It also
commissioned an external audit to satisfy itself on the use of thresholds. This
confirmed that the application of thresholds in relation to early help referrals
to social care was working properly.


The Board has been active in seeking to improve services to children at risk
of child sexual exploitation and those who go missing. It has set out a wellstructured child sexual exploitation strategic plan for 201517. A robust
action plan is in place that is regularly updated and reviewed for progress
and overseen by the strategic child sexual exploitation sub-group. Chelseas
Choice, a theatre production on child sexual exploitation, has been made
available to all schools and Lottie training (professional training on child
sexual exploitation and online grooming) has been provided to the
safeguarding leads at all schools. Child sexual exploitation was the subject of
a multi-agency challenge session led by the LSCB in September 2015. This
enabled the Board to monitor and evaluate progress and the effectiveness of
services to young people at risk of both child sexual exploitation and missing.
Although some work has been undertaken with businesses that young
people might come into contact with, such as pharmacists, the Board
recognises that further work is required in relation to hotels and taxis in
particular. It has also identified that while the move to an independent
agency undertaking return home interviews is positive, further work is
required to ensure that information from those interviews is collated and
analysed. The Board is aware of child sexual exploitation incidents in
Wokingham. It has facilitated a day to raise awareness about child sexual
exploitation and to help professionals reflect on whether they are fully
considering the likelihood of child sexual exploitation in their work with
children. The chair also hosted an assurance exercise on culture and
behaviours in May 2015, in relation to child sexual exploitation and was able


as a result to assure herself that children were safer in Wokingham as a
result of a rising level of awareness and work done by partners.

There is regular monitoring of multi-agency frontline practice. The LSCB has
initiated an extensive program of commissioned audit activity. These include
a review of transition arrangements, a review of the early help and childrens
services interface, a review of mental health practice, partnership working
and children in need cases. While some have included detailed information
and analysis, others have not measured impact and outcomes of practice.
They have been useful in identifying individual casework issues but have not
provided sufficient analysis. As a result, learning for the LSCB and individual
agencies has been more limited than it could have been. The Board has
recognised this and this has led to the production of a quality improvement
plan, which identifies some core areas of practice for further scrutiny and
improvement. Actions from this plan are detailed and regularly reviewed by
the Board for progress. The LSCB has also received a number of singleagency audits, some of which it has identified as lacking in information and
analysis and which it has asked to be re-done, demonstrating challenge to
individual agencies.


The Board has ensured that there is a programme of section 11 audits on a
three-yearly basis with mid-term reviews. The Board has challenged audits
that have not met an appropriate standard, for example asking the central
ambulance service for further information and a re-presentation to the
section 11 sub-group.


The LSCB has initiated a series of challenge sessions for partners on early
help, child sexual exploitation, domestic abuse and learning and
development. This has enabled it to inform itself about agency compliance of
policy and process as well as practice and whether practice is making a
difference. These are a valuable opportunity for the Board to assure itself of
agency understanding and activity in relation to safeguarding issues and
encourage challenge from partners.


The LSCB has a local learning and improvement framework with statutory
partners, including procedures for serious case reviews (SCRs) and multiagency and single-agency learning reviews overseen by an active SCR subgroup. Although there have been no recent SCRs, the Board has conducted
two case-management reviews in 201415, with detailed multi-agency action
plans arising. It has ensured that lessons learned have been disseminated
through multi-agency practitioner sessions. Wider learning from SCRs is
included in the LSCB training offer across a range of courses, including those
concerning domestic abuse and neglect.


The child death overview panel covers the whole of the county but is able to
provide the Wokingham LSCB with a local perspective. The panel is able to
identify trends and is active in promotion of issues to improve awareness,
including, currently, the risks associated with asthma.



The LSCB has a concerns log and can evidence effective challenge to
partners. For example, it includes challenge to both health and social care to
improve the timeliness of health assessments for children in care and
attendance by the police and GPs at child protection conferences. Both have
resulted in improvements to practice, including ensuring police attendance at
conferences and an increase in reports to conferences by GPs.


The Board has engaged with young people and now has two young
commissioners attending the board on a regular basis to contribute views
and ideas. The Board also organised a day in August 2015 with young people
who had been or were in care, or being supported by the targeted youth
service. They identified bullying as a major concern and this has
subsequently become an LSCB priority. As a result of this engagement, the
Board is in the process of publishing a pledge to young people that includes
promoting assurance and resilience, enabling members to hear and
understand the voices of young people.


The annual report of the Wokingham LSCB provides a clear account of the
working of the Board and its sub-groups in language that makes it accessible
to a wider audience. The report from the quality and performance sub-group
lacks detail on issues identified in audit activity. However, the report includes
a section on challenges raised, together with the concerns log of the board
providing information on issues that require further progress. This helps to
ensure that the report is relevant and provides an account of safeguarding
practice across Wokingham.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who have
needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and young
people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and starting
their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and an
additional inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Linda Steele HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Peter McEntee HMI
Team inspectors: Brenda Mclaughlin HMI, Pietro Battista HMI, Ali Mekki HMI, Mark
Shackleton HMI and Michael McCracken additional inspector
Shadow inspectors: Margaret Burke Designated HMI
Senior data analyst: Stewart Hartshorne
Quality assurance manager: Pauline Turner SHMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W:
 Crown copyright 2015


