London Borough of Barnet
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 25 April  18 May 2017
Report published: 7 July 2017

Childrens services in Barnet are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Inadequate


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Inadequate

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
There are widespread and serious failures in the services provided to children and
their families in Barnet. Inspectors identified a legacy of widespread poor practice
and ongoing systemic failures and services that neither adequately ensure the safety,
nor promote the welfare of children and young people.
Threshold decisions are inconsistently made and misunderstood at all levels of
intervention. Partners in the multi-agency safeguarding hub do not effectively share
information or ensure timely decision making. This causes delay for too many
children, some of whom remain at risk of significant harm. Strategy discussions and
child protection investigations are of poor quality, with insufficient information
sharing between partner agencies to ensure rigorous risk analysis. This results in the
risks to children not being fully understood or evaluated. Large numbers of poorquality assessments result in inappropriate planning, and many children subsequently
need a reassessment before they can receive more specialised help and support.
Ineffective analysis of risk and assessment of childrens needs, including for children
looked after, result in poor care planning that is not focused on outcomes and is
unresponsive when childrens circumstances change or deteriorate. Poor-quality case
recording and oversight of casework by managers, child protection chairs and
independent reviewing officers lead to ineffective case work direction. This
contributes to drift and delay in the provision of appropriate services for children and
their families. There is some effective early help to families. However, early help
services are not sufficiently well coordinated or focused.
Since the local authority was last inspected in 2012, there has been a significant
deterioration in the quality of service provision. The breadth and depth of this decline
were recognised by the current director of childrens services. He commissioned an
independent diagnostic review of childrens services in January 2016. This work
confirmed widespread systemic weaknesses in practice.
Following the diagnostic review, action was taken to address concerns. Senior
leaders have successfully gained corporate support and resources to make
improvements, and demonstrate a sound understanding of the areas for
development and a commitment to improving services for children and families in
Barnet. Most notably, the authority entered into a collegiate partnership with a local
authority that is able to share relevant social work knowledge and expertise. From
April 2016, changes to the senior leadership team and a social work improvement
board have been established to oversee a broad programme of planned activities to
address ongoing deficiencies in service provision and to drive improvement. In
October 2016, there was further investment in senior practice leadership to enable a
focus on quality of practice and childrens experiences. There is evidence of some
recent improvements that have been made as a result of these strategies. However,
to date, these have been ineffective in improving core standards of social work
practice for children and their families.


Oversight of practice by heads of service and team managers is weak. The
evaluation of practice is often too positive and minimises the risk to children.
Managers do not provide sufficient guidance or direction to improve practice for
children or keep childrens progress at the centre of their practice. Heads of service
and operational directors rarely record their involvement in decision making.
The local authority and partners have prioritised the strategic response to child
sexual exploitation and multi-agency working for children at the highest risk. This is
overseen by the multi-agency sexual exploitation panel and by the newly created
multi-agency REACH team for children at risk of gang affiliation and related violence.
However, operationally, the response to children, including those looked after, at risk
of sexual exploitation and those who go missing is not consistently effective. The
action taken to understand and reduce the risk to them is often delayed and
insufficient. Recent improvements in the completion of return home interviews are
enabling better engagement with children, but this is still inconsistent.
Multi-agency arrangements are stronger for some areas of service that are led by the
councils community safety service. The response to radicalisation is effectively
coordinated, and there are high levels of awareness and effective systems. Services
for children privately fostered do not meet minimum standards, and responses to
homeless 16- to 17-year-olds are too variable, with some childrens needs not met.
Decisions for children to become looked after are not always timely. Some children
who are experiencing significant neglect remain in the pre-proceedings phase of the
Public Law Outline for too long before care proceedings commence. Permanence is
not considered early enough or achieved swiftly for many children. Social workers
see the majority of children looked after regularly, although not always alone. Most
children live in stable homes with carers who meet their needs, although some
children are living with connected carers in unassessed situations for too long.
Children told inspectors that they are listened to and are happy where they are
living. Too few children have a record of their life story. Once children are looked
after, corporate parenting is stronger, achieving improvements in the housing
provision for care leavers and the timeliness of initial health assessments. Childrens
achievements are recognised and celebrated.
Adoption is achieved without delay for small numbers of children, and adopters are
positive about the service that they receive. The quality of adoption reports for adults
and children is not consistent. The information and language used in life-story work
are not always appropriate for the age of individual children to understand their
histories.
The care-leaving service is in touch with almost all care leavers, and knows and
supports them well. Almost all care leavers have suitable accommodation, but
although the majority of care leavers are engaged in learning or employment, too
many are not. Not enough care leavers know what the local authority pledges to do
for them or what their entitlements are, or have ownership of their pathway plans.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two childrens homes. Both were judged to be good
in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements for the
protection of children was in January 2012. The local authority was judged to be
good.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
January 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since May 2015.
 The DCS is also responsible for culture and libraries.
 The chief executive has been in post since January 2017.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
October 2013.
 The function that the local authority has delegated to a third-party provider is the
emergency duty service.
 The local authority uses a resilience model of social work.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 93,590 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Barnet. This is 25% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 17.4% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years are
living in low-income families (HMRC 2014).
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 16.7% (the national average is 14.5%)
 in secondary schools is 13.1% (the national average is 13.2%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 67.6% of all
children living in the area, compared with 30% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Indian and Black African.

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 48.7% (the national average is 20.1%)
 in secondary schools is 38.8% (the national average is 15.7%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2017, 2,849 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 March 2017, 196 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 25.4 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 263
(29.6 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 31 March 2017, 16 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from 14 at 31 March 2016.
 In the two years before this inspection, eight serious incident notifications were
submitted to Ofsted and one serious case review was completed.
 There are two serious case reviews ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2017, 345 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 38.3 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 318 (35.8 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
authority area
area
 eight live with parents, of whom 75% live out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been eight adoptions
returned to be looked after


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


living
 no children or young people are living in houses in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure a continued and sustained focus on improving core social work
practice, strategically and operationally, to equip practitioners and managers
to deliver good-quality services to children and their families.


Ensure that partners work together in the multi-agency safeguarding hub to
ensure timely and accurate information sharing and a consistent application of
thresholds for all children referred to childrens services.


Ensure that social work practice and decision making for children focus on
understanding their lived experiences and incorporate their wishes and
feelings.


Ensure that all children identified as being at risk of harm benefit from
effective child protection enquiries.


Ensure that strategy discussions include information gathered from all
partners, and result in clear planning and recording of actions and the
rationale for decisions.


Ensure that all written records are clear and up to date, and accurately reflect
the circumstances of children and their families.


Ensure that the quality of assessments is sufficient to enable an accurate
evaluation of the risks posed to children, and that this is regularly updated.


Ensure that management decision making is effective and leads to clear,
timely and effective care planning that safeguards children and focuses on
improving outcomes for them.


Ensure that children who are victims of chronic long-term neglect and
emotional abuse, and who are subject to long periods of child protection
planning, have appropriate risk assessments and plans made for them.


Ensure that timely action is taken to understand and reduce risk to children
who go missing from home or care and who are vulnerable to child sexual
exploitation. When risk does not reduce, or increases, ensure that effective
additional safeguarding action is taken.


Improve the standard of social work to families under the pre-proceedings
phase of the Public Law Outline and ensure that, when there is no
improvement within a timescale that is right for children, the local authority
issues timely court proceedings to protect them and avoid drift and delay in
achieving permanence.


Ensure that connected carers are thoroughly assessed within regulatory
timescales.



Ensure that all children who are privately fostered and their carers are
regularly visited, that all work is compliant with minimum standards of good
practice, and that the awareness of private fostering is raised in the
workforce.


Ensure that homeless 16- to 17-year-olds are thoroughly assessed and that
appropriate ongoing support is offered to them to meet their needs.


Ensure that the oversight of practice by all operational directors, heads of
service, team managers, child protection chairs and independent reviewing
officers is child focused and effective in achieving positive change for children.


Improve childrens participation in all decisions and planning that affect them
and in future service developments, including their stronger involvement in
corporate parenting.


Ensure that all children receive help to understand their histories, and that
social workers write life-story books and later-life letters sensitively, in a childfocused way.


Ensure that childrens diversity and identity needs are met and that they are
supported to retain their birth language. Ensure that interpreters are used to
communicate with them and their families, when needed.


Improve care leavers ownership of pathway plans and the quality and
timeliness of targets, to improve their lives. Ensure that care leavers have the
tools, such as money management, to cope with lifes challenges and are fully
aware of the Pledge and their entitlements.


Summary for children and young people
 Too many services for children and young people in Barnet are poor. Senior
leaders know this and have started to do something about it by making changes
and focusing on recruiting good-quality staff to work with children and young
people, but it is taking too long. This means that some children and young people
in Barnet are not kept safe from harm.
 Senior leaders, all managers and social workers do not find out enough about
what it is like to be a child or young person living in Barnet who needs help or
protection. Social workers do not always respond at the right time to help
children.
 When professionals tell social workers that children and young people need help,
social workers do not always act quickly enough to help them.
 In almost all cases, social workers do not make enough effort to find out what
children and young people want or need. This means that plans to help children
and young people in need are not very good. It is not clear what is going to
happen, or by when, to improve childrens and young peoples lives.
 Not all social workers are good at working out the risk of dangers to children and
young people. They do not always make sure that children and young people are
receiving the right services from the right people.
 Social workers managers do not guide them to make sure that they are getting
things right. When they do, they do not always write this down so that they can
check that it has happened.
 The majority of children and young people in care live with someone who knows
them well, listens to them, looks after them well and keeps them safe. Children
and young people told inspectors that they are happy where they are living and
that their achievements are celebrated.
 Social workers do not always bring children into care soon enough.
 Young people who go missing from care receive a poor service, because social
workers do not find out enough about the risks to them. This means that young
people who go missing are not always kept safe enough from dangers, such as
gangs or adults sexually exploiting them.
 Once it is agreed that children in care are to be adopted, they receive a good
service.
 Young people leaving care receive a better service from members of staff who
know them well, find out what their basic needs are and put clear plans in place
to meet their needs.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Inadequate

Summary
Since the last inspection in 2012, the quality of the service provided to children in
need of help and protection has deteriorated. A lack of focus on listening to
children in order to understand their experiences is at the core of the widespread
and serious failings seen across the service. Risks are not always recognised, and
many children live in neglectful or abusive situations for too long.
Threshold decisions are inconsistent at every stage. Partners in the multi-agency
safeguarding hub do not work together effectively to ensure timely or effective
decision making that is informed by good-quality information. This causes delay in
receiving a service, for many children, and some remain at risk of harm because of
this.
For many children, when they are identified as being at immediate risk of harm,
the strategy discussions and child protection enquiries are of poor quality, with
insufficient information sharing and lack of risk analysis. This results in risks to the
children not being fully understood or evaluated, poor management decision
making, and thresholds not being understood and consistently applied.
Large numbers of poor-quality assessments do not effectively analyse risk, so lead
to reassessment and poor planning, therefore delays in the provision of services
and poor outcomes for children. Poor oversight of casework by managers and child
protection chairs leads to drift and delay for many children, particularly those
identified as at risk of harm from neglect and emotional abuse. This means that
those children do not have prompt and effective responses when things are not
improving. Some children remain in the pre-proceedings phase of the Public Law
Outline for too long before appropriate decisions are made about the next steps.
Oversight in this area has recently been strengthened, but it is yet to have an
impact on frontline practice.
Although the local authority has taken action to improve services for children with
disabilities and homeless 16- and 17-year-olds, similar weaknesses in assessment
and care planning, and poor management oversight are apparent.
The response to children at risk of sexual exploitation and those who go missing is
not consistently effective. Despite some recent improvements, services for children
privately fostered do not meet minimum standards, and the response to homeless
Multi-agency arrangements are stronger for some areas of service led by the
councils community safety service. The response to radicalisation is effectively
coordinated, and there are both high levels of awareness and effective systems.


Inspection findings

Work with children in need of help and protection is inadequate in Barnet,
because practice is not child focused. At all stages of childrens journeys, the
work undertaken with children does not demonstrate enough professional
curiosity to find out what is happening to them to ensure a sound
understanding of their lived experiences. Social work practice too often
describes and documents events and situations without any consideration or
analysis of the impact on children or any clear plan of what needs to change
to improve outcomes. This inhibits timely and effective intervention and
means that some children remain at risk of significant harm.
(Recommendation)


Not all children receive the right help at the right time. Referrals and concerns
to childrens services via the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) do not
lead to the consistent or effective application of thresholds. This results in
delay for many children. For children at the highest level of risk, action is
taken quickly to ensure that they are safeguarded. However, for some
children, risk remains unassessed for too long. For children who are not at
immediate risk, there is delay as multi-agency information gathering takes too
long or is incomplete. Children may not receive the appropriate help at the
right time and then need more specialised help and support at a later stage,
or be repeatedly reassessed before receiving an appropriate service.
(Recommendation)


Many children identified as at risk of harm do not benefit from effective child
protection enquiries. Strategy discussions do not routinely consider sufficient
information from partner agencies, and the decisions to proceed to an initial
child protection conference are not informed by thorough enquiries. The
application of thresholds is inconsistent, resulting in low numbers of children
being discussed at multi-agency conferences and some children not being
offered intervention at the appropriate level of need. (Recommendation)


While some very recent assessments are of better quality, the overall quality
of social work assessment is weak. There needs to be more consideration of
historical information and analysis of parenting capacity, better consideration
of diversity and a focus on the lived experience of children. The impact on
children living with the risk posed by parental behaviours is poor, in the
majority of cases considered. Decision making is often flawed, as it is based
on a poor-quality evaluation of childrens circumstances, and this leads to the
help not being provided at the right time. (Recommendation)


The vast majority of care planning is ineffective. There is a lack of focus on
measuring progress for children or their outcomes. When there is no progress,
this is not re-evaluated or escalated effectively. This leads to drift and delay.
This is particularly stark for a significant number of children who are victims of
chronic long-term neglect and emotional abuse, who do not have the impact


of this risk recognised, responded to or reduced, despite spending long
periods subject to child protection planning. Examples include children whose
chronic neglect is missed due to a focus on a childs disability, and whose
parental mental health and learning difficulties lead to drift and delay in
instigating the Public Law Outline (PLO) processes. (Recommendation)

Some children remain in the pre-proceedings phase of the PLO for too long
before appropriate decisions are made about the next steps. The local
authority has recently strengthened its oversight of practice within the PLO
through a review of all childrens circumstances by heads of service. However,
decisions to take legal action have not been progressed swiftly for a small
number of children, resulting in further drift and delay. This has meant that a
small number of children have remained living in circumstances of high levels
of neglect for unacceptable lengths of time. (Recommendation)


There has been some improvement in the participation of partners at regular
core groups and reviews, but meetings are not sufficiently focused on the
experiences of children. They do not offer a robust scrutiny of the progress of
plans. This means that too many children live with neglect and abuse for long
periods without effective intervention from multi-agency practitioners.


Poor-quality practice has gone unchallenged until recently. The ineffective
management oversight is compounded by the lack of purposeful challenge
from independent child protection chairs, who fail to act to address drift and
delay for many children. Since January 2017, the local authority has begun to
address this lack of effective oversight and is starting to implement change
and improvements by strengthening practice leadership. This is not yet
evident in the work undertaken with the majority of children.


Work with other specific cohorts of vulnerable children reflects similar issues.
Services for children with disabilities demonstrate some skilled and sensitive
direct work and some good-quality support, but also some examples of poor
care planning, and drift and delay for those in need of protection.


The response to children at risk of child sexual exploitation and those who go
missing has been the focus of recent improvement, but it is not yet
consistently effective. Those children identified as being at high risk and
regularly discussed at multi-agency sexual exploitation meetings receive a
more coordinated response. However, the weaknesses seen throughout the
service also result in some children at risk of sexual exploitation being
responded to using incorrect thresholds. Consequently, assessment and care
planning do not effectively address the underlying issues that place them at
risk. Some children continue to be vulnerable to further exploitation, and
others are responded to only when the risk has escalated to such a high level
that it results in their becoming looked after and being moved to out-of-area
placements to ensure that they are safeguarded.



Children who go missing from home are now receiving a more consistent
response from the new service that undertakes return home interviews, but it
is too early for the service to evidence real impact. Information is not
evaluated so the reasons and patterns of missing episodes may be
understood for some children who are living with their families. The individual
interviews undertaken were not used to inform future care plans.


The local authority has well-established arrangements, such as the pupil
placement panel, to monitor those children missing education. The pupil
placement panel has clear records and reasons why children are currently
missing from education. The most recent local authority records at this
inspection show that 57 children are not in full-time education. The
attendance rate from data supplied by the local authority for all children in


Schools receive up to two visits a year from the local authority to support
them to understand their safeguarding responsibilities. When children are
absent, schools swiftly assess the reasons for absence and, when the head
teacher has concerns, they make a referral to the MASH. Managers at the
local authority rate schools for risk, for example where there may be clusters
or higher volumes of children at risk of child sexual exploitation. Managers at
the local authority attend the Channel panel.


The local authority keeps accurate records on the number of those children
who are being home educated. From May 2016 to May 2017, the number
increased by 12 to 155. The manager responsible has a clear oversight of this,
and the local authority keeps in touch with all home-educated children and
makes visits to most. All children receive 25 hours of learning a week, unless
the child can only cope with less, due to specific medical or behavioural needs.
There are currently six children looked after in alternative provision. One of
these is outside London.


The service for 16- and 17-year-olds who present as homeless was identified
by the local authority as an area for development, and it is currently being
remodelled. Current practice does not yet ensure robust assessment of the
needs of this group of vulnerable young people or that suitable plans or
accommodation are in place to give them appropriate levels of support. This
results in some young people left in situations that place them at continuing
risk. (Recommendation)


Arrangements for assessing and monitoring children in private fostering
arrangements are showing improvement in more recent cases, following the
creation in October 2016 of a dedicated social worker position. However, work
with children does not currently meet minimum standards. Case records are of
poor quality. Records are unable to demonstrate the required checks of carers
and there are gaps in the records of initial visits. A small number of children
are living in arrangements in which the carers are resistant to social work
visits and state their dissatisfaction at the delay and drift on the part of the


local authority. There has been no ongoing work to maintain and raise
awareness, and the number of private fostering notifications received by the
local authority in the last 12 months have decreased significantly from
previous years. The local authority has recently acknowledged this, and work
is planned to address this. (Recommendation)

There is a range of early help provision that is offering some good-quality
support to children. However, the services operate independently and do not
offer an integrated early help service that provides seamless support to
families. This is recognised and work is underway to develop more integrated,
locality-based services.


The quality of assessments and plans is variable across the partnership, with
stronger-quality work undertaken by social workers in the common
assessment framework team. However, the limitations of this resource mean
that the model currently requires partners to take lead responsibility for
complex situations in families that have recently been at the threshold for
social work intervention or straight from the MASH. This often results in
children being stepped back up to social work teams when progress is not
maintained or further concerns arise. In too many cases, the decision to pass
work to early help is not informed by a social work assessment, despite longstanding concerns and lack of progress.


Children at risk of domestic abuse in their homes are referred to the multiagency risk assessment conference, at which an established group of partners
regularly share information to provide effective risk analysis. The outcome of
meetings is clear and communication is effective, resulting in a good range of
services and interventions being offered to families to respond to and reduce
risk. However, for a small number of children, the risks of domestic abuse are
not assessed or evaluated appropriately, or are minimised, and this leads to
ineffective planning to protect them.


There is an effective service to respond to allegations against professionals. In
addition to raising awareness of the service effectively, the designated officer
ensures a rigorous response to concerns from the initial contact through to
the strategy meetings to follow up and review. This is effective in dealing with
allegations and protecting children from further risk.


Systems to recognise and access support for children at risk of radicalisation
work well in Barnet, and there is good partnership engagement and
information sharing through the Channel panel to ensure that risks are
known and childrens circumstances are appropriately reviewed. There is good
awareness of the risk of female genital mutilation among professionals, with
examples of robust action taken to protect children when this is required.


An effective out-of-hours emergency duty service operates in partnership with
Harrow childrens services, employing a range of appropriately experienced


staff. This provides full coverage out of hours to deal with crises such as
family breakdown, child protection enquiries and requests for accommodation.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Inadequate

Summary
Recent decisions for children to become looked after are appropriate, although not
always timely. Some children experiencing significant neglect remain in the preproceedings phase of the Public Law Outline for too long before care proceedings
commence. When children looked after go missing and are vulnerable to criminal
or sexual exploitation, the action taken to understand and reduce the risk to them
is often delayed and insufficiently robust.
Permanence is not achieved swiftly for many children. A lack of urgency in
completing assessments of parents and connected carers means that a minority of
children experience avoidable delay in returning to their families or live in
unassessed situations for too long.
Independent reviewing officers quality assurance of practice is not sufficiently
focused on childrens experiences, and escalation processes to challenge practice
are rarely used. Team managers oversight of work is irregular and lacks challenge.
Consequently, staff do not receive enough guidance to improve the quality and
timeliness of the services provided to children.
Social workers visit the majority of children regularly, but do not always see them
alone. The quality of assessments is variable and care planning is often delayed or
insufficiently clear or specific. The quality of case recording is often poor.
Childrens identity needs are often not met well and interpreters are not always
used when needed. Few children have a record of their life stories.
Most children live in stable homes with carers who meet their needs. Children told
inspectors that they are happy where they are living and are confident that they
are listened to. The local authority is good at recognising and celebrating their
achievements. While almost all children looked after attend good or better schools,
too many personal education plans identify the targets insufficiently to evaluate
childrens progress and achievements.
Small numbers of children are placed without delay to achieve permanency
through adoption. Generally, the quality of adoption reports for adults and children
is not consistent. The information and language used in life-story work are not
always appropriate to the age of individual children to enable them to understand
their histories.
The care-leaving service is in touch with almost all its care leavers and knows them
well. The local authority provides suitable accommodation for almost all care
leavers. Although the majority of care leavers are engaged in learning or
employment, too many are not.



While recent decisions for children to become looked after are appropriate,
they are not always timely. Some children remain in the pre-proceedings
phase of the Public Law Outline (PLO) for too long before appropriate
decisions are made about the next steps. The local authority has recently
strengthened its oversight of practice within the PLO, through a review of all
childrens circumstances by senior managers, and has established a
permanency planning panel to scrutinise childrens plans. However, the
decisions to take legal action have not been progressed swiftly, for some
children, resulting in further drift and delay. When children become subject to
court proceedings, the quality and timeliness of assessments and planning for
them are stronger. While not quite meeting the national target of 26 weeks,
Barnets performance in September 2016 was 29.6 weeks, in line with the
London average of 29.4 weeks.


Social workers visit children looked after regularly. Not all workers meet
minimum requirements for statutory visits, as some do not take place at the
childs home and some visits to children are always made by arrangement.
Some children are always seen with brothers or sisters, and not alone. These
practices limit social workers assessments of the childrens home
environments and mean that some children do not have the opportunity to
speak confidentially to their social workers to influence the planning for their
futures.


Children who go missing from care often receive a poor service. They are not
always offered return home interviews to determine any underlying causes
and to inform planning to reduce risk. The local authority strengthened and
improved arrangements in November 2016, and since then children have been
offered return interviews more often, rising, for example, from 23% as at April
is not routinely extended to the majority (62%) of children looked after who
do not live in Barnet. Return home interviews for children placed out of area
are completed by a commissioned service that has struggled to meet demand.
Outcomes of return home interviews are often not included on childrens
records. This makes it difficult to use the information gathered from the
interviews in safety planning or even to know whether the interviews have
taken place.


Overall, the local authority is far too tolerant of the risks that children face
when they go missing and the risks that they present to others. Inspectors
saw examples of children being threatened with violence or being physically
attacked, and a small number of children going missing, sometimes for
extended periods, without appropriate action being taken to find or protect
them. This risks children believing that their experiences are acceptable or
that professionals do not care what happens to them. While the local authority
provides children with services to reduce specific risks, such as gang affiliation
and child sexual exploitation, safety planning is not always timely or sufficient.
Provision of services is sometimes delayed and, when children do not engage,
the alternatives are not swiftly considered. Consequently, children sometimes


remain in circumstances that are unsafe for too long before it is recognised
that the risk is not being reduced and additional action is taken. Inspectors
saw examples of the risk of sexual exploitation to children being effectively
reduced through placing children at a distance from Barnet. However, such
examples were in a minority, and transition planning was not robust for those
children when they were due to leave care.

Most children (68%) live in foster families and benefit from the experience of
family life that this affords. Inspectors saw evidence of carers who know their
children well, support them and meet their needs effectively. Carers have
delegated responsibility, and this helps to normalise childrens experiences.
Carers reported that they are generally well supported by supervising social
workers, although communication with childrens social workers is more
variable. Some carers reported delays when unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children need age assessments, causing uncertainty about the suitability of
arrangements and concerns that adults may be placed with children.


The legacy of delay is a major contributory factor in the effectiveness of care
planning for children, and contingency planning is not always clear or
rigorous. Although some more recent plans contain timescales, this is not yet
consistent or embedded. This makes it difficult to hold workers, agencies and
sometimes parents to account. Children experience delay in planning for
permanence. For some children in stable foster homes, the impact is
minimised. However, inspectors saw significant, avoidable delay in reuniting
some children with their families, due to a lack of urgency in completing
assessments. Some children live with connected carers for extended periods
without a full assessment of the suitability of the arrangement, causing
uncertainty for all concerned. (Recommendation)


Independent reviewing officers (IROs) oversight of casework is regular and
children have timely reviews. IROs visit children between reviews and
sometimes are stable figures in childrens lives. Children are encouraged to
participate in their reviews, and many do so. Reviews for children looked after
routinely consider childrens contact with the people who are important to
them, including previous foster carers. While not always timely, inspectors saw
examples of clear efforts made to re-engage family members, when
necessary, to the benefit of children. When childrens contact requires
supervision, support workers provide an effective service that ensures that
childrens contact with their families is safe. However, IROs quality assurance
of practice is overly focused on process rather than childrens experiences.
They have not used escalation processes sufficiently when positive change for
children is not achieved within acceptable timescales. While the local authority
has taken recent action since January 2017 by reshaping the service and
refreshing escalation procedures to ensure that IROs have the capacity and
skills to be more effective in their oversight of practice, this is not yet resulting
in improved outcomes for children.



Staff report good informal support by frontline managers. However, in written
records, team managers oversight of practice is variable in frequency and is
rarely challenging or effective in improving the quality of practice. This
ineffective oversight by managers and IROs is not sufficiently focused on
childrens experiences. This means that staff are not provided with enough
guidance to improve practice standards. (Recommendation)


While there is evidence on some case files of very recent activity to ensure
that case recording is up to date, too many files overall do not give a
complete picture of a childs experience. The quality of case recording is often
poor, and it is sometimes not possible to tell from childrens records what has
happened in their lives or even where they are currently living. Discussions
with heads of service are not recorded, so there is no evidence of their
oversight of casework, including when children are at significant risk. This
risks the out-of-hours services making decisions on casework without access
to all relevant information and children not having coherent records of their
histories if they choose to access their records in later life. (Recommendation)


The completion of life-story work and life-story books for children who do not
have a plan of adoption has not been prioritised, and very few children have
received the help that they need to understand and have a record of their
story in the past 12 months. (Recommendation)


The virtual school has a clear oversight of the improvement in learning
required for the children looked after for whom they are responsible, both in
and out of the borough. It has established strong partnerships with schools
and purposeful governance arrangements to improve the scrutiny of its
progress and achievement and to raise its aspirations. It has identified salient
priorities and ambitious targets for improvement and is taking steps to achieve
these targets. For example, there has been an increase in the regular
attendance of children looked after at school, although this remains too low,
and a reduction in their authorised and unauthorised absence.


A high proportion of children looked after go to a good or better school.
Arrangements for the few children who require alternative learning provision
at the two specialist schools in the borough ensure a range of individualised
curricula to meet their diverse educational and emotional needs. There are
also some carefully planned initiatives in which children looked after mentor
younger children, which helps to improve their behaviour and confidence. The
majority of children looked after achieve well in their reading, writing and
mathematics by the end of primary school. However, too few achieve
sufficient qualifications and high grades or make sufficient progress by age 16
in secondary school. At age 16 to 18, although the large majority are in
education and training, too many are not. Managers recognise the need to
improve advice and guidance for children looked after to help them to
understand all the learning options for them post-16. They are developing
apprenticeships and traineeships with partners to increase the insufficient


number of children looked after who follow this employment-focused learning
pathway.

The proportion of children looked after who are removed from school for a
short period is too high, as is that of the small number of these children who
are persistently absent. Managers are fully aware of this and it forms part of
their improvement plan. The local authority allocates additional funding (the
pupil premium) appropriately for children looked after, to provide a range of
targeted support to help them to keep up with their learning. Education
planning for children looked after has historically been poor. However,
teachers and the local authority are now taking full ownership of a recently
introduced electronic system, and the quality of personal education plans is
improving. Despite this, too many plans articulate the targets insufficiently to
enable managers to measure the progress and achievement of children. In
addition, a few children do not yet have a plan on the new system.


The local authority has recently successfully prioritised improving the
timeliness of initial health assessments when children first become looked
after. Investment in training for local general practitioners and awareness
raising is improving the quality of these assessments. Children receive review
health assessments that are timely and provided by dedicated nurses for
children looked after, including those children placed out of area. Few children
refuse this service, which means that any emerging health needs are
identified and addressed. The local authority recognises that children can
experience unacceptable delay when they need additional support for their
emotional or mental health needs through child and adolescent mental health
services. For this reason, the local authority is in the process of
recommissioning the service.


Childrens diversity and identity needs are generally not met well. The local
authority struggles to find a sufficiency of placements either within or outside
its own resources to match childrens linguistic and cultural needs. While this
would be a struggle for any local authority, given the richly diverse children
looked after population, inspectors saw examples of some basic needs not
being met, such as ensuring that a child retains the ability to speak their birth
language or that they are always provided with interpreters, if required.
However, inspectors saw a few examples of stronger practice with sensitive
attention to childrens identity needs. (Recommendation)


The local authority is home to increasing numbers of unaccompanied asylumseeking children. At the time of the inspection, 17% of all children looked
after were unaccompanied asylum-seeking children. The quality of support
and services provided to them demonstrates the same deficits in practice as
are seen in services provided to other children. While inspectors saw some
examples of childrens additional needs being met in a timely fashion, such as
support to make asylum claims, this was due to the tenacity of individual
carers and social workers, and other children experienced delay. When
unaccompanied asylum-seeking children go missing, there is little recognition


of their additional vulnerabilities and, when this is recognised, action agreed is
not always taken.

The newly reformed Children in Care Council has undertaken some useful and
helpful work, such as a recent survey of children looked after, which echoes
some of the findings in this inspection. Children spoken to by inspectors are
happy where they are living and confident that they are listened to. The local
authority is good at recognising and celebrating their achievements.


While the local authority has taken action to address drift in care planning, to
strengthen quality assurance of practice and to improve responses to children
who go missing, this is too recent to improve the quality of service that
children receive.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement


Low numbers of children leave care through adoption. Since April 2016, eight
children have benefited from permanence arrangements through adoption,
including children over five years old, children with complex disabilities, and
brother and sister groups. At the time of the inspection, Barnet has a very
small number of children in foster to adopt arrangements and 12 children
who are placed for adoption.


The local authority has identified that permanency planning requires
improvement to ensure the earlier identification of plans for children who need
adoption. Since October 2016, a permanency-planning panel and a
permanency-planning tracker have been introduced to provide more focus and
scrutiny. An adoption worker is identified to attend legal planning meetings to
improve the timeliness of permanency planning. It is too early to see evidence
of positive impact on childrens timescales.


Once the agency decision maker (ADM) makes the appropriate decisions to
proceed to a plan of adoption, the timeliness of adoption work is good,
evidenced by a strong adoption performance scorecard. Published figures for
moving in with their adoptive family was 472 days, compared to the national
average of 593 days and below the national scorecard threshold of 487 days.
This performance is continuing in 201617.


The prospective adopter reports (PARs) seen by inspectors vary in quality.
This is acknowledged by the ADM, independent panel chair and adoption team
manager. While the large majority of reports seen are detailed and contain all
required checks and references, the documents are neither consistently
completed in a timely manner nor adequately quality assured before they are
submitted to the adoption panel. The large majority contain grammatical and


recording errors, while others lack sufficient analysis of the information
presented. The ADM and recently appointed independent adoption panel
adviser are robustly addressing the quality of written submissions with the
adoption team manager. Joint training with the foster panel is planned in June

Adopters who spoke to inspectors, including second-time adopters, were
positive regarding the preparation, assessment and support received from the
agency. Joint recruitment and preparation of prospective adopters, in
partnership with the North London Fostering and Adoption Consortium, is
supported by a wide range of good information, guides and an easy-to-use
website. The joint preparation course is comprehensive and provides adopters
with a good, basic understanding of the needs of adopted children. Adopters
spoke positively of the learning and insight that they had gained from
attending the foundation day and preparation course, and from the
assessment process.


However, adopters and the service acknowledge some delays in moving
between adoption stage one and stage two assessments, preventing some
PARs from being progressed in a timely manner. Adoption recruitment has
recently been brought back into the adoption service from the recruitment and
assessment team to ensure the prompt assessment of prospective adopters.


The quality of child permanence reports is too variable. Reports seen contain
recording errors and are not routinely updated by social workers. A minority of
reports include irrelevant information from brother and sister assessments,
and information such as medical adviser comments is missing. Senior leaders
are aware that the lack of pre-adoption medicals to inform planning for
children requires improvement. A recent paper presented to the clinical
commissioning group has very recently led to a decision for resources to be
allocated to address this issue.


The local authority works well with the North London fostering and adoption
consortium to ensure the timely exchange of information and secure
appropriate links for children and waiting adopters, resulting in the majority of
children living at the earliest opportunity with an adoptive family that meets
their needs. Local authority year-to-date figures show that children who wait
less than 16 months between entering care and moving in with their adoptive
family is 58% (11 children out of a total of 19), continuing the strong
performance of 201215.


Timely family finding and robust matching are effectively scrutinised by the
adoption panel, members of which carefully consider their recommendations
for approving adopters and matching children. There were almost no adoption
disruptions in 201617, and learning from the disruption has been
appropriately disseminated to staff.



The ADM makes timely decisions and appropriately challenges staff when
information and reports are not sufficient. The ADM meets regularly with the
panel chair to maintain oversight and accountability. Panel members receive
annual appraisals, as well as joint training with the adoption and foster panel
and teams, to ensure that their contributions remain informed by current
practice.


The adoption service undertakes comprehensive life-story work and later-life
letters. However, the language and images used are not always appropriate to
the age and understanding of children, and the later-life letters seen varied in
terms of the quality and accuracy of information contained in them.
(Recommendation)


The adoption service provides a range of effective post-adoption support,
including the facilitation of direct contact, letterbox arrangements, birth
records counselling and support groups for children, and adopter support. The
local authority has been successful in supporting a large number of
applications to the adoption support fund, resulting in financial and practical
support to sustain permanence.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement

The care-leaving team is in touch with almost all of its care leavers (98% in
March 2017, according to local authority data). Personal advisers visit care
leavers frequently enough to monitor their well-being adequately and provide
day-to-day support when needed. The range and skills of staff, many of whom
have recently come into the service, match the diverse needs of care leavers.
There is a good team ethos and desire to improve the quality of the service,
as it has not been effective enough. The local authority undertook a thorough
evaluation of provision, including an audit of the quality of pathway planning,
and this is leading to a number of positive changes in the service.


Planning to help care leavers to move towards independence is insufficiently
thorough. Advisers record the events of care leavers lives accurately,
including when care leavers achieve positive outcomes. However, in
approximately half of the plans, advisers do not translate their observations
effectively into pertinent and timely targets. All care leavers have a pathway
plan. A small minority did not have a sufficiently up-to-date one until recently,
but this has now been resolved.


In too many instances, planning for when children looked after transition into
the care leaving service does not sufficiently build on care leavers prior
experiences and achievement, and plans routinely start too late. Too many
care leavers do not have sufficient ownership of their plans.
(Recommendation)



Care leavers receive appropriate healthcare. They receive a health assessment
prior to coming into the care-leaving service. The service provides care leavers
with access to health visitors for advice on both the dangers of drugs and on
sexual health, and there are plans to make an agreement with the family
nurse partnership so that older care leavers can access mental health services
more easily.


The care-leaving service works well with a range of partnerships to support
care leavers. Managers, for example, have strong working relationships with
advisers who work for the Department for Work and Pensions, which makes
following up difficulties with benefit payments easier for care leavers.
Managers also work closely with the probation service and youth offending
team, and are putting in place a strategy to support one of the two young
people currently in custody, who is due for release. The centre holds
emergency supplies for when care leavers occasionally need them. Partnership
working helped to reduce effectively the risk to two young people who were at
high risk of child sexual exploitation. Care leavers have effective support to
make sure that they have bank accounts and national insurance numbers.


There are insufficient organised learning activities to support care leavers in
life skills such as money management, which is an evident need that personal
advisers record in many pathway plans. (Recommendation)


The centre already holds some events that acknowledge young peoples
achievement and activities to develop their personal and social skills.
Managers have well-considered plans to develop a training centre for this
purpose.


The majority of care leavers (57% in March 2017, according to local authority
data) are in education, employment or training. Some of these are
undertaking some well-planned learning. For example, an unaccompanied
asylum seeker is successfully completing a course in English for speakers of
other languages, and another care leaver is fulfilling a long-held ambition to
follow a mechanical engineering course.


Managers monitor the attendance and progress of care leavers and their
safety in the learning settings in which they study. They have valuable contact
with care leavers key workers in the settings. However, there are too many
care leavers who are not in education, training or employment or who do not
undertake learning that is right for them. A few do not complete courses, or
they follow courses that repeat the same level of learning, and this reduces
their ability to improve their life chances. Currently, 43% of care leavers are
not engaged in employment or training, and the attempts to re-engage these
young people have had mixed success.


The head of the care-leaving service is fully aware of the improvements that
are required in the quality of the work and services provided. Managers have
introduced better governance arrangements, and are introducing new ways of


working to improve corporate parenting and support staff by using group
supervision. In addition, they understand that they need to make sure that
they further improve the oversight of any risks to care leavers. They also have
an honest and self-critical view of what they do well and what requires
improvement.

Almost all care leavers value highly the quality of accommodation in and
outside the borough. This year, 98% of care leavers are in suitable
accommodation and the majority live independently. Approximately one in 10
care leavers have remained with their former foster carers after the age of 18.
Arrangements for housing in the borough are well established, and the service
allocates accommodation swiftly. Care leavers are given a high priority for
accommodation and receive a five-year flexible tenancy. A few care leavers
stated that their initial temporary accommodation was of poorer quality.


Arrangements for the small minority who live out of London are suitable, apart
from a few instances in which arrangements have not been so
straightforward. Care leavers reported that they feel safe in their
accommodation.


Care leavers are supportive of the service and trust their advisers. They
discussed positively the work that advisers do to help them out. One described
their accommodation as a palace. Care leavers said that personal advisers
help them well with their day-to-day living. However, too many are unclear
about the local authority Pledge and care leavers entitlements. Care-leaving
managers are aware of this, and work is underway to improve the promotion
of both. Care leavers gave a mixed response to the usefulness of pathway
plans. Again, managers are appropriately aware of the need to make plans a
more integral and useful part of young peoples futures.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Services for vulnerable children in Barnet are inadequate. Leaders and all
managers have not yet addressed the legacy of practice deficits to ensure that
children are adequately safeguarded. Since the local authority was last inspected in
children and young people receive. Recognition and action taken by the director of
childrens services in January 2016 enabled senior leaders to understand the depth
and breadth of the service failures. As a result, the local authority has commenced
an improvement programme to promote wholescale organisational and cultural
change, focusing on creating the right environment for effective social work to
develop. While this has achieved some key elements to support and develop
childrens services, improvements in the standard of social work practice are much
less advanced. Consequently, the quality of service for children in need of help and
protection and children looked after is inadequate.
The commissioning of a collegiate partner in April 2016, alongside the creation of a
social work improvement board, has established a programme of planned activities
to address deficiencies in service provision. Senior leaders have successfully gained
corporate support and resources to make improvements, although these have
been ineffective in improving standards of core social work practice for children.
A lack of challenge from the Local Safeguarding Children Board has not assisted in
raising safeguarding standards in the local authority. The recent engagement of
key strategic partners is beginning to assist in improving services for children.
However, this is limited, as services are newly commissioned or are at the planning
stage, and there is not yet an evaluation of improvement.
The oversight of practice by heads of service and team managers is weak.
Evaluation of practice by managers is often too positive and plays down the risks
to children. Managers do not provide enough guidance or direction to frontline
practitioners to improve outcomes for children or keep childrens progress at the
centre of improvements. Heads of service and operational directors rarely record
their involvement in decision making.
The corporate parenting panel is committed to improving the lives of children
looked after but, until recently, had not received full performance information,
which limits its ability to challenge any deficits in services effectively. The local
authority is beginning to strengthen and stabilise its social work workforce with the
creation of new posts and the successful recruitment of permanent social workers
and managers. There is more work to do to address the existing culture of poor
social work practice.


Inspection findings

The local authority recognises that a restructure of childrens services in 2014
was wholly unsuccessful in achieving a positive social work service for
children. The increased demand for services and a significant number of staff
leaving, following the restructure, resulted in widespread instability throughout
childrens services, contributing to deteriorating practice standards. The extent
of the decline was not fully recognised until the recently appointed director of
childrens services commissioned a diagnostic review of the service in January
able to share considerable, relevant social work knowledge and expertise. This
has enabled and assisted senior leaders to understand the depth and breadth
of service failures. Since April 2016, senior leaders have focused on creating
the right infrastructure and staffing requirements to support wholesale
practice improvement. Improvements include the creation of additional social
work posts and teams to reduce caseloads, significant investment in improving
the local authoritys electronic recording systems and more accurate
performance management reporting. In October 2016, there was further
investment in senior practice leadership to enable a focus on quality of
practice and childrens experiences. The very recent improvements are a
result of this. However, there is recognition that there is much more work to
do to ensure that all managers and staff embed a culture of positive social
work practice across the organisation.


Senior leaders and elected members demonstrate a clear understanding of
areas for development within childrens social care, and a commitment to
improving services for children and families in Barnet. The local authority has
secured ongoing financial support and expertise across the council to support
improvements. Collaboration with its collegiate partner and strengthened
governance arrangements, including the social work practice improvement
board chaired by the chief executive officer, monitor and scrutinise
performance in areas already identified for improvement and development.


The practice improvement board has successfully promoted structural
developments and improved working conditions. However, the accompanying
practice improvement plan 201617 remains largely focused on management
systems, structures and processes. While the local authority is at the
beginning of its improvement journey, to date the activity has not focused
quickly enough on securing improvements in frontline practice to improve
outcomes for children. When practice changes are identified and appropriate
action is taken to achieve these, they are not revisited to ensure that
improvement is secured and sustained. Other changes, such as the review of
the child protection chairs and independent reviewing officers, the review of
permanency planning panel, are still ongoing or are too recent for their impact
to have been monitored or evaluated. The local authority recognises that
there is still much more to do to ensure that plans sustain the focus on


resolving the significant deficits in frontline operational practice quickly
enough. (Recommendation)

The local authoritys investment in improving electronic systems means that
childrens services now benefit from access to good-quality performance data.
However, monthly reports are lengthy and unwieldly, and do not include
analytical commentary to help the focus on required performance areas.
Patterns of deterioration and fluctuation of key data in these reports indicate
that the local authority is not yet consistently sustaining practice
improvement. Weekly reports are circulated to managers for oversight and
action. It is not evident that managers and staff routinely use this
performance information to support, improve or sustain frontline practice.


Quality assurance of casework is now established through auditing and the
use of practice weeks over the past year. These have been a helpful
development. However, audits are overly focused on process, with insufficient
weight given to the impact of poor decision making, creating drift and delay
for children. Consequently, findings from audit sometimes give a falsely
positive view of practice. This was replicated in the local authority selfassessment that was presented to inspectors. Of the cases audited for this
inspection, inspectors considered 40% of the cases audited by the local
authority to be over optimistic. While senior leaders demonstrate an
understanding of what constitutes good and acceptable practice for children in
Barnet, this has not been effectively communicated or translated to staff and
managers or integrated into frontline practice.


Senior leaders commitment to reducing caseloads by increasing the numbers
of social workers and frontline managers has not yet produced the desired
improvements in practice. Social workers report having to catch up on
uncompleted work, and changes to their line management arrangements
contribute to delays. The practice development worker posts were created in
November 2016 with specific responsibility to support and embed changes in
practice. All roles were filled until an urgent requirement arose to cover a
head of service post. This has limited the success of this initiative. The
implementation of a resilience model of practice is currently being
established, but it is not used coherently across the service to improve
outcomes for children.


There is a legacy of poor oversight, and casework direction of practice by
managers at every level is weak and fails to drive performance effectively,
leading to positive change. Supervision notes seen by inspectors are poor and
there is little evidence of the direction given or the actions set by managers or
any follow through to ensure accountability, but a revised template is
improving the quality. The challenge from child protection conference chairs
and independent reviewing officers is too often ineffective, and escalation
processes are underused. Senior managers do not routinely record on
childrens records the direction and decision making. Their involvement in and
accountability for decisions reached is not demonstrated, particularly in


circumstances in which children are at significant risk. Poor case recording
compounds these failures, and it is not always possible to understand from
the records the reasons for decisions or plans. (Recommendation)

Arrangements for commissioning services for families appropriately reflect
priorities for children within the boroughs comprehensive joint strategic needs
assessment. Strong commissioning partnerships at a strategic level have
ensured that a range of culturally sensitive services are available for children
and families. These include services for children and their families in
households affected by domestic abuse and drug and alcohol substance
misuse. Stronger partnership working is resulting in the early identification of
hidden harm and is strengthening multi-agency working. Through the work of
the Health and Wellbeing Board, the local authority has successfully secured
joint commissioning arrangements with the clinical commissioning group.
Together, they have commissioned innovative childrens mental health early
help services through schools and childrens centres, and have ambitious plans
to further transform child and adolescent mental health services. However,
many commissioned services are still in the planning stages or too new for the
impact on children to be fully felt or evaluated.


Strategically, there is further work to do to ensure that multi-agency service
provision responds more appropriately to meet the needs of children. This
includes the need to clarify pathways with all partners to strengthen and
embed the early help offer across all services and to secure accommodation to
enable the local authority to appropriately discharge its duties to homeless 16
to 17 year olds. More positively, engagement with Barnets housing providers
is leading to better accommodation for care leavers.


The Local Safeguarding Childrens Board (LSCB), while challenging other
partners, has not been effective in challenging the performance of the local
authority. Not enough has been done to understand the deficiencies in either
practice or the outcomes for children. Recognising the need to strengthen
strategic arrangements, the chief executive has been proactive in
commissioning a review of the LSCB. A leadership forum to progress
recommendations from the review was held with the police borough
commander and the chief executive of the clinical commissioning group in May
improvements.


The links between child sexual exploitation, sexually harmful behaviour, gangs
and missing children is recognised at a strategic level, and has resulted in the
creation of a new multi-agency team known as REACH. However, more
widely, thresholds are not consistently recognised or applied. Frontline
practitioners have, on occasions, inappropriately tolerated risks to children at
risk of criminal exploitation and interpreted the behaviour of young people at
risk of child sexual exploitation as a lifestyle choice. Once a risk of child sexual
exploitation is recognised and managed through the multi-agency sexual
exploitation panel, more effective protection for children results. The panels


response also includes successful disruption of perpetrators activity.
(Recommendation)

The corporate parenting panel has strong cross-party membership and keeps
itself informed of matters relating to children looked after and care leavers.
The panel has been effective in championing issues for children, including
being instrumental in care leavers gaining housing priority status and
progressing the deficiencies in initial health assessments. While securing some
successes, its ability to provide effective challenge and scrutiny is limited, as
comprehensive performance information is not made available. The DCS has
incrementally addressed this gap over the last few months.


Young people are involved in corporate parenting panel meetings through
#BOP. While they provide a report for panel on their activities, the children
require more support to challenge effectively the deficiencies in the services
that they receive. Panel processes do not support children to bring individual
concerns or complaints to panel members attention, and members do not
have direct links with children. Neither do they routinely attend children in
care meetings, so they are missing opportunities to gain insight into the life
experiences or concerns of the children in their care.


Not all children who would like to make a complaint are able to have support
from a trained advocate when they need it. While children are able to access
some advocacy support that is available through a commissioned contract, this
does not support all children. A detailed report on complaints is reviewed at
the children, education and libraries committee on an annual basis. However,
as a result of this report, scrutiny and learning have had little impact on
changes to practice. Action plans are weak, and progress and impact are not
measured from a childs perspective.


Involvement of children is reported to be at the centre of many of Barnets
plans, and children are routinely consulted and encouraged to give their views
and wishes. However, monitoring to ensure follow through on childrens views
is very recent and is only now beginning to be embedded. For example, the
children in care Pledge, created with children, is a detailed list of sound
promises with plans for an annual review, but its performance monitoring has
only recently been put in place. Involving children and keeping their views and
experiences at the heart of their care planning, and evidencing their
participation, remain weak. (Recommendation)


The local authority has made significant progress with the recruitment of
permanent staff at all levels. Effective working relationships and support from
corporate human resources have allowed Barnet to successfully reposition
itself to attract new workers and to innovatively change terms and conditions
to convert agency staff into permanent posts. Most social work and
management vacancies are recruited to and are waiting for the formal
processes to be completed. The recruitment of suitably experienced senior
leaders who have filled the newly created operational directors posts requires


further consolidation to ensure permanent staffing arrangements. However,
the experience of change and churn is still a reality for some teams, and this
has an impact on the services provided for children. Social work practitioners
have access to a range of training and development opportunities through the
Barnet childrens academy partnership. However, key basic practice
improvement training to support consistent social work practice, while
recognised and planned for, is not yet available.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
Executive summary
The Barnet Safeguarding Childrens Board is inadequate, as it is not effective in
discharging all of its statutory functions. Monitoring of frontline practice has been
poor and insufficient, therefore the board was unaware of the failings to safeguard
children that were identified by this inspection.
The board does not have robust scrutiny of statutory requirements, such as the
arrangements for children in private fostering or the monitoring of the quality of
multi-agency safeguarding training. The business plan does not include specific
actions to drive improvement in how the board discharges its statutory duties.
Some annual reports to the board do not provide analysis and do not contribute to
action planning. This has not been recognised or challenged by the board.
Some partnership financial contributions to the board have been maintained at a
low level, and this prevents the board from funding core safeguarding training and
evaluating the quality of training offered across the partnership. This has been
recognised strategically, and recruitment for a learning coordinator post has
commenced.
The chair has led challenge panels across the partnership to enhance learning
from section 11 audits, and themes arising from this are taken forward by the
board. However, it was a serious oversight not to have conducted this process for
the local authority. The chief executive commissioned an independent review of
the board in January 2017 which recommended substantial improvements. A new
executive strategic group is due to meet in May 2017 to improve the effectiveness
of safeguarding across the partnership.
The learning and improvement framework is not fully implemented, as there is no
programme of multi-agency audits. Case file audits in the last year have been
infrequent and on a very small scale, and the board has not been provided with
partners own quality assurance findings. The processes to review child deaths
work well, and there is an effective multi-agency rapid response to unexplained
deaths. The board has published a serious case review. However, inspectors found
very little awareness of the lessons learned among frontline practitioners.
The board has historically kept a strong focus on children at risk of exploitation
and going missing, and has a detailed strategy and action plan in place. However,
the sub-group has not met to advance this work for several months and the
interface with other strategic groups is not clear. The board has yet to assess the
quality of early help services, although data on common assessment framework
assessments is included in a new performance data set.


Recommendations

Ensure that a programme of quality assurance is established to monitor the
quality of frontline practice across statutory work and early help.


Ensure that all partner agencies and their staff are aware of thresholds for
intervention.


Increase scrutiny and challenge of practice for privately fostered children and
raise awareness of the notification process.


Ensure that the effectiveness of multi-agency safeguarding training is
monitored and evaluated.


Review the function of the child sexual exploitation and missing sub-group,
and align this with other strategic forums to incorporate children at risk of
youth violence and gang affiliation.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The Local Safeguarding Childrens Board (LSCB), Barnet Safeguarding
Childrens Board, is inadequate as it is ineffective in discharging all of its
statutory functions. It has not assessed the effectiveness of the help being
provided to children and their families, quality assured practice or
comprehensively monitored and evaluated the quality and impact of
safeguarding training for multi-agency practitioners.


The governance and structure of the board meet statutory requirements,
although there is no clear protocol that sets out the relationship with other
strategic groups. The chair is an active member of the Health and Wellbeing
Board, and childrens needs such as adolescent mental health are prioritised.
The board works with community safety to align action plans and avoid
duplication. The lead member attends board meetings regularly, but
inspectors saw limited evidence of challenge between by the board to the
local authority. A wide range of agencies are represented on the board,
including the voluntary sector. However, some partners experienced the board
as unwieldy, making it challenging to participate in, and they valued
opportunities to work in small groups, to be more effective.


The board does not have a comprehensive programme of planned multiagency audits. Two multi-agency audits were completed in the last year,
reviewing a total of six social care cases. This has meant that the board does
not have sufficient insight into the lived experiences of vulnerable children in
Barnet. A very recent audit of domestic abuse highlights areas for practice
improvement, but mechanisms are not in place for the board to drive the
improvements forward and to hold partners to account. (Recommendation)



Quality assurance activity has been focused on developing a comprehensive
performance data set, which includes a range of data across the partnership.
The relevant sub-group recognises that the analysis of data and trends is an
area for development. There is a significant time lag in the data reviewed by
the sub-group, which reduces the potential impact of any actions agreed.


Securing sufficient financial contributions from partner agencies has been an
ongoing challenge for the board. A relatively low level of funding in proportion
to the child population has resulted in a very limited administrative capacity.
The chair continues to challenge this with senior leaders across the
partnership at a strategic level, but it has impacted negatively on the capacity
of the board to deliver its functions.


The business plan does not include specific actions on core statutory
responsibilities. The reliance on annual reports that are of variable quality and
depth has not supported a systematic and rigorous approach by the board
towards key priorities. The boards plan covers a very wide spectrum of
activity, some of which lacks specific outcomes for children.


The board has published a serious case review and commissioned a further
two serious case reviews. There is evidence of robust decision making and
appropriate referrals to the national panel. The board has driven immediate
action, when required, ahead of publication (such as a partnership audit of
children who are unaccounted for). The chair has shown great tenacity in
driving these reviews and there has been good engagement from partners.
However, inspectors found limited awareness among frontline practitioners of
the lessons learned from reviews, despite the board conducting a number of
learning events.


There are effective processes to review child deaths. Good partnership
working contributes to an efficient rapid response process, led by an
experienced designated doctor. The annual report needs to set out more
clearly the learning from any deaths that have modifiable factors.


Challenge panels have enhanced the section 11 audit process. However, it is
of note that a challenge panel for the local authoritys childrens social care
services has not occurred. This is in contrast to evidence of strong and
consistent challenge to police, probation and health partners by the board.
This has contributed to improvements, such as a dedicated education post in
the multi-agency safeguarding hub that is funded by the local authority, and
improved identification of parents using drug and alcohol services. The quality
of arrangements for privately fostered children has not been sufficiently
scrutinised by the board. The board has been unaware of the quality of
assessments or compliance with statutory visits. A very limited annual report
in 201516 indicated a sharp drop in private fostering notifications, but the
board has not yet taken any decisive action or held partners to account for
this. (Recommendation)



Some sub-groups have been at stop start over the last year, due to gaps in
key roles such as group chairs. Not all sub-groups have forward plans of their
work in progress and how the board drives forward the work of the sub-group
or the reporting lines back to the board is not always clear.


While section 11 audits monitor the delivery of single-agency safeguarding
training, the evaluation of multi-agency safeguarding training (delivered by
the Barnet workforce development team for the partnership) is
underdeveloped. The relevant sub-group restarted in 2016, and a training
programme is now in draft form. This sets out bespoke training aligned to the
boards priorities and informed by case reviews, such as recent self-harm in
adolescents. There is limited capacity to evaluate the impact of this training or
to commission further training. A learning coordinator is currently being
recruited to address this challenge. (Recommendation)


The board historically played an important strategic role to improve practice in
relation to child sexual exploitation, with consistent scrutiny of the return
home interviews offer for children who go missing. A problem profile informs
interventions, and there is a detailed child sexual exploitation strategy and
action plan in place. A champions network has been successful in improving
recognition and referrals. However, the sub-group has not met for five
months, and specific planned activity of the group is not clear and does not
yet reflect youth violence and gang affiliation risks. The sub-groups remit
overlaps with that of two other strategic groups and requires alignment to be
most effective. (Recommendation)


The board has recognised that the lack of formal escalation across the
partnership hampers opportunities for improvement. A revised escalation
policy was reissued in February 2017, but it is too early to determine any
impact. The board launched a revised thresholds document in early 2017, but
engagement across the partnership was limited. While numbers of early help
assessments are monitored, the board needs to use performance data to
understand whether all agencies are responding to needs at an early stage.


The board has maintained scrutiny of key priorities, such as domestic abuse,
focusing on developing services for adult victims such as independent
domestic violence advocates in hospital settings and the effective use of police
enforcement powers. However, there has been insufficient focus on children
affected by domestic abuse, and the board does not yet understand their
experiences.


The board launched a neglect strategy in 2016. Champions to combat neglect
have been trained and a neglect assessment tool agreed. So far, there is little
evidence of impact on practice. The data set does not yet reflect neglect
measures, and the take-up of training has been low.


A range of schools are very much engaged with the work of the board. A
headteacher chairs an online safety working group and the safeguarding leads


have network meetings with the chair of the board. The chair has recruited a
second lay member. However, the role of lay members requires further
development to ensure that their contributions add value.

Youthshield acts as a youth consultative group for the board. Following its
survey of young people, the group rolled out Healthy relationships workshops
to hundreds of children in local schools. The chair facilitates young peoples
participation through tabling their challenges and questions to the board.


A review of the board commissioned by the chief executive sets out a
programme of significant transformation. Recommendations for developing a
smaller, more strategic executive group have been positively received by the
partnership, which reports that the board membership is too large always to
function effectively.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other, and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Louise Warren
Deputy lead inspector: Margaret Burke
Team inspectors: Paula Thomson-Jones, Shirley Bailey, Tara Geere, Steve Stanley,
Brenda McInerney, Ian Young
Senior data analysts: Patrick Thomson, Pete McLaughlin, Hywel Benbow
Quality assurance manager: Sean Tarpey


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance, Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services, and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects
to achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners
of all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for children looked after and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


