Birmingham

Re-inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
Inspection dates: 12 September 2016 to 6 October 2016
Report published: 25 November 2016

Childrens services in Birmingham are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Executive summary
This re-inspection has identified that serious and widespread failings in some services
to help and protect children have not yet been tackled effectively. Children are not
always kept safe and not enough is being done to protect them from harm.
Senior leaders and politicians have worked hard, invested considerable resources and
reconfigured services to ensure that there is a strengthened focus on improvement,
and this inspection has found some significant improvements in a range of services
as a result. However, key areas of service provision are continuing to fail children
and families, and where progress is being made further work is required to ensure
that services are of good quality.
Children and families do not receive the help they need at an early enough stage. In
addition, the understanding and operational support from partner agencies is poor.
This results in inappropriate referrals being made to childrens statutory services. The
multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) does not identify and reduce risks to children
effectively at the point of contact and referral. Inspectors had to refer back to the
authority too many cases where risk had not been identified properly or acted upon.
Partnership working with other services is not well embedded, with, for example, too
many instances where police do not attend strategy meetings or provide early
enough information. A lack of effective multi-agency working at both operational and
strategic levels is hampering the pace and extent of progress.
Children who have disabilities, and who are in need of help and protection, are not
seen regularly enough by their social workers and many wait too long to have their
needs reviewed. The authority does not do enough to identify those children who
may be privately fostered, and for those who are identified, do not discharge their
statutory responsibilities of assessment and overview effectively.
Arrangements to identify, manage and intervene where children and young people
are at risk of child sexual exploitation are not consistently effective. Arrangements to
link risk with children who go missing from home or care are underdeveloped, and
work to reduce risk is not informed by sufficient analysis of intelligence and
performance information.
Many child protection plans are not reducing risk in a timely way, with ineffective
multi-agency core groups and a lack of challenge by child protection chairs to ensure
that good outcomes are achieved as quickly as possible for children.
Significant progress has been made in addressing serious weaknesses in identifying
and reducing the numbers of children missing education. For those children looked
after, personal education plans are now often of good quality and increasing
numbers of children in care attend good or better schools.
Services for children looked after have improved, and they benefit from seeing their
social worker more regularly as a result of a more stable workforce. There is an


increasing and improved focus on ensuring that, where necessary, children live with
a permanent alternative family as soon as possible. Adoption is considered for
children who cannot return home, and they live with their new families more quickly
than at the time of the last inspection. Many young people who live in permanent
fostering arrangements have secure and settled placements with foster carers who
receive good support from the local authority. For a minority of young people,
however, it has taken too long to find a stable placement and these young people
have had too many moves.
The local authority has taken robust action to ensure, following a recent child death,
that the circumstances of children subject to a special guardianship order (SGO)
have been reviewed to ensure their welfare. Current assessments to place young
people under SGOs with carers are now of satisfactory quality.
Care planning does not always ensure that all of a childs needs are carefully
considered, and there is, in some cases, ineffective challenge by independent
reviewing officers of progress between reviews to ensure that plans do not drift.
Too many care leavers are not in education, employment or training, and this
situation has not improved since the last inspection. The local authority has not
prioritised these young people or supported them effectively to secure
apprenticeships and job opportunities within the council. Care leavers benefit from
good relationships with personal assistants and are well prepared and guided in
preparation for independence.
The corporate parenting board now has a clear focus on issues for young people and
is beginning to have an impact on improving services. The Children in Care Council is
established and is listened to by the council, but more work is required to ensure
that it is representative of all children in care in Birmingham.
Performance management and quality assurance systems are not closely enough
aligned, and there is insufficient emphasis on the quality and impact of practice.
The council has been successful in establishing a sufficient and relatively stable
workforce, including a reduction in the overall use of agency staff. Where use of
agency staff remains high, as in the MASH, issues of poorer quality and inconsistent
standards of practice remain.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area1
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five homes. Two homes were judged to be good
and three were judged to require improvement in their most recent Ofsted
inspections.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements
was in March 2014. The local authority was judged to be inadequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked
after was in March 2014. The local authority was judged to be inadequate.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since July 2013.
 The director is also responsible for adult social care, education, public health
and housing strategy.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post
since April 2016. The previous chair of the LSCB took up the post in October
Children living in this area
 Approximately 283,900 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Birmingham. This is 25.5% of the total population in the area (1).
 Approximately 37.1% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty
after housing costs  according to figures published by the End Child Poverty
Coalition in October 2014.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
- in primary schools is 28.0% (the national average (2016) is 15.2%)
- in secondary schools is 27.4% (the national average (2016) is
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 60.6% of
all children living in the area, compared to 25.5% in the country as a whole
(2).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
- in primary schools is 43.0% (the national average (2016) is 20.1%)


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


- in secondary schools is 40.1% (the national average (2016) is
 Birmingham is a highly diverse city. This has a positive impact on the city, but
also raises significant challenges for cohesion: 22.2% (238,300) of
Birmingham residents were born outside the UK. Of these, 74,900 arrived
when they were aged 0 to 15 years and 103,682 arrived in the UK between
to see an increase in population of 0.9% to 1,223,000, of which 285,500 will
be aged under 18 (4).
________________________________________
(1) ONS 2015 mid-year population estimate
(2) ONS annual population survey January to December 2014
(3) Census 2011
(4) ONS 2014 subnational population projections
Child protection in this area
 At 31 August 2016, 7,155 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a decrease
from 9,676 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 August 2016, 854 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a decrease from 1,028 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 August 2016, 17 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from 33 at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, 17 serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and eight serious case reviews have been completed or are ongoing,
and there were six learning lessons reviews at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 August 2016, 1,816 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 64 per 10,000 children). This is similar to 1,815 (64 per
- 752 (41%) live outside the local authority area
- 177 live in residential childrens homes, of whom 45% live out of the
authority area


- three live in residential special schools[1], of whom 100% live out of the
authority area
- 1,206 live with foster families, of whom 39% live out of the authority
area
- 91 live with parents, of whom 12% live out of the authority area
- 92 children are unaccompanied, asylum-seeking children.


In the last 12 months:
- there have been 153 adoptions
- 15 children became subject of special guardianship orders
- 899 children ceased to be looked after, of whom 8% subsequently
returned to be looked after
- 18 children and young people ceased to be looked after and moved on
to independent living.

[1]

These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Recommendations

Strengthen the management oversight, systems and processes in the MASH to
ensure appropriate application of the thresholds, effective decision-making
and a consistent response.


Ensure that local authority staff and partners, through the Local Safeguarding
Children Board, understand the early help offer and are able to undertake
assessments of need and offer appropriate interventions at an early enough
stage to prevent escalation to statutory intervention.


Ensure that quality assurance and performance management processes are
better used to improve weak performance, and that they and strategic
improvement planning have a much stronger emphasis on impact.


Reduce the backlog of unassessed domestic abuse notifications and
strengthen systems to ensure that children are not left in unassessed
situations.


Ensure that key partner agencies contribute fully to child protection strategy
meetings.


Address poor assessment and review practice in the service for children who
have a disability to ensure that all children are helped and supported.


Improve the quality and timeliness of services to children and young people
who are at risk of child sexual exploitation or who go missing. Ensure that
these two service areas are aligned and that service development is informed
by available intelligence and performance information.


Improve the quality and timeliness of core group meetings to support families
in engaging with the child protection process and to ensure that progress is
made.


Ensure that practice for children who are subject to private fostering
arrangements meets statutory requirements and that all staff and partners
know how to recognise a private fostering arrangement.


Ensure that when children have a plan to return home risks are fully
considered and that the right support arrangements are in place.


Ensure that all children benefit from good quality care plans, including plans
for permanence, and that these are actioned and reviewed effectively to
prevent drift and delay for children.


Improve matching processes and management oversight to keep placement
breakdown, particularly multiple placement breakdown, to a minimum for
children.



Work closely with partner agencies to improve joint working at both
operational and strategic levels, including in relation to female genital
mutilation.


Ensure that issues around identity, cultural and racial needs are explored more
fully in order to support effective matching during prospective adopters
assessment and by the panel.


Reduce the number of care leavers aged 19 to 21 not in education,
employment or training.


Strengthen the opportunities open to care leavers through the councils own
services to ensure that they receive appropriate consideration to enable them
to achieve better outcomes.


Strengthen assessments and plans to ensure that they fully reflect and
respond to all childrens and young peoples diverse needs.


Summary for children and young people
 Ofsted inspected Birmingham city council childrens services two years ago
and found that not all children were protected and they did not get the help
they needed soon enough. At this inspection, inspectors found that some
improvements have been made but many things have not improved quickly
enough.
 The council and its partners, such as the police and schools, need to improve
how quickly they talk to each other about children and their families. It is
important that they work better together, to ensure that families are not left
waiting to get the help they need.
 Until quite recently, some children have had too many changes in social
worker. The council is now trying to make sure that staff do not move around
as often and have smaller numbers of cases so that they have more time with
children and young people.
 The council is working hard to make sure that plans to protect children set out
who needs to do what and by when, but they are not always getting this
right.
 Inspectors found that services for children who have disabilities could be
better at making sure that those young people and their families are getting
the right help.
 The council has improved its services for children looked after and now most
children live in safe and secure foster homes. At times, the council is not
always finding the best places for children to live quickly enough, and this
means some young people have to move too many times before the best
place is found.
 Social workers regularly visit children looked after by Birmingham, but dont
always make sure that they write down what young people say to them.
When children do not see their families, they need to be able to talk to
someone who is not their social worker (such as an independent visitor) and
who can then speak on their behalf.
 Children do not always attend meetings to help decide what should happen in
their lives. Independent reviewing officers should help them to talk about this,
but they do not always talk to young people before these important meetings.
 The council has made some improvements to make sure that children are
adopted quickly if they need a new permanent family. They still need to work
to make sure that young people understand why they have come into care
and what has happened to them since.
 Young people leaving care are well supported by the staff who work with
them. However, too many young people who leave care are not in any sort of
education or do not have a job. Better work needs to be done to make sure
that plans for their future help them to get jobs or a better education.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Inadequate

Summary
The local authority is failing to ensure that all children are kept safe and protected.
Too many children have remained as children in need when they would have
benefited from the support of a child protection plan sooner.
The quality of practice and services for children are not of a good enough
standard. Thresholds between early help provision and statutory intervention
remain unclear and are inconsistently applied at all levels across the partnership.
Early help services are not supporting children sufficiently, and this results in too
many childrens cases being referred to statutory services when this is not
necessary.
Practice in the MASH is weak and too many decisions are being made by nonqualified staff. Management oversight is not of a consistently good enough
standard and the quality of information shared by partner agencies needs to
improve to inform planning and decision-making effectively.
The team working with children who have disabilities does not identify or manage
risks effectively in all cases, and children are not seen by social workers sufficiently
regularly.
Arrangements to identify, manage and intervene when children and young people
are at risk of child sexual exploitation are not consistently effective.
The recent establishment of assessment and short-term intervention teams and
safeguarding teams is positive. Practice in these teams is of better quality,
although improvements are not sufficiently widespread, robust or embedded.
Recent investment by leaders in more effective supervision is starting to make a
positive difference to the quality of social work supervision and case direction
provided by managers. Caseloads are manageable, and social workers are
spending more time with children. An increased use of direct work by social
workers with some children is starting to improve their outcomes.
Recent improvements are evident in the child protection case conference process
with the adoption of a well-regarded practice model, which is helping families
understand what they need to do to change.
Some children wait too long before their care is secured through legal processes,
and local authority plans to improve practice have not yet had an impact.


Significant progress has been made in addressing serious weaknesses in
identifying and reducing the numbers of children missing education, to ensure that
there is early identification, regular review and robust follow-up of children.

Inspection findings

Multi-agency thresholds for intervention are poorly understood by both social
care staff and partner agencies. This deficit, combined with poor management
oversight of practice in the MASH, results in some childrens needs being
inaccurately assessed and responded to. In turn this means that some
children are not adequately protected. (Recommendation)


During this inspection, too many children have been identified as being at risk
of immediate harm, and in a small number of instances urgent action has had
to be taken by the local authority to safeguard them. Too often there have
been missed opportunities to effect prompt change for children who have not
received the right level of services at the right time, resulting in drift and
delay.


Too many children are referred inappropriately to childrens social care,
because there is an absence of a coherent early help offer. There is a lack of
clarity from local authority staff and partners about the purpose and function
of early help, and it is often confused with targeted family support, which is
delivered successfully by childrens social care services. The development of
the early help brokerage service, now situated at the point of access to
services, has the potential to resolve disputes and to provide help and
guidance about thresholds and signposting to agency partners. However, poor
quality management oversight has not yet ensured that children are benefiting
from early help support.


More needs to be done to encourage and support partners in understanding
the positive impact that they could make to children by undertaking the role of
lead professional. The number of common assessment frameworks (CAFs)
completed has increased, although the majority are completed by local
authority staff. The quality of many CAFs undertaken by partners is not good
enough. Too many are incomplete, lack clear and detailed action plans, or do
not include childrens views. Central recording of CAFs from all agencies is in
the early stages, so the total number of plans completed is not clear to the
local authority or to partner agencies. (Recommendation)


There is now a single point of access for contacts and referrals. Unqualified
referral officers receive all contacts, as well as making all follow-up enquiries
and telephone calls to professionals. Professional oversight is poor and this
results in key information often being missed, as these staff are unclear about
what is expected of them. The number of contacts is increasing, but many do
not lead to a referral. Decisions are being made on the basis of incomplete


information and there is an over-reliance on unqualified workers to signpost
and process contacts. This results in missed opportunities to correctly identify
needs and ensure that there is the right response.

The day-to-day management oversight of cases in MASH is inconsistent, with
managers often changing decisions made by other managers. This in turn
leads to staff confusion and a lack of clarity about the application of
thresholds. The absence of an effective electronic performance management
information system, combined with incomplete enquiries, are significant
factors in a failure to identify risks and ensure that appropriate action is taken
to help and protect children. Added to this, the workforce in the MASH is overreliant on agency staff. As a result, the inevitably high turnover in social work
staff means that new protocols and policies are not consistently understood or
applied.


Consent by families, both for early help and statutory services, is always
sought and the discussions with professionals and families are recorded in
great detail. In some cases, the rationale to overrule consent is not recorded,
and this lack of management recording undermines the care and attention
that is being taken when families are first referred.


The number of domestic abuse referrals per month is high, at over 3,000, with
backlog, while gradually reducing, still means that children wait too long
before an assessment of need or risk is undertaken. Consequently, children
who have been involved in, or have witnessed, domestic incidents, may not be
adequately supported and protected soon enough. The use of various risk
assessment tools in the domestic abuse triage process between police and
childrens social care does not efficiently identify levels of risk to children.
However, when children need an immediate and urgent response, prompt
decision-making is effective. (Recommendation)


Multi-agency partners who are based in the MASH are not yet being used
effectively to gather information. Agencies are co-located but do not yet work
well together and more needs to be done to improve respect and
understanding for each others roles and their shared roles in the MASH. Only
a third of referrals are responded to in a timely way. Unnecessary multiagency discussions, in cases assessed as of medium risk, result in children and
families experiencing delays in the provision of services they need.


When children are assessed to be at risk of significant harm, strategy
meetings are generally timely, but not all children who require them have one.
Strategy meetings are not routinely attended by all key agencies including, in
some instances, the police. This means that decisions to initiate child
protection investigations are made without a full picture of the childs life
experience and family history. This deficit also relates to children whose cases
are already open to statutory services. Inspectors identified a small number of
enquiries that should have led to a child protection conference but did not. In


these cases, insufficient or no action was taken to reduce risks for those
children. Strategy meetings and child protection enquiries vary significantly in
the detail and quality of recording. Some seen lacked relevant information
from partners and it was difficult to understand why some decisions were
taken based on the information gathered. This compromises opportunities to
understand risks to children and young people. (Recommendation)

The service and response to children provided by the out-of-hours emergency
duty team is poor. The local authority does not quality-assure or oversee
decisions made by the emergency duty service and communication with
daytime services is too limited. As a result, senior managers cannot be
confident that the response to children who need help outside of normal
working hours is always timely, effective or safe. In a small number of cases,
young people did not receive a sufficiently timely service, including provision
of accommodation that was in line with statutory guidance.


Assessments of need for children often do not provide a full analysis of risk
and clear recommendations. The local authority has introduced new operating
principles, and social workers have received training in undertaking
assessments. However, most assessments still lack historical context, and this
deficit means that assessments are often based on a limited understanding of
the childs lived experience. Some assessments seen do not explicitly explore
the emotional impact on children of long-term neglect. Managers who
authorise completed assessments do not always challenge the quality of them
and this does not support required improvements to practice effectively.


There are continued serious shortfalls in assessments and planning for
children who have disabilities. Too many children receive an inconsistent
response when help and protection are needed. Children in need of this
service do not have their cases reviewed regularly enough: 481 children have
not had their plan reviewed within required timescales and some children have
not been visited by childrens services in over two years. Too many children
who have disabilities are dealt with by the early help service, where the
necessary expertise is not available. (Recommendation)


Social workers and managers are not yet using authoritative action when
situations have changed and new risks have emerged or known risks have
escalated for children subject to children in need plans. This means that there
are missed opportunities to intervene to safeguard children through child
protection proceedings or court care proceedings. A lack of understanding of
the complexity of using a relationship-based social work model with families is,
in some cases, leading to delays in responding to risks and an over-optimistic
view of childrens circumstances.


Some children have had to wait too long before appropriate action is taken to
secure their care through legal processes. The local authority is aware of the
current weaknesses in pre-proceedings work and has recently been seeking to
address this.



Increasingly, the public law outline is being used with good effect to ensure
that care is only used when this is in the best interests of children. This is
particularly evident in planning arrangements for young children and babies.
When letters are written to families to advise them of the intention to enter
pre-proceedings, the large majority of these clearly identify concerns and what
families need to do to reduce professionals concerns.


Consideration of childrens individual and diverse needs within assessments
and plans is not consistently of a good enough standard. Stronger
assessments recognise the impact and importance of identity to children and
young people, and are central to planning for them. Weaker assessments lack
detailed exploration and understanding of the impact of religion and culture in
families, and this does not help in identifying the right services for children.
(Recommendation)


Child in need plans and child protection plans do not demonstrate a focus on
outcomes based on actions and timescales to achieve change. Recent work
has been completed to improve the quality of plans, but this is not yet
demonstrating an impact. Many child protection plans are not updated
following core group meetings and have unrealistic expectations of parents
ability to change and to protect their children. Core-group activity is very
inconsistent in quality and timeliness, and this does not ensure that progress
to ensure that children and young people are protected is being monitored,
reviewed and measured. (Recommendation)


The establishment of the assessment and short-term intervention teams
(ASTI) and safeguarding teams is starting to demonstrate improvements in
practice. The frequency of management oversight and decision-making is
improving. There is a stronger grip on cases in this part of the service.
Caseloads are now manageable and children are now more able to build
trusting and positive relationships with social workers. Children are almost
always seen, and seen alone, in child protection enquiries and in assessments.
A strong focus on relationship-based and solution-focused practice means that
children and families are starting to understand professional concerns, and
parents are increasingly understanding of what needs to change. However,
disguised compliance is not always recognised and this means that too much
emphasis can be placed upon families ability to improve outcomes for
children, without evidence of sustainable change.


Support to families is further enhanced through work by family support
workers, who work with families delivering a range of direct work and
interventions alongside social workers. Feedback from families indicates that
this is a much-valued service that is making a positive and lasting difference
to children and families.


Child protection chairs are not challenging drift effectively in the progress of
plans through use of a formal escalation process. Informal challenges do not
always result in a swift management response. As a result, many children in


need of help and protection experience delays in achieving change, and are
stepped down to children in need plans inappropriately, or remain on
protection plans with no improvement to their outcomes.

The quality of child protection case conferences is starting to improve through
the use of a recognised and well-regarded model of practice: 91% of families
and professionals now report that they understand why they are in conference
and they understand what they need to do to change their family situation,
and this is positive performance. However, childrens views are not
consistently heard through the child protection planning and review process.
Children do not have sufficient advocacy support to attend child protection
meetings to enable them to contribute meaningfully to decisions.


At the time of the inspection, local authority performance data reports that
which is slightly below the 31% recorded in 201415, but still five points
higher than comparators. In cases seen, the majority of these children were
removed prematurely, before risk was reduced, with no positive change
sustained. The local authority has not yet successfully addressed delays in
securing lasting safety and stability for these children, with a high percentage
of children (21.7%) becoming subject to repeat child protection plans at the
time of the inspection.


Services for children missing from home or care are poor. Return home
interviews are only being completed for a minority of children who go missing,
with some young people not being offered an interview. Of those undertaken,
two thirds take over 72 hours to complete and they are not then consistently
copied across to childrens electronic case files. The information gathered from
children is not collated or used well to evaluate the reasons why they go
missing or to inform their care planning. As a result, children do not always
receive the help that they need, and there is no evidence that episodes of
going missing are reducing. (Recommendation)


Those children and young people identified as being at risk of child sexual
exploitation are referred to the multi-agency child sexual exploitation (MASE)
meeting. Inspectors identified delays of up to five months from a case
recommendation to escalate a childs case to MASE, and delays of up to six
months for childrens cases to be reviewed at MASE. As a result of this
inspection, all of these childrens cases have now been scheduled to be
considered at MASE. However, these significant delays mean that children at
risk have not received a multi-agency response to their needs and there have
been missed opportunities to gather critical intelligence about trends, patterns
and perpetrators. (Recommendation)


The experiences of children discussed at a MASE meeting provide a clear
source of intelligence. However, opportunities for maximising the benefit that
this meeting offers are missed. There is an absence of specific or timely
actions to improve planning for individual children. Thresholds to access


targeted child sexual exploitation services are not applied consistently, which
means that services are not always directed at those children who are most at
risk. As a consequence the targeted family support on offer is not yet reducing
risk effectively. The local authority is not adequately addressing the underlying
causes of children who are at risk of child sexual exploitation and, despite a
revision of child sexual exploitation procedures, practice is not improving.

Significant progress has been made in addressing serious weaknesses in
identifying and reducing the numbers of children missing education. Additional
capacity has enabled a thorough review of data systems, processes and
procedures, which has prompted a raft of changes to make sure that accurate
information is collected so that action can be taken. The system has been
cleansed and is now regularly updated and reviewed. The data-set is now
robust, with 109 young people at the time of the inspection currently missing.
All current referrals for children missing education are retained for 12 months
until the childs whereabouts are known, and only at that point are names
withdrawn from the data-set.


Schools representatives, including headteachers, confirm that they are
confident that the council has a much better grasp on safeguarding children in
schools as a result of significant improvements having been made. Elective
home education (EHE) data is now also secure, a significant improvement
realised since June 2016. Relatively high numbers (894) are closely monitored
and now carefully analysed to identify any trends, concerns and issues arising
from local areas, schools and communities. Schools are aware of their duties
and complete the appropriate referral forms for children they identify as being
at risk. Children they identify as being subject to a CAF, child protection and
children in need plans are now alerted to the authority through the referral
process. Managers and local schools are working closely with representative
EHE families to improve and increase provision for this cohort of children and,
more specifically, to raise awareness and concerns regarding safeguarding
issues.


Effective arrangements are in place when planning for high-risk adults who
are due to be released from prison through multi-agency public protection
arrangements (MAPPA) and the youth MAPPA. Cross boundary arrangements
are in place and these are well supported through regional procedures. MAPPA
monitors agency attendance, and social care are now contributing to and
attending all MAPPA. Prior to January 2016 this was not the case.


Despite a 34% increase in referral of high-risk victims to the multi-agency risk
assessment conference (MARAC) since 201415, a range of partners, such as
adult mental health and housing, still do not contribute routinely. This reduces
the effectiveness of MARAC. While there are a range of support services
focusing on groups such as mothers, children and male victims, there are no
perpetrator programmes available. This is a significant gap and further limits
the effectiveness of responses to reduce risk.



Homeless young people who are 16 and 17 years old receive a good quality
joint response from social care and housing services through the integrated
youth hub. Social work assessments lead to young people being offered
section 20 accommodation appropriately, with seven young people becoming
looked after during the last six months. The remaining 26 homeless young
people have all benefited from a range of accommodation providers and
appropriate child in need support plans.


The council is not identifying children who are privately fostered effectively.
When children are living with private foster carers, the local authority does not
discharge its statutory responsibilities. Children are not visited in line with
requirements, and assessments of potential private foster carers do not
always include an analysis of suitability of living arrangements for children.
Further, statutory checks relating to the carers household are often
incomplete. As a result, the local authority cannot be sure that privately
fostered children are being cared for safely. (Recommendation)


The local authoritys response to cases referred to it by the police through
Operation Limelight, identifying young people as potentially at risk from
female genital mutilation, was poor and failed to ensure that necessary multiagency checks and risk assessments had been completed. There was
insufficient planning by both the local authority and police to ensure that a
coordinated response to concerns and actions was taken, and this was not
compliant with Local Safeguarding Children Board procedures.
(Recommendation)


The management of allegations through the work of the designated officer is
improving and is now effective. The outcomes of investigations are based on a
full range of information, and decision-making is appropriate. Good work on
engaging with faith organisations is undertaken alongside a charity and is
supported by community safety partnership funding, this includes a helpful
guide document for all faiths. Further improvements are yet to be made in
establishing the role and responsibilities of the designated officer across
agencies and the implementation of an audit programme to drive up the
quality and effectiveness of practice.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
The local authority has improved services for children looked after since the last
inspection. This is the result of successfully delivering a substantial work
programme to review and improve practice. Key achievements include joint
working with the courts and the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support
Service (Cafcass) to ensure that children gain legal security swiftly through
reducing court timescales, as well as the review and development of services that
deliver good quality assessments and support for special guardians and connected
persons caring for children. However, the large majority of children still receive
services that require improvement.
Appropriate decisions are made for children to become looked after, although
some children are looked after in an emergency rather than as a planned move.
The education of children looked after is positive, with attendance, attainment and
progress being supported effectively by a well-led virtual school. An increasing
range of after-school activities are enabling children to become more selfconfident.
Risks for children who frequently go missing, and risks from gangs or sexual
exploitation, are considered and reduced through robust plans. Children looked
after do not always receive or are offered return home interviews after they have
been missing, so risks associated with these individual episodes are not known.
Some children and care leavers have experienced a delay in receiving mental
health services.
Most children live in stable placements. However, some children have experienced
numerous placement breakdowns due to a lack of robust matching processes. Care
planning is an area of weakness for the local authority. This means that some
children experience delay in receiving services to meet their needs and improve
their outcomes.
Children are engaged in decisions about their lives and social workers visit them
regularly. Adoption is considered for children who cannot return home and they
live with their new families more quickly than at the time of the last inspection.
Children, including those placed for adoption, are not consistently helped to
understand their care histories through direct work and life story work.
Care leavers enjoy positive relationships with their personal advisers, are aware of
their entitlements and high numbers stay in regular contact with the service. The
timeliness and quality of pathway plans, however, are inconsistent and too many
care leavers are not in education, employment or training.


Inspection findings

Appropriate decisions are made to accommodate children, and no children
who had been brought into care unnecessarily were identified during this
inspection. For some children, decisions to accommodate them are not based
on clear, effective and comprehensive risk-based assessments. This means
that they are taken into care in an emergency as risks escalate, rather than
having a planned move into accommodation.


Assessments and plans for children who have a plan to return home require
improvement to ensure that risks are fully considered and that the right
support arrangements are in place. When children and families require
additional support to make a return home successful, there is an effective
edge of care service that undertakes proactive work to support these moves.
This team also works positively with children and families at risk of family
breakdown, and at the point of a child becoming accommodated.
(Recommendation)


Applications to court are based on a detailed analysis of issues and childrens
needs, and contain appropriate recommendations. A small number of court
statements lack clarity about placement options. The district judge and
Cafcass report that they have seen an improvement in the quality and
timeliness of documents submitted to court, and improved decision-making
regarding thresholds for children in the past year. The timeliness of court
processes is improving. In 201516, the average was 37 weeks for care
applications, and from April to July 2016 this had reduced to 27 weeks.


Children regularly see their social workers and almost all see them alone. The
current provision of independent visitors is not sufficient to meet the needs of
children looked after. The local authority offers an appropriate issues-based
advocacy service for children, including those placed out of authority. An
information pack has not been developed to share with children when they
become looked after, so the local authority cannot have confidence that all
children know how to complain. When there is concern that a child looked
after is being bullied, professionals and foster carers work effectively to
reduce this risk.


Return home interviews are not routinely offered and completed with all
children looked after following each missing episode. This means that risks
associated with a particular missing episode, the reasons why children went
missing or where they were, is not always known. There have been delays in
appropriately identifying and responding to risk, particularly the risk of child
sexual exploitation, for a small number of children looked after. However, for
most children looked after, risks associated with offending, going missing or
being at risk of child sexual exploitation are being addressed. This includes
exploration of missing episodes for those children who regularly go missing,
use of strategy discussions and referral to MASE meetings to reduce risk. For


some children who have been at high risk of child sexual exploitation or gangrelated crime, placements have been sought outside the childs immediate
community to provide specialist care, resulting in a reduction of risk. Effective
specialist provision for children looked after who are at risk of child sexual
exploitation includes two full-time and one part-time nurse who provide
education and awareness-raising, and who can coordinate health information
to inform MASE meetings. (Recommendation)

Children cannot easily access timely support to improve their emotional wellbeing and mental health. There have been delays in access to the local
authoritys therapeutic and emotional support service (TESS) service to
prevent placement breakdown and in access to a service from Forward
Thinking Birmingham (FTB), which is the local child and adolescent mental
health service (CAMHS), to assess and meet mental health needs. The local
authority has been working, via TESS, to engage effectively with FTB, and
joint screening meetings will now be held to consider new referrals.


Educational outcomes for children who are looked after have improved
marginally since the last inspection. In 20142015 at key stage 1, children
performed better in reading than statistical neighbours and nationally, and
achieved in line with comparators in writing and mathematics. At key stage 2,
attainment in grammar, writing and reading improved, with children
performing better than the national average, while attainment in mathematics
declined. At key stage 4, of 130 pupils eligible to take exams, a small cohort of
which was better than the national average of 14%. However, gaps in
attainment at each key stage between children looked after and all children in
Birmingham remain too wide.


The number of children attending good or better schools has increased to
attention on increasing support, if it is assessed as necessary, for children in
schools judged to be less than good. Attendance has improved and is high in
both primary and secondary schools. The new welfare call system has been
introduced to regularly monitor and support the attendance of children
attending alternative provision and when living out of area. No child looked
after has been permanently excluded, and the virtual school works well with
schools to address potential fixed-term exclusions.


For those children who struggle to sustain a place in mainstream education, a
range of alternative provision is used. Currently, 35 children who are looked
after attend provision for up to and including 25 hours. The LACES team
closely monitors the attendance and progress of children at this provision. The
quality of placements is also regularly reviewed and all provision within the
city is subject to monitoring visits. Only two out of the city providers were
judged to be less than good and quality assurance visits have been scheduled
to take place this term.



The vast majority of personal education plans are now completed within
appropriate timescales and those sampled were generally of good quality. A
small number require improvement because target setting was too simplistic
and not appropriately linked to individual needs. Three well-attended reward
events have taken place this year for children to celebrate their achievements,
attendance and involvement in enrichment and extra-curricular activities.


Most children are enabled to have meaningful contact with their family. This
includes foster carers supporting some complex contact arrangements to
ensure that children are able to maintain their important family relationships.
There is limited evidence of social workers proactively considering childrens
social needs or friendships, or their ability to make friends. Many children
engage in a range of leisure activities, from girl guides to gymnastics and
regular swimming. A range of additional programmes, across the virtual school
and schools in Birmingham, have developed this year to encourage children
looked after to develop wider interests in learning, both during and after
school.


Some children who have complex needs and behavioural issues, including
children as young as seven years, have experienced multiple placement
breakdowns. This is due to weaknesses in matching processes and
insufficiently detailed placement request forms. For a small number of
children, the impact of these breakdowns continues to affect their well-being.
Most children, however, live in stable placements that have been well matched
by the local authority. Following good quality assessments, most children live
with their brothers and sisters when this is in their best interests. The local
authority has appropriately reviewed the placements of four children who are
living in childrens homes which have been judged to be inadequate.
(Recommendation)


The large majority of childrens care plans require improvement to ensure that
the childs full range of needs and risks are considered, and to ensure that
actions are sufficiently clear and time-bound to enable effective monitoring.
Adherence to and follow-through of care plans is an area of weakness, with
the lack of a sense of urgency leading to drift. This includes delay in accessing
appropriate services for children, and is particularly evident for children in
their junior and secondary years. (Recommendation)


Children benefit from regular review of their care plans, but only just under
half of children aged 4 to 18 years old attended their review in person in
reviewing officer (IRO) between reviews and prior to their next review
meeting. The IRO team is seeking to improve childrens attendance at review
meetings and to ensure that their participation in these important meetings
becomes more meaningful. Review meetings are appropriately challenging for
professionals when drift has become evident against the plan. However, there
is little evidence within childrens case records that IROs are challenging drift
effectively in progressing care plans between reviews. The IRO service has


undergone much development since the previous inspection, including
reducing caseloads to the current manageable average of 68 children per fulltime IRO.

When children are placed out of the local authority area, priority is given to
securing a suitable placement, with education services identified as soon as
possible. This includes appropriate use of both therapeutic and secure
accommodation to meet needs and reduce risks for some children. Health
colleagues do not currently sit on the external placements panel, which means
that childrens health needs are not always met at the time placements are
made. For the majority of children, the health team negotiates appropriate
health support effectively with the host area once the child is in placement,
including for emotional and mental health.


Support and care planning for the 94 unaccompanied asylum-seeking children
who are looked after by the local authority require improvement. At the time
of this inspection not all of these young people had fully completed care and
pathway plans. The local authority has placed more experienced staff in this
area, but it is too early to have had an impact on improving practice.


The majority of children who have disabilities and who are in care are making
tangible progress and are positively engaged with by their social workers.
Management oversight and direction is clear, and planning for permanency is
being taken forward for these children. When practice is less than good, this is
due to lack of appropriate engagement by social workers with the child and
family.


Timeliness to achieve permanence for children is variable, and for some
children is poor. For those children experiencing delays, this is due to lack of
swift action for access to appropriate services and assessments in identifying
appropriate permanent placement options. Practice from the start of 2016
shows that planning for permanence is becoming stronger. Children with an
early plan for permanence, particularly babies and younger children where
relevant parallel planning has been identified, are receiving proactive and
timely interventions by social workers against their plans. Many social workers
have received training from the local judge regarding best practice when
reaching decisions for children. Delays in proceedings are being kept to a
minimum through joint work between the courts, social workers and Cafcass.


The local authority took practical and decisive action to review and improve
the welfare of children living with special guardians and connected persons
following the death of a child in 2015. Detailed reviews of children who were
subject to proceedings for special guardianship orders, and those who had
been placed with special guardians over the preceding two years, was
undertaken. Appropriate follow-up action was taken when relevant to promote
individual childrens welfare. The local authority has added substantial
resources to develop the assessment and support service for SGOs and
connected persons to ensure that these placements are timely, safe and


supported for children. SGO and connected persons assessments are now of a
good quality. Furthermore, the local authority is in the process of identifying
and contacting all special guardians to explain its offer of support.

During 2015, the fostering team undertook a review of in-house foster care
provision, which resulted in a reduction of 116 placements, some of which had
never been used for children. There has been a significant improvement in the
recruitment of foster carers following this review, although further
improvement is still required to increase options for children. Current
recruitment is appropriately targeted to increase the availability of placements
for children who can be difficult to place, such as teenagers. The new
designated out-of-hours carers are supporting continuity for children
(including siblings placed together) who are placed in an emergency.
Previously, very short-term placements were being used.


Assessments for foster carers are thorough, include relevant checks and are
appropriately challenging if concerns are identified. The large majority of
foster carers spoken to by inspectors were very positive about the support
they receive from their supervising social workers, describing them as
amazing and second to none. Carers all have up-to-date, signed, delegated
authority to make appropriate decisions regarding their care of the children
placed with them, and they receive information about the children in a timely
way. Carers spoke positively about the potential for children to develop more
enduring and open relationships with their social workers now that the
workforce is more stable.


The local authority has commissioned an effective service to support children
aged 10 to 16 years who are moving from residential care to foster
placements. Children are central in planning for these moves and are
supported by inspirational mentors with a background of care themselves.
Therapeutic support is also provided to support these moves, with this
gradually decreasing over time according to the childs needs.


Life story work is not routinely undertaken with all children who are being
long-term fostered to ensure that they understand their identity, life and care
histories. Where this important work is undertaken, it requires improvement to
ensure that information is sufficiently child-focused and that it is likely to be of
help, both now and in the future. The large majority of children are enabled to
establish positive relationships with those who are caring for them through
being placed in stable placements with skilled carers. Current recording
systems would make it challenging for a child accessing their records in the
future to gain a clear oversight of their care histories or experiences.
(Recommendation)


The Children in Care Council (CiCC) is made up of a small but active group of
working effectively with the local authority to improve services for children
looked after. Key successes have been, implementation of the MOMO mobile


telephone application, enabling improved communication between children,
their social worker and IRO, and a full review of pocket money rates.

For some children, consideration of diversity is limited to noting the childs
identity and diversity, without then developing this into a detailed plan to
meet these needs. For most children, though, needs arising from ethnicity,
religion and identity are considered well, with appropriate plans in place to
meet these. This includes appropriate consideration during matching for
placements.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement

Steady progress over the last 15 months, under a new manager, has
improved the adoption service by increasing staffing, expanding family-finding
teams and establishing a post-adoption service. A clear improvement plan
identifies the areas requiring urgent attention, such as improving the
timeliness of, and monitoring the progress of, adoption plans. However, recent
improvements to the service, such as the permanence advice clinic, are not
yet sufficiently embedded to evidence the desired impact.


Adoption is considered for all children who cannot return home at the second
child looked after review. Nevertheless, the absence of the adoption
managers early involvement at legal and care planning meetings means that
the service is not alerted at a sufficiently early stage about children who may
need an adoptive family, and, as a result, adoption planning and family-finding
does not start as soon as it could.


Monthly tracking meetings are now in place to monitor the progress of
decisions about children ready for adoption through to care proceedings.
Despite recent involvement by the adoption manager, it is still too early to see
if there has been any impact in ensuring that plans are progressed without
delays and that placement options are continually monitored.


Timeliness, as measured by the national adoption scorecard, demonstrates
progress in closing gaps to target thresholds. Recent figures for 2016 relating
to the average time it takes from a child entering care and moving to their
adoptive placement show the gap reducing between 2012 and 2015 to 200
days. However, performance for the average time between a placement order
being granted and a match with an adoptive family, while reducing and now
at 263 days, still misses the government target of 121 days. Some good
examples of improved timeliness were identified, such as adoptive families
being identified for three children within 180 days.


The authority acknowledges the challenges of meeting nationally set adoption
timescales and understands why their performance is not yet meeting these.


In particular, delays relate to the time taken to identify suitable families to
meet the needs of harder to place children. Delays are mitigated by the
councils tenacity in identifying adoptive families for children with complex
health and disability needs. A good example is that of five brothers and
sisters, where it has taken 2,000 days to secure the right adoptive family.
More positively, these children benefited from living in stable and secure
foster homes while they waited.

Numbers of children placed for adoption have steadily increased, from 120 in
Currently there are 32 children with a placement order going through the
matching process, including seven brother and sister groups. A further 44
children have a decision for adoption but legal proceedings are not yet
concluded.


There have been two pre-order adoption disruptions in the last three years.
This indicates that, in most cases, matching ensures that children live in safe,
permanent homes. Matching practice is effective, considers the strengths of
adopters, their capacity to meet the needs of children with complex needs and
the level of support they will need. As a result, children and their adoptive
families receive the right support.


In the last 12 months, 34 plans for adoption have been changed and the
rationale for these includes courts not granting a placement order and the
authority reversing the decision. For some children, permanence has been
achieved through special guardianship arrangements or a successful return
home. Although it is positive that the children have had stability with their
foster carers, there have been delays of over two years for a small number of
children in making the decision to change the plan in order to achieve
permanence. In these cases, consideration of adoption with the existing foster
carers was not timely. In 201516 the authority actively reviewed all cases of
children waiting too long and have now secured permanence for the majority
through long-term foster care.


There are no formal arrangements for concurrent planning, but twin-track
planning for some children has been effective in reducing delays. The limited
progress in securing foster to adoption carers and continuing low numbers,
one in 201415 up to four in 20152016, means that there are missed
opportunities to secure permanence and avoid unnecessary delays for some
children. The authority acknowledge this challenge and is ensuring that this
option is explored with prospective adopters.


A range of options are pursued for family-finding, including activity days and
collaborations with local adoption agencies and access to national adoption
links. The authority has been successful in finding families for harder to place
children. For example, in 201516, 49 children from Black and minority
backgrounds, and 24 brother and sister groups of two, and two brother and
sister groups of three, were placed. While the district judge has commended


the quality of assessments of whether brothers and sisters should stay
together or be separated, the arrangements for contact between the children
is not always clearly identified. Establishing the accuracy of adoption data
about the number and progress of children who have disabilities and the
number of older children who have been adopted is problematic.

The adoption panel has appropriate processes in place to consider
recommendations for approval and matching. Suitably senior agency decisionmakers are now making timely decisions and plans are under way for more
regular meetings with the panel chairs. More effective quality assurance by
the panel informs areas for development, such as improving the quality of
child placement reports (CPRs) and as a consequence additional training was
provided to staff. CPRs now demonstrate improvement and provide
appropriate information about the childs journey, their experience and the
rationale for adoption. Childrens wishes are taken into account where
possible. One young person expressed their strong desire to no longer be
associated with being a child looked after and made this clear to the social
worker, as they wanted to be adopted by their long-term foster carer, and this
positive outcome was achieved.


The adoption panel could better explore childrens identity, especially when a
child of mixed parentage is considered for placement with white adopters, or
adopters of a culturally mixed background. It is not consistently clear how
adopters will address identity issues as children grow up and become more
culturally and racially aware. While social workers say that they do scrutinise
prospective adopters attitudes to diversity, the prospective adopters reports
also show the same limitations in this important area. (Recommendation)


Life story work is not consistently completed at the right time. For example,
the life story work for six children was incomplete, and one child has been
waiting since 2015 for this important work. While one adopter praised the
timeliness and positive impact of life story work and the book for their child,
another said that they have been waiting for this to commence. The quality of
life story work and life story books is variable. Some life story books are
excellent, focusing on the childs journey, capturing their history and ongoing
experiences in a helpful, sensitive manner. Others are less child-friendly, with
too much use of jargon and lacking personal information to help young people
make sense of their history.


Children are prepared well for the transition from foster care to their adoptive
family. Effective support plans identify direct work to support children. For
example, pictorial imagery is used effectively to help children to recognise and
identify the people in their lives.


No delay was found from the point of enquiry to the prospective adopter initial
visit, but the quality of the initial visit assessments was variable. Unclear
recording limits the understanding of the information provided by the
prospective adopter. One adopter described the adopter preparation,


assessment and training as excellent and exacting and that it provided
confirmation of whether adoption was the right choice for them. Adopters
were clear that the training prepared them well for the challenges associated
with adoption. In 201415, 45 adopters were approved. This increased in
authority has 16 approved Muslim adopters, with seven currently awaiting
placement.

The post-adoption support team helps adopters and children before and after
adoption, including access to the teams clinical psychologist. Appropriate
individual and group support is available through a commissioned adoption
agency. The offer of therapeutic parenting training assists adopters with their
new roles and attachments with children. A good example is the positive
impact on an adoptive child of six years, after difficulties in engagement at
school emerged. The support plan included one-to-one support in school and
counselling for both the child and the adopters and access to a clinical
psychologist via the adoption support fund. The adopter reported that the
support had helped her child to, begin to make sense of his situation and
environment.


An increasing number of adoptive families received effective support, including
support from Adoption Support UK, 47 families are accessing the adoption
support fund, counselling is offered to birth families and adopted adults
received birth records counselling and access to records. Letterbox contact is
available with 1,193 such arrangements.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement

Considerable work has taken place since the last inspection to improve
practice. Young people say that they feel well supported by their aftercare
advisers and show confidence in seeking advice and support when they need
to. Personal safety and keeping safe are key themes which are regularly
discussed with care leavers, and when interventions are required they are duly
recorded. Risks are carefully assessed, and particularly so when moving
towards independence and in the allocation of housing. When necessary,
management oversight is timely and decisive.


Training has been implemented to strengthen relationship-focused work and
some good examples were seen where this is beginning to have a positive
impact on young peoples lives. The local authority is in touch with 97% of
care leavers, which is better than the England average of 88% in 201516. Of
service. Aftercare advisers are experienced and use their skills and


relationships effectively to support them and keep them engaged. Caseloads
are becoming more manageable, and the local authority has identified a need
for a newly established team to lead and support work with unaccompanied
asylum seekers and care leavers who have special educational needs and/or
disabilities to increase the capacity and strength of the service.

The quality and timeliness of pathway plans are not consistently good. There
is still much work to do to ensure greater consistency of practice across all the
care leaving teams. In some instances, plans were not completed to
timescales and action planning was cursory. New electronic pathway plans
have been recently introduced, with a much stronger focus on the voice of
young people. Oversight and quality monitoring are more rigorous, which
ensures that in the majority of cases plans are thorough and the views and
wishes of care leavers are well documented. As a result, planning in the best
examples was well-defined with a stronger focus on outcomes. However,
some care leavers have expressed concerns that the new style of plan is
overly personal rather than focusing on more practical issues. Some advisers
also expressed concerns that the plans were taking longer and this was
causing some delays in completion.


Joint transition planning between the 16 to 18 social work teams and the 18+
service is inconsistent and for some young people happens at too late a stage.
Planning for transition began for some individuals in their mid-17th year,
giving them little time to explore concerns about, for example, readiness for
independence and accommodation options. Transition planning for children
looked after who have special educational needs and/or disabilities is more
effective and well targeted in ensuring that appropriate housing solutions and
specialist services are commissioned in a timely way.


Overall, there is good attention to medical and health issues for care leavers.
They know how to access the right services when they need them and there is
support to arrange local registration with a doctor, dentist and optician.
Specialist health services are available in a variety of locations around the city,
including sexual health and drug and alcohol services. When living out of the
area, aftercare advisers help care leavers to locate and access relevant
services when necessary. Designated nurses provide support to those care
leavers who have special educational needs and/or disabilities in completing
new forms for disability and personal independence payments.


A bespoke service for children and young people who are looked after, the
therapeutic emotional support service, receives many referrals and is
providing a reliable and immediate service for those care leavers needing
emotional support and guidance. However, waiting times for the newly
configured child and adult mental health service, Forward Thinking
Birmingham, are at times excessive because children looked after and care
leavers do not currently receive prioritised treatment. It was unclear from case
records whether care leavers had received information about their health
histories prior to leaving care. Aftercare advisers were equally unsure. A


review is to be implemented to improve this practice and ensure that
information has been appropriately passed on to each care leaver.
support to access information about, for example, legal rights, benefits and
financial help they can receive. Good examples were seen of aftercare
advisers helping care leavers to apply for duplicate birth certificates and
passports. In job centres across the city, welfare rights champions work
closely with the 18+ service, and help care leavers to navigate the benefits
system and seek employment.
and there has been a gradual reduction in the not in education, employment
or training (NEET) cohort to 13% (53 of 406). The virtual school headteacher
has developed a number of strong partnerships across higher and further
education, training and business sectors to increase the range of opportunities
to prepare care leavers for more positive pathways. The corporate parenting
boards mentoring programme, for children looked after and care leavers in
the city and out of area, is a positive development. Over 200 mentors have
been recruited and offer a range of one-to-one learning support as well as
help with job search, interviewing techniques and writing curricula vitae.
employment or training, and of this group 15% (101) are in higher education.
Of real concern, however, is the stubbornly high percentage of young people
who are NEET. At 46%, higher than the national average of 40%, this has not
reduced significantly since the last inspection. Progress has been too slow.
Significant barriers continue to block progress, particularly for those in care
who have not fared well in English and mathematics while at school. For
example, a care leaver who had successfully completed an entry-level
childcare programme at college could not move on to the level 1 course
because she did not have functional skills qualifications. (Recommendation)
employment partners to improve opportunities for care leavers. Although it is
too early to see significant impact, new pathways are beginning to emerge
across the city, including joint funding with another local authority of 50
million for a youth employment initiative targeting vulnerable young people,
including care leavers. An effective partnership has developed between the
virtual school and the 18+ service with the University Hospitals Trust to open
up opportunities for care leavers in work experience and training in the public
health sector, and 11 care leavers have also recently started a preapprenticeship programme with a construction company, and full
apprenticeships will be offered to those who complete the programme
successfully. To date, however, very few opportunities have been offered by
the council that prioritise care leavers for placements, and this is a significant
gap. (Recommendation)


improved attention to ensuring more gradual transition from care to
adulthood. Take-up has more than doubled, from 35 in 2014, with currently
birthday. A higher proportion of young people are choosing to stay in care
until their 18th birthday, at 73% against 68% nationally.
available and appropriate for care leavers. The care leavers accommodation
and support framework provides a helpful pathway in identifying the range of
options available to them. All provision must meet the Birmingham standard,
a commissioning validation tool, to ensure that quality standards are met.
Approximately 94% of care leavers were in suitable supported and
independent accommodation on 31 August 2016, which has improved over the
year. Placement stability was good. Multi-occupancy accommodation was used
only when it had been assessed as suitable for the young person. Risk and
protective factors regarding a young persons safety and well-being are
prioritised in the placement process, whether they are being housed in
Birmingham or out of area. A number of examples were seen where care
leavers had been appropriately rehoused out of Birmingham for their safety
and protection.
support is targeted well through the councils provision of appropriate housing
and commissioning of specialist services. The small cohort (13) of care leavers
in custody receive regular visits by their aftercare advisers and preparation for
leaving is prioritised. In some instances, this work had been undermined by
inaccurate or short-notice information about actual release dates from the
custodial placement, leaving very little notice for the 18+ service to make sure
that the right accommodation in the right location was available.
assessing the suitability and quality of accommodation, as well as testing the
support arrangements offered by a range of council and private housing
providers. Bespoke packages of support towards independence are in place
and floating tenancy arrangements are made for those new to tenancies or
who might need extra help in becoming independent. Emergency
accommodation is sufficient and well-regulated to meet requirements should
placements break down or if needs are unmet. The Youth Hub, a nationally
recognised service established by St Basils voluntary organisation, is an
important and well-used facility to address emergency placements as well as
the housing and homelessness needs of young people living and arriving in
the city. A key partner with the council, it also provides staff training and
accredited life skills programmes supporting care leavers in their move
towards independent living.
Academic achievement and participation in training and activities to develop


their confidence and skills were celebrated. The newly established care
leavers forum has begun to engage in broad policy discussions with senior
officers and the corporate parenting board on a range of issues. Building on
the success of the active CiCC, numbers attending are low and work to extend
its representation is identified by the service as an important priority for the
group.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
The local authority has a history of providing poor services to children and their
families. Some services continue to have serious and widespread failings that have
not been tackled effectively. Against this background, strategic leaders have an
increasingly effective focus on improvement and have invested in services to
support this. This has been helped by stronger and more joined-up leadership at a
council-wide level from both political and strategic leaders. Because of this, some
important steps forward have been taken within the last year, including a sharper
focus on frontline practice. A well-considered approach to workforce development
has been successful in ensuring that there is a sufficient and relatively stable
workforce. Services for children looked after, care leavers and those who could
benefit from adoption, which were graded inadequate by Ofsteds last inspection,
have improved. Some improvements are very new or yet to have a full impact in
ensuring better outcomes, and significant barriers to further improvement remain.
Despite this, those improvements that have been achieved, and an increase in the
pace of improvement, provide a foundation for further progress.
Frontline management oversight and decision-making, particularly of unqualified
staff within the MASH, is not consistently effective in ensuring that risk is
identified, or that interventions are matched to the levels of childrens needs and
risks.
Strategic planning to address child sexual exploitation is weak, with planning for
improvement at an early stage. There is a lack of focus on understanding the
impact of services in reducing risk, including understanding the links between
children missing and continuing risk.
Service development for children in need of help and protection is not sufficiently
informed by analysis of intelligence and performance information or by a strong
enough focus on understanding the impact that services are having on reducing
risk.
Performance management, strategic improvement planning and quality assurance
processes are not consistently used to identify and improve performance and lack
a focus on impact. The local authority has an unclear and sometimes overoptimistic picture of the progress it is making. Multi-agency working at both
strategic and operational levels is not consistently effective. It is not well joinedup, lacking clarity and coherence. This has limited the pace and extent of progress,
particularly when services are provided in partnership with other agencies. While
most local authority-led early help work is at least adequate, and some is good,
the majority of that led by partner agencies is very poor. Although yet to have a
significant impact on improving frontline services to children, the establishment of
the childrens strategic leaders forum and the early help and safeguarding


partnership have been important in beginning the process of creating a shared
strategic approach.
Inspection findings
widespread failings that have not been tackled effectively. These are primarily
for children and young people in need of help and protection but the failings
have an impact across all services. Against this background, strategic leaders
have an increasingly effective focus on improvement and have invested in
services to support this. The appointment of the Executive Director of
Childrens Services (EDCS) has led to a sharper focus on frontline services.
This has been supported by stronger and more joined-up leadership at a
council-wide level from both political and strategic leaders. Because of this,
some important steps forward have been taken within the last year. Services
for children looked after, care leavers and those who could benefit from
adoption, which were graded inadequate by Ofsteds last inspection, are now
improved. Some of these improvements are very new or yet to have had an
impact, and significant barriers to further improvement remain. Such barriers
include an electronic case recording system that does not best support good
social work practice and partnership working that is frequently poor. Despite
this, those improvements that have been achieved and an increase in the pace
of improvement provide a foundation for further progress.
advice officers consistently enough or well enough to ensure that they make
the right judgements, nor are their own decisions consistently right when
evaluating risk. This means that children do not always receive the right
services, or receive them quickly enough, and in some cases children have
been left at continuing risk of significant harm. This lack of effective
management oversight has also meant that many children who have
disabilities, and who are in need of help and protection, have not been seen
regularly, nor have they had plans to support their welfare reviewed. Although
this service has recently been brought under childrens safeguarding line
management, much work remains to be done to ensure that it is fit for
purpose. (Recommendation)
Strategic planning to tackle child sexual exploitation is not good. It lacks
sufficient connection to work to protect children and young people who may
be at risk as a result of going missing, and lacks a strong enough focus on
understanding the impact of services in reducing risk. Work to reduce risk is
not sufficiently advanced, and neither it nor wider service development is
informed by sufficient analysis of intelligence and performance information.
For example, delays in holding MASE meetings have only recently been
reduced to approximately four weeks, and the practice of providing much
quicker emergency slots to discuss the cases of children whose situations are


urgent was only introduced four weeks before the start of the inspection.
(Recommendation)
those missing from home. Return home interviews (RHIs) are only being
completed for a minority of children who go missing. Of these, two thirds take
over 72 hours to complete and they are not then consistently copied into
childrens electronic case files. Childrens plans are not routinely informed by
RHIs, nor are themes from RHIs used to inform service planning. This work is
not well aligned with work to counter child sexual exploitation. Planning for
improvement is at an early stage.
significant deficits in some important areas of practice, such as child sexual
exploitation, protecting children who go missing and those who live in homes
where there is domestic abuse. The effective use of such systems to
understand and improve performance is also hampered by ongoing challenges
with data quality. More broadly, the electronic case recording system does not
best support high quality work with children and families. Performance
management and quality assurance systems are not closely enough aligned
and there is insufficient emphasis on the quality and impact of practice. With
the exception of an audit of assessments carried out by the three principal
social workers (PSWs), thematic audits are not being used to identify or help
improve poor practice. Although the use of practice evaluation forms has
become progressively more embedded during 2016, findings have not been
well used to identify or tackle areas of poor practice, such as inconsistent
threshold decision-making in the MASH. Feedback from children and their
families is increasingly being gathered, which is a positive improvement, but
this is at a relatively early stage and is not used alongside performance and
audit information to help understand the impact of practice.
(Recommendation)
systems have undergone significant development during 2016. The structure
of performance meetings, from the senior management quartet at a strategic
level, through city- and area-level meetings, provides a sound framework for
considering performance. It provides senior managers with a line of sight to
the frontline and gives frontline and middle managers a framework to
understand and improve some areas of performance. The performance
evaluation service and PSWs are increasingly well integrated into this
structure. This is beginning to have an impact in some areas of practice.
Improvements have been achieved in the timeliness of assessments and initial
child protection case conferences. This means that children are more likely to
have their needs assessed and to receive appropriate and timely services.
right things, but has paid too much attention to simply checking whether
agreed actions have happened and too little to whether those actions


achieved improvements in practice and in childrens outcomes. This has
sometimes led to an over-optimistic assessment of progress, and means that
the local authority cannot always be clear that desired improvements in the
quality of practice and in outcomes for children have been achieved. For
example, if overview and scrutiny reports on progress in tackling child sexual
exploitation or monitoring of the implementation of the MASH had a stronger
focus on quality and impact, deficits in practice which were identified by
inspectors may have been picked up earlier. Although further work is required
to shape a functional framework for early help services, the current
arrangement of the Childrens advice and support service, ASTI, safeguarding,
children looked after and leaving care teams provides a coherent framework
for the delivery of statutory services.
well joined-up, lacking clarity and coherence. Birminghams joint strategic
needs analysis contains a number of gaps in important information, for
example about children living in homes where domestic abuse or parental
mental ill-health are a feature. A July 2016 partial update still contains gaps
and is too recent to have had an impact on improving services. This
incomplete package of information, not linked to any shared multi-agency set
of priorities, clear commissioning or monitoring plan, makes it more difficult
for agencies to work together effectively to improve outcomes for children, to
hold each other to account for delivery or to understand what difference they
are making. Despite these gaps, the local authority has provided leadership to
partner agencies, by driving the establishment of the childrens strategic
leaders forum and the early help and safeguarding partnership. Although yet
to have a significant impact on improving frontline services, these groups have
been important in beginning the process of creating a shared strategic
approach, for example through the recent adoption by agencies of the early
help outcomes framework. (Recommendation)
work. Of over 4,500 children and young people receiving early help services at
the time of the inspection, 2,882 were being supported by the local authoritys
own family support services and 752 by the youth offending service,
compared to only 1,046 being supported through CAFs with partner agencies
taking the role of lead professional. While most local authority-led early help
work is at least adequate and some is good, the overwhelming majority of
examples seen by inspectors where work was led by partner agencies is very
poor. Weak tracking and evaluation systems, and no current electronic CAF
recording system, make it difficult to drive improvement through performance
management. The duplication of CAFs alongside child in need or child
protection plans for some children is particularly confusing. (Recommendation)
advance in establishing an effective approach to commissioning. However, the
quality of commissioning remains inconsistent and there is much more work to
do to embed the centres approach. While early years services have been


mapped against need and recommissioned, a similar process for early help
and targeted services is yet to be completed. Contract management does not
always ensure that commissioned services consistently deliver against contract
specifications and childrens needs, as seen with the poor completion rate and
timeliness of RHIs. In an improving, but still inconsistent, commissioning
landscape, there are a number of examples of good practice. These include:
an improved approach to recruiting agency staff via a master-provider
contract and agreed regional price-cap, leading to better value for money and
an improved ability to transfer capable agency staff to permanent contracts;
an improved 0 to 25 CAMHS service, including reduced waiting times and a
rapid response team helping to avoid hospitalisation; and a recently
established young people-specific sexual health service for which young
people were involved in the specification and tender processes.
and refine its work plan. Clear governance arrangements now oversee the
board and its work effectively. Although the board has achieved some
improvements, it is still at an early stage of considering the full range of issues
for children looked after. For example, the board has not considered the IRO
annual report and, although it secured a number of refurbished laptops for
children looked after, did not know how many children looked after had access
to a computer or laptop at the time of the inspection. It has, however,
established itself as a key driver in improving services for children looked after
and has ensured that nearly all councillors have had training about their
corporate parenting responsibilities.
planned activity in a recently published sufficiency strategy. Although the
strategy lacks specificity about current or projected numbers of children
looked after, it is a well-considered document that provides a structure and
evidence base for planning to meet need. Good use is made of results-based
contracting and a mixed economy of providers and partner agencies.
establishing a sufficient and increasingly stable workforce. The percentage of
permanent, as against agency, staff has improved and both vacancy rates and
staff turnover have reduced. Focused advertising, golden hellos, retention
payments and no-penalty conversion of agency staff have been elements of
this approach. Additional investment has supported improved staffing levels,
and this has helped to ensure that staff have manageable caseloads. Children
are now more likely to be able to build a relationship with a social worker who
does not change and has the time to visit regularly. The support and
progression package for social workers in their assessed and supported first
year in employment is strong, and social workers generally speak positively of
the support and development opportunities they receive. Almost all social
workers receive regular supervision and this is continuing to improve. Between
monthly. The impact of systemic supervision training received by team


managers can be seen in improved reflection and learning in more recent
supervision records.
Workers are asked to complete an electronic evaluation form between five and
practice, and has a completion rate of only 26%. The training offer has
recently been matched against the core competencies expected of staff, as
outlined in a practice framework, but has not been matched against areas of
poor practice identified through audit or performance management. This
means that the volume and focus of training is not well aligned with areas of
performance most in need of improvement.
The CSW meets regularly with the chief executive, DCS and EDCS, and the
PSWs are well integrated into area management structures. This approach is
beginning to have a positive impact. An audit of single assessments, carried
out earlier in the year, led to a revision of the assessment template and this
has supported recent improvements in practice. However, their role is at a
relatively early stage, with much still to do, such as the roll-out to all staff of
evidence-based tools, the creation of a stronger link between the PSWs
oversight of practice and the learning and development offer and further
work to improve planning.
there are some examples of good practice and well-targeted work reducing
risk for young people. This is true at an individual level, where the Prevent
duty is well joined-up with mainstream safeguarding work, and at a strategic
level, where the local counter-terrorism profile drives awareness training in
schools and other settings, as well as targeted interventions with vulnerable
communities and groups.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions under its
power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of the Education and
Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 13 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Peter McEntee
Deputy lead inspector: Dominic Stevens
Team inspectors: Jenny Turnross, Tracey Metcalfe, Jansy Kelly, Janet Fraser, Alison
Smale, Tara Geere, Stella Butler, Lolly Rascagneres, Christy Wannop, Fiona Millns
Shadow inspectors: John Roughton
Senior data analysts: Stewart Hartshorne, Judith Swindell
Quality assurance manager: Lynn Radley


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


