London Borough of Bromley
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 April 2016 to 5 May 2016
Report published: 27 June 2016

Childrens services in Bromley are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Inadequate


Inadequate


Inadequate


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
There are widespread and serious failures in the services provided to children and
families in Bromley. Senior leaders and managers do not have a comprehensive
understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of the services that they provide for
vulnerable children and young people. Since the Ofsted inspections of 2010 and
children looked after, care leavers and children requiring adoption.
This is a corporate failure by the local authority that leaves too many children in
neglectful and abusive situations for too long. Weak practice includes the poor
identification and reduction of risk, a lack of understanding and application of
thresholds, and cases stepped down too soon from child protection to child in need
on insufficient evidence that progress is being made or sustained. Some children wait
too long before becoming looked after and there is a lack of urgency in progressing
permanency plans.
Senior managers do not have sufficient understanding of the issues to take
appropriate action to improve performance and practice. Oversight of cases is weak,
ineffective and not systematic. Performance management information is used
insufficiently to improve practice. Quality assurance arrangements are inadequate
and case auditing does not demonstrate rigour to review the quality of work.
Independent reviewing officers (IROs) and conference chairs do not provide
sufficient challenge to frontline social workers or their managers. Neither are they
sufficiently robust in escalating concerns.
The response to children missing or at risk of child sexual exploitation is inconsistent
and uncoordinated. The local authority lacks understanding about the prevalence or
level of risks for individual children and young people, and their collective profile.
There is evidence of better practice in early help services through the Bromley
childrens project, where the work of family support is well embedded. Assessments
for early help intervention are timely and lead to a range of appropriate services. The
borough commissions an extensive range of effective early help and statutory
services for children and families.
An appropriate range of colocated professionals work effectively together in the
multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH). Roles and responsibilities are well
understood, and referrals to childrens social care are dealt with promptly.
Those children and young people who need to be looked after wait too long before
coming into care. Some children experience significant delays in decision making
before plans for permanence are progressed. Comprehensive weaknesses in the
quality of legal advice mean that local authority lawyers are not sufficiently
experienced to advocate for children in complex care proceedings. Cases are not
prepared thoroughly enough for court, and social work evidence is too often not


strong enough to support the local authoritys plan.
There is a lack of urgency in progressing permanency plans. Not all children are
considered for adoption when they are unable to return to their birth parents, and
many are not considered soon enough. This means that too few children are adopted
and, for those that are, the process takes longer than is necessary.
Good arrangements are in place to maintain and improve the health of children and
young people looked after. The designated nurse, located within the looked after
social work team, helps to ensure a coordinated approach to childrens and young
peoples health. There is good support for their emotional health and well-being
through dedicated looked after children and adolescent mental health services
(CAMHS) provision.
The majority of children looked after are placed within good-quality foster
placements and receive a good level of support from their carers. Most children
looked after go to a good or better school, and personal education plans are
generally of a high quality as a result of effective work undertaken by the virtual
school. The virtual school team knows the circumstances of individual children well.
It routinely monitors their progress, including the progress of those children and
young people causing concern and that of those who are living outside of the
borough.
The local authority recognises that it does not have sufficient foster placements for
older children, and for children and young people from an ethnic minority
background. Proposals to change allowances for foster carers are having a negative
effect on the local authoritys ability to retain foster carers.
The current Living in Care Council (LinCC) is representative of the diverse needs and
circumstances of children looked after. It is well supported by dedicated participation
and engagement workers to express their views, and to influence service quality and
development.
There is an insufficient range of safe and suitable housing available for care leavers.
The local authority routinely places a significant number of care leavers in bed and
breakfast accommodation, which is not appropriate. As such, arrangements are not
risk assessed and managers cannot assure themselves of the safety of young people.
Local authority staff do not effectively engage with more challenging young people
who are reluctant to take up offers of help.
For those children and young people with disabilities, a clear referral pathway
ensures effective joint working with safeguarding, and referral and assessment
teams, when there is a concern.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates no childrens homes.
 The last inspection of Bromleys arrangements for the protection of children was
in July 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The last inspection of Bromleys services for children looked after was in April
Local leadership
 The interim director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since October
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since April 2015.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 71,500 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Bromley. This is 24% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 15.5% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 11.4% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 8.4% (the national average is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 15.9% of all
children living in the area, compared with 14% in the country as a whole.
 The main minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Black/African/Caribbean/Black British and Asian/Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 13.2% (the national average is 19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 8.5% (the national average is 15%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data, where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 1 March 2016, 1,785 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from 2,258 at
 At 1 March 2016, 229 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 220 at 31 March 2015.
 At 1 March 2016, nine children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from six at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, one serious incident notification has been submitted to
Ofsted and one serious case review has been completed or is ongoing at the time
of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 1 March 2016, the local authority was looking after 281 children (a rate of 39.8
per 10,000), an increase from 265 (37 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2015.
authority area
 eight live in residential special schools,3 all of whom live outside the local
authority area
area
 three live with parents, one of whom lives outside the local authority area
 Since 1 April 2015:
returned to be looked after
to independent living
 four children and young people ceased to be looked after, and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.
 The local authority uses signs of safety as its social work model for child
intervention work.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or fewer per year.


Recommendations

Ensure that the director of childrens services has the authority and capacity
to respond to deficits in childrens and young peoples services, and to drive
forward change and improvement.


Review and improve all quality assurance arrangements to ensure that senior
managers and elected members understand performance, in order that they
may robustly improve the quality of social work practice.


Improve management oversight of frontline practice to ensure that decision
making, assessment and planning for children and young people is both
timely and focused to meet their needs. This is to include the work and
involvement of conference chairs and independent reviewing officers.


Review workforce capacity in order to reduce social work caseloads in the
referral and assessment, and safeguarding teams, to enable staff to carry
out good-quality direct work with children.


Ensure that thresholds are understood and consistently applied in response
to risk, so that appropriate actions are taken when risks or concerns escalate
or diminish.


Ensure child protection, child in need, children looked after and pathway
plans are informed by assessment, focused on the needs of individual
children and young people, and specific about the outcome to be achieved
and the timescale for change. Contingencies should be explicit.


Improve the arrangements to reduce the risk to children of sexual
exploitation and episodes of missing from home and care, by:


ensuring that risks to sexually exploited children and young people, and
those who go missing, are routinely assessed and understood by strategic
managers who take timely action to address concerns



developing suitable arrangements to share and analyse information from
child sexual exploitation risk assessments and return interviews to reduce
future risks for individual children and young people, and to inform
partnership prevention and disruption activity.


Review the cases under the public law outline and in care proceedings to
ensure that robust plans are in place and that cases are progressing at a
pace that matches childrens needs.


Improve the quality of legal advice to social workers and their managers to
enable confident and effective presentation of care plans in court, to achieve
the right outcomes for children and young people.



Ensure priority is given to considering achieving permanency, including
adoption, at the earliest possible point for children, and that there are
effective systems to track and monitor the progress of this work.


Improve the sufficiency and choice of placements within the borough to
meet current needs, to strengthen placement planning arrangements and to
ensure increased support to foster carers.


Ensure that robust assessments are undertaken when considering alternative
permanency options for children with connected persons.


Ensure that children and young people who are placed out of the borough
are sufficiently supported by their social worker and have access to services
to meet their needs where they are living.


Ensure through direct work with children that they have the opportunity at
their own pace to explore their history, identity and reason for becoming
looked after, and that their voice is heard in plans which affect them.


Ensure that children looked after in Year 12 are effectively supported and
encouraged to remain in education.


Increase the range of suitable accommodation available for homeless 16and 17-year-olds and care leavers, so that they are safe and feel safe where
they live.


Integrate childrens commissioning arrangements corporately, to ensure that
safeguarding children and young people is understood and prioritised.


Evaluate services that support children and families living with domestic
violence, drug and alcohol misuse and parental mental ill health to ensure
that these are making a difference and improving circumstances for children
and young people.


Summary for children and young people
 Senior managers and leaders in Bromley do not have a good understanding of
what works well to protect vulnerable children and young people. Since Ofsted
last inspected Bromley, services have got worse for children and young people.
 The local authority has not given enough help to children in care and those who
need to be adopted. Social workers are too slow at finding permanent places for
children and young people to live.
 Senior managers do not ensure that staff receive appropriate support and
guidance. This is important to ensure that staff make the right decisions about
childrens and young peoples lives.
 Children and their families receive the help that they need quickly when they first
approach Bromley for support. A good example of this is the Bromley childrens
project.
 Managers in Bromley do not get good enough legal support in court. Because of
this, childcare cases are not well prepared and do not always support plans for
childrens and young peoples futures.
 Children who are looked after by the local authority live healthy lifestyles and do
well in their education. Staff work closely with health and educational
professionals to help children and young people to do well with their studies and
to stay healthy.
 Children looked after receive good-quality care while living with foster carers.
Leaders and managers understand that they need to recruit more foster carers
and they will need to work hard to keep the current number of carers who foster
children and young people for Bromley.
 The Living in Care Council (LinCC) meets often with senior managers and leaders,
who listen to and take its views and opinions seriously. This helps to shape
childrens services, taking into account the things that children and young people
would like to see happen.
 There is a lack of safe and suitable housing available for care leavers. The local
authority regularly places these young people in bed and breakfast
accommodation, and this is not appropriate.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Inadequate

Summary
Services for children in need of help and protection are inadequate. Serious and
widespread weaknesses in the identification and management of risk to children
and young people mean that the local authority is failing to ensure that the most
vulnerable children in need of help and protection are safeguarded. Such failings
are characterised by weak managerial oversight, and the absence of authoritative
and timely casework interventions. This contributes to drift and delay in too many
cases. Thresholds are neither consistently applied nor understood, and cases are
stepped down too soon from child protection to child in need on insufficient
evidence of progress being made or sustained.
Senior managers do not have sufficient understanding of the issues to take
appropriate action to improve performance and practice. Other managers neither
set clear actions and timescales for social workers, nor provide sufficient review
and challenge. This means that plans are not progressed as quickly as they should
be, and children and young people are left in neglectful and abusive situations for
too long. Child protection chairs do not provide sufficient challenge and scrutiny to
ensure that plans are effective in keeping children safe.
Of the cases considered by inspectors, none was compliant with statutory
guidance. Strategy discussions are not held soon enough and, in the majority of
child protection and child in need plans, the presenting risks do not fully inform the
plan, and actions are not specific enough and lack clarity about the outcome to be
achieved.
The identification of risk is not always prominent in the majority of assessments,
which are too descriptive and lacking in analysis. Insufficient weight is given to
childrens histories, and chronologies are poor and incomplete. Tools to consider
neglect and assess and understand risks are underutilised.
Roles and responsibilities are well understood in the MASH, and referrals to
childrens social care are dealt with promptly. Early help intervention through the
Bromley childrens project and the work of family support is well embedded. Early
help services offer a range of effective support services for children and families.
The response to children missing or at risk of child sexual exploitation is
underdeveloped, inconsistent and uncoordinated. Delays in police notifications
mean that it is not clear when children first go missing and when they return.
Homeless 16- and 17-year-olds are sometimes placed in bed and breakfast
accommodation, which is unacceptable practice.


Inspection findings

The application of thresholds, and the identification and management of risk
are inadequate in Bromley. In cases seen by inspectors, risk is not
consistently recognised, and past history and concerns are given insufficient
consideration. In too many cases when risks have escalated, the local
authority has not had the confidence to intervene robustly and in a
timeframe that is optimal for children and young people. At the time of the
inspection, 12 children had been subject to a child protection plan for over
two years, seven of whom are in care proceedings. In these cases, parents
have failed to engage in assessment and with support services to reduce
risk. Children have been left in neglectful situations by the failure of the local
authority to convene or review timely legal planning meetings and to
consider public law outline procedures soon enough. This is clearly
detrimental to their welfare. (Recommendation)


Child protection cases are stepped down too soon to child in need, with
insufficient progress made in key areas at the point of transfer. For example,
in some cases, parents have only just started to engage in work to address
domestic violence or drug and alcohol misuse, and their ability to change and
to sustain improvement has not been tested. Cases seen where risks had
escalated were appropriately stepped up from child in need to child
protection. The number of children subject to repeat child protection plans
has risen significantly from 13% in 201415 to 21% currently, which is well
above comparators. For this group of 48 children, the previous plan has
closed too soon or the work completed has been ineffective. This means that
childrens and young peoples safeguarding needs are not met in a timely or
comprehensive manner. (Recommendation)


Strategy discussions are not being held soon enough when concerns are first
identified, and are not compliant with statutory guidance. All strategy
discussions are solely between police and childrens social care, without
direct involvement by health or other agencies, despite a range of multiagency professionals being present in the MASH. Professionals contribute
information, but are not actively involved in decision making and the
planning of section 47 enquiries. This means that important child protection
decisions are not informed by the widest possible range of multi-agency
views and information available.


As a result of an audit of MASH contacts in September 2015 that identified a
lack of formally recorded discussion with partner agencies, the use of
conference calls is being explored to improve effectiveness. It is too early to
measure the impact of this proposed initiative.


Numbers of strategy discussions, section 47 enquiries and initial child
protection conferences remain lower than comparators. The local authority
has not undertaken sufficient analysis to understand the reasons for this.
The proportion of initial child protection conferences completed within 15


days of the decision to begin an investigation has improved on the previous
year, from 67% to 83%. Review conferences are timely, with the local
authority reporting a current performance figure of 96%.

Some more recent assessments demonstrate effective use of the local
authority social work model, but others are too descriptive and lack sufficient
analysis. In stronger cases, childrens and families views are clear and
include a thorough assessment of risks with clear actions. In weaker cases,
tools to consider neglect and assess risks are underutilised. Chronologies do
not provide a succinct and clear history to inform assessments. The
individual needs of children and young people are routinely considered
together in a single assessment. This means that the individual needs of
children and young people are not clearly recognised and are in danger of
becoming lost. Research is rarely used to inform analysis in assessments.


Although not evident in all cases, inspectors saw evidence of some direct
work with children. Tools such as three houses are used to engage children
and to elicit their views, which are reflected in the assessment. The use of
words and pictures in one case helped a child to understand the worries of
professionals and what is to happen to ensure the childs safety and wellbeing.


Young people aged 12 years and over are routinely asked if they would like
the services of an advocate to assist in their views being considered. Support
is provided to parents and young people by an externally commissioned
advocacy service. Between November 2015 and January 2016, this service
supported 29 young people to attend initial or review child protection
conferences. Inspectors observed child protection conferences where
advocates sensitively engaged and supported children and parents to ensure
a clear understanding of the seriousness of the concerns.


The majority of child protection plans and child in need plans are not specific
enough and, in too many cases, risks do not inform the subsequent plan. In
most cases, it is not clear what outcome is to be achieved and by when. For
example, despite a positive parenting assessment, it was recommended that
a mother attend a parenting course, yet the plan did not specify what areas
she needed to work on and why. Parents spoken to during the inspection
showed an understanding of the local authoritys concerns, but were not
always clear about what changes they had to make to address these.
Brothers and sisters being considered together on shared plans inhibits the
identification of individual childrens needs. Contingency planning is not
specific enough for families to understand the consequences, if progress is
not made to address child protection concerns. (Recommendation)


Bromley commissions a number of services to assist families where domestic
violence, substance misuse or parental mental ill health cause concern. This
includes Bromley adults substance misuse service, victim support services
and Bromley and Lewisham MIND, an organisation that works alongside


people with mental health needs and dementia. During the past year,
conference monitoring has shown that, of 457 conferences, domestic
violence has affected 279 families, mental health 170, alcohol misuse 136
and drug misuse 158. Too often, plans recommend parents engagement or
re-engagement with services without considering how effective these
services are. (Recommendation)

Managers do not set clear actions and timescales for social workers, and do
not provide sufficient review and challenge. This means that plans are not
progressed as quickly as they should be. Child protection chairs do not
provide sufficient challenge or scrutiny and, in the past year, have only
escalated 10 cases for formal resolution. (Recommendation)


Child in need cases are not considered within the monthly performance
digest, as this data is not systematically captured. Instead, cases are
recorded on individual managers spreadsheets. This means that the local
authority does not have reliable data to assist managers to oversee the
quality and timeliness of work within these cases, to monitor trends or to
understand the profile of this group of children and young people.
(Recommendation)


High numbers of cases for the social workers in the referral and assessment,
safeguarding and care planning teams inhibit high-quality social work. Some
social workers with 25 or more cases report that they do not have sufficient
time to undertake positive direct work with children and families, or to reflect
with managers on the progress of their work. (Recommendation)


Children who go missing or who are at risk of child sexual exploitation
receive an inconsistent response from agencies. Delays in notifications from
the police mean that childrens social care is not always aware at what point
children go missing or the date when they return. This means that the offer
of a return home interview is delayed, and children may be unable accurately
to recall and reflect upon incidents leading to missing episodes. In most
cases seen, it was not possible to be assured that a return home interview
had been offered or completed. The local authority is currently neither
collating nor analysing this data sufficiently well to understand the profile of
missing children and the links to child sexual exploitation. (Recommendation)


Assessments considered in cases where mothers had undergone female
genital mutilation identify concerns appropriately with parents and seek their
views regarding this practice. A protocol and update to the threshold
document is being developed to support midwives and general practitioners
to refer cases appropriately. However, the local authority is yet to collate
performance data to ensure that it understands the number and nature of all
cases seen.


The local authority is more effective in tracking and identifying children and
young people missing education. At the time of the inspection, there were


nine children missing education, with staff demonstrating tenacity and
determination in locating them. They liaise effectively to undertake relevant
checks with other agencies such as revenue and benefits, schools and other
local authority services to establish childrens whereabouts. Of 199 referrals,
only one child could not be traced. Most return to school or join a new
school.

The local authority has a good understanding of the reasons why parents
choose to home educate their children, and holds good information on
childrens individual circumstances. A multi-agency panel oversees elective
home education (EHE). There is effective work between the children missing
education officer and the EHE adviser. The adviser undertakes routine home
visits and checks on the suitability of the education of the vast majority of
children. Effective working with the MASH team and childrens social care
ensures that childrens welfare needs are known. Those children moving into
Year 11 after being home educated receive effective help on their next steps
from the targeted youth support service.


Early help intervention and family support is well embedded and delivered
effectively through the Bromley childrens project. Thresholds for early help
are appropriate and, in the majority of cases, considered as step-up or stepdown processes that meet the respective threshold criteria. Assessments for
early help intervention are timely and lead to a good range of services being
offered. These include an early intervention programme supporting children
who have witnessed domestic violence. Five of the six family centres hold
early parent education classes, and parenting plus has been offered since
March 2015. Family support and parenting practitioners offer a range of
workshops and one-to-one support regarding domestic violence, parenting,
housing, employment and access to education. Examples of work seen
demonstrate that knowledgeable staff assist parents to focus on practical
skills and solutions.


The early help service has undertaken three common assessment framework
(CAF) quality audits during 2015 for primary and secondary schools, health
visitors and midwives. All have resulted in appropriate action plans and
further review. Consequently, the number of CAFs rose to 706 in 2015 from
completed a third of the CAFs, indicating their commitment to the early help
process.


The troubled families initiative is reported by the local authority to have been
successful, with turnaround of the first 490 families. This has resulted in
Bromley successfully achieving targets as part of the Early Start for year one
of phase two of the programme.


A range of professionals including police, health and education are colocated
within the MASH, and all report effective working relationships. Roles and
responsibilities are well understood, and referrals to childrens social care are


responded to promptly. A shared database ensures that requests for
information are followed up swiftly and in priority order, according to risk.
Out of normal office hours, the emergency duty team deals effectively with
referrals. In cases considered by inspectors, the response was appropriate.
The information subsequently passed on to the MASH was detailed and clear.

There is evidence that consent is routinely sought, when required, and
persistent attempts are made to engage with families to ensure that this
takes place. Qualified social workers within the MASH make decisions that
are countersigned by consultant practitioners or group managers. Referrers
do not always receive feedback following the making of a referral, which
does not assist them to contribute to or monitor the progress of cases
referred.


Multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARAC) are well attended by a
nucleus of key professionals, including from childrens social care. Members
attend with relevant information, and good joint working ensures that there
are effective safety plans. Multi-agency public protection arrangements
(MAPPA) meetings are similarly well attended, with agencies reporting an
appropriate response from childrens social care. Thorough scrutiny of cases
identifies risks, and effective joint working ensures that safety plans are
established.


Sixteen- and 17-year-old homeless young people are assisted by a housing
options officer and a housing senior practitioner, who are based part-time in
the MASH under a joint protocol between childrens social care and housing.
Assessments completed are of good quality, with the views of young people,
their families, and other agencies being well recorded. Young people are
aware of their entitlements as care leavers, and are offered mediation work
to facilitate a return home. Young people are also referred or signposted to
other support services appropriately.


At the time of the inspection, one young person was in bed and breakfast
accommodation and had been there for a week with no plan to move on.
This accommodation is not thoroughly risk assessed and no additional
supports are in place for the duration of this stay. The use of bed and
breakfast is an accepted part of Bromleys provision for 16- and 17-year-old
homeless young people, yet the local authority is not ensuring that these
premises are safe and appropriate. This is a significant failing.
(Recommendation)


The lack of basic safeguarding practice for children who are privately
fostered means that the local authority cannot be assured that they are safe.
Not all of the five cases sampled had a completed Disclosure and Barring
Service (DBS) check, and in one case the arrangement had been in place for
several months. Children from abroad living with host families do not always
receive timely visits. Awareness raising regarding private fostering is
beginning to have an impact. Within the Private fostering annual report


from non-language schools and other ethnicities is increasing. At the time of
the inspection, there were nine children privately fostered.

An effective designated officer and a well-resourced service follow up
children who are subject to allegations of professional abuse. Complex
strategy meetings are held, when necessary, with clear monitored actions to
ensure the well-being and safety of children subject to allegations. Good
multi-agency systems and relationships ensure that communication and
actions are clear. There is also evidence of training and awareness raising
regarding the designated officer role and findings from cases.


For those children and young people with disabilities, a clear referral
pathway ensures that there is effective joint working with safeguarding and
referral and assessment teams when there is a concern. Young people with
disabilities are well supported in their transition into adult services.


Where there is a risk of a child or young person being radicalised, staff
proactively engage with partners in this work. They raise awareness in
schools, and successfully intervene to prevent an escalation of concerns. For
example, recent cases demonstrate the excellent multi-agency work when
the local authority was proactive in taking a matter to court, successfully
securing wardships for three children.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Inadequate

Most children and young people wait too long before becoming looked after, and
authoritative management action is not taken soon enough to safeguard children and
young people. Some children and young people have experienced significant delay in
being offered help, and there is a lack of urgency to secure permanence for them.
There are significant weaknesses in the quality of the legal advice available to social
workers and their managers. The public law outline (PLO) process is not used
effectively, leading to too many children experiencing significant drift and delay in
achieving permanence.
When children do become looked after, their needs are not formally reassessed.
Ongoing risk is not always recognised or supported well enough. Care plans for
children and young people are not routinely updated and, in many cases, it is difficult
to understand what progress has been made. There is limited evidence of social
workers carrying out direct work with children and young people, or undertaking lifestory work to help them to understand their family history and the reasons for them
becoming looked after.
IROs do not provide sufficient challenge to the work of frontline social workers and
their managers. They are not robust enough in escalating their concerns. Managerial
oversight is weak. There is little evidence of effective scrutiny or challenge to the
social work practice taking place to improve outcomes for vulnerable children and
young people, including when children and young people return home from care
episodes.
Procedures for monitoring and supporting children and young people who go missing
from care are ineffective. Risks to children in relation to child sexual exploitation and
child trafficking are not well understood. Neither are the needs of unaccompanied
asylum-seeking children thoroughly assessed.
Adoption is not considered soon enough for all children who are unable to return to
their birth parents. This means that too few children are adopted and, for those who
are, the process takes too long. Children wait too long to find permanence, while
unrealistic assessments are often undertaken of birth parents and the wider family.
There is an insufficient range of safe, suitable housing available to vulnerable care
leavers. They are placed in bed and breakfast accommodation for extended periods
of time. The local authority does not know the risks posed to young people by other
residents, as these are not assessed.
The quality of foster care is good, and the work of the Living in Care Council (LinCC)
is a considerable strength.


Inspection findings

At the time of inspection, Bromley looked after 287 children and young
people. Inspectors did not find any child for whom the recent decision to
become looked after was inappropriate. However, some children who have
experienced neglect waited too long before coming into local authority care.


Of 287 children looked after and young people, 101 are looked after under
section 20 voluntary arrangements. The vast majority (70) of these
arrangements are over six months duration and a further 48 are over 12
months duration. While the local authority recognised in December 2015 the
need to review these arrangements, this review had not taken place by the
time of the current inspection. Concerns raised with senior managers during
the inspection resulted in the local authority taking action, and a significant
number of childrens cases were reviewed when it was identified that there
was drift and delay. The level of concern was such that the local authority
convened an urgent legal meeting to review seven cases, of which one was
subject to an urgent legal planning meeting. (Recommendation)


The public law outline (PLO) process is not being used effectively to consider
what further evidence or assessments are needed to make early decisions
about care plans. There are significant weaknesses in the quality of legal
advice available to social workers and their managers, and this sets a
threshold for intervention that is too high. This results in a lack of confidence
in their analysis of risk and professional judgement. Consequently, there are
delays in convening and reviewing legal planning meetings, and issuing
proceedings. Letters before proceedings do not help to ensure that families
are fully aware of the local authoritys concerns, expectations and the
potential consequences of care proceedings. The length of time to decide
care proceedings has risen from 27 weeks to an average of 35 weeks over
the past year, which includes one complex case that took 84 weeks.
(Recommendation)


The local judiciary reports that local authority lawyers are not sufficiently
experienced to advocate for children in complex care proceedings. Some
lawyers do not prepare cases thoroughly enough before representations in
court, and social work evidence is often not strong enough to support the
local authoritys plan. This results in the court, legal representatives for
childrens parents and the childrens guardians influencing some childrens
care plans and requesting additional assessments. As a result, some children
have experienced significant delay in their care plans being progressed. The
local authoritys evidence, in a small number of cases, lacks analysis and
confident presentation in court. This results in a change of care plan and
children being returned to parents when it may not be in their best interests.
(Recommendation)


Not all children who become looked after have clear and timely pathways to
permanence. Senior managers do not consistently authorise assessments


and decisions regarding children and young people returning home to their
parents prior to this taking place. This means that the local authority does
not know if the risks which led to the child becoming looked after have been
ameliorated, or that safe enough care can be sustained. (Recommendation)

For those children and young people who require legal permanence through
adoption, special guardianship orders (SGOs) or child arrangement orders,
there is a lack of urgency in progressing their plan. In a large number of
cases there have been delays in holding permanence planning meetings, in
one childs case for 14 months after becoming looked after and 10 months
after a recommendation from the IRO that it should take place. Similarly, a
small minority of children under the age of 10 (16) have been subject to a
care order for a number of years, some dating back to 2006, but who have
not been considered for permanence. The local authority recognises the
need to improve in this area, and in December 2015 it established a
performance monitoring process to track the progress of children when they
first become looked after. However, this system is very new and
underdeveloped, and is therefore not yet having an impact on those children
who have been looked after for more than six months. The local authority is
yet to demonstrate effective scrutiny and challenge to the quality of social
work assessment in relation to permanence planning. (Recommendation)


Managerial oversight of practice is a serious area of weakness at all levels.
There is no senior manager with a single line of sight or overall responsibility
for the progress of all children looked after. There is little evidence of
appropriate challenge by group managers taking place to improve practice
and outcomes. Managers do not regularly scrutinise childrens plans or the
impact of social work interventions, and the focus of supervision of social
workers is on sharing information rather than the progress and impact of
childrens plans. (Recommendation)


When children can no longer live with their families, approved foster carers
meet their needs. Placement stability is better than that in comparator
authorities, with only 8% of children having moved placement more than
three times in the year. This is an improvement from 201415, when it was
people receive in their placements is good and, to some extent, this
mitigates some of the short-term impact of delay in planning for their longerterm needs.


The recruitment of foster carers complies with key aspects of regulations. All
foster carers had received an annual review which was well recorded and
detailed, and this provides evidence of training attended. A good range of
training is available for foster carers, as well as a duty system and a wellattended support group, which is positively received. Generally, foster carers
spoken to were positive about their supervising social worker. However,
many report feeling undervalued by the local authority and do not feel that


they are considered as part of a professional team supporting children and
young people.

The local authority recognises that it does not have sufficient foster
placements for older children and for children from ethnic minority
backgrounds. A new recruitment strategy with an accompanying action plan
has yet to be implemented. It has been delayed by recent proposals
considering the reduction of some foster care allowances. This has created
much uncertainty among foster carers regarding their future with Bromley. It
is also affecting the progress of childrens plans with their current carers and
of those children waiting to be matched. These new proposals are having a
direct effect on the councils ability to retain foster carers and may affect its
ability to recruit, both now and in the future. The local authority has
identified that it needs to recruit 22 foster families a year to meet continued
demand, although last year it had a net loss of 11 families.
(Recommendation)


A draft process for finding families has yet to be introduced. However,
comprehensive searches are undertaken to ensure a good long-term match
for children. This includes the use of Internet profiling and independent
fostering agencies where in-house carers cannot meet the needs of the child.
The council has 16% of children placed with independent fostering providers
and, if the placement is an appropriate match, it is committed to supporting
children in these placements long term. Matching reports vary in quality.
Most contain information about the childs needs and the skills of the foster
carers, although the amount of detail and the level of analysis could be
improved. The voice of the child is not clear in most of the reports seen by
inspectors. There are delays in long-term matches going to panel when
children have been settled in a placement for many months, often well over
a year. This makes it difficult to see the foster panels impact on the quality
and timeliness of placement matching.


The number of special guardianship orders is decreasing, and 23 children left
care on a special guardianship order last year, compared with 12 this year.
Some foster carers report that they are reluctant to make an application for
children for whom they are caring, because of the lack of clarity about future
support, including financial arrangements. Assessments for matching children
to connected persons vary in their quality. In most cases, there is a lack of a
comprehensive exploration of the risks and vulnerabilities of the placement.
When issues arise about a carers background, there is too often a lack of
professional curiosity and insufficient exploration into the impact of this on
the carers ability to meet the needs of the child. Too many reports are
overoptimistic about the carers ability to parent the child into adulthood. The
wishes and feelings of children are not often considered in sufficient detail.
(Recommendation)


The small number of children and young people who live in private
residential childrens homes outside the borough (21) live in homes that are


judged good or better by Ofsted. However, insufficient checks are made with
host authorities as to whether the local area has the appropriate health and
education provision required for the child, or whether the placement location
presents a child sexual exploitation risk. (Recommendation)

The local authority is currently supporting 19 unaccompanied asylum-seeking
young people. In most cases, assessments of need and risk are insufficiently
robust to ensure that the placements provided are safe and suitable. Issues
around culture, ethnicity and religion are recognised by social workers, but
are not always fully reflected in assessments or case records.


Contact between children and their family members is not sufficiently risk
assessed or managed. Insufficient consideration is given to the potential
negative impact of very frequent contact and associated travel for children
and their attachment behaviour. Contact records are not sufficiently
analytical and do not inform case planning well. The local authority has
already identified the weaknesses in this service and is undertaking a review.


While statutory visits to children are mostly within the local authoritys
required timescale, it is not clear how visits are contributing to the progress
of childrens plans. Children and young people do benefit from continuity of
social workers within the looked after social work team, and social workers
know the children well. However, many childrens cases are allocated within
the safeguarding and planning service. These teams have experienced a high
turnover of staff, with frequent changes of social workers. High caseloads
mean that there is insufficient time to undertake this work.
(Recommendation)


The majority of placement plans seen do not contain the information that
carers require to understand the arrangements for childrens care. In a small
number of cases, carers have not received this information for a number of
weeks after children are placed. Placement plans and care plans are not
always updated when children move, and delegated authority was not
explained or recorded in any placement plans seen by inspectors.
(Recommendation)


Most looked after children reviews (93.4%) are carried out within the
required timescales. IROs do endeavour to see children and young people
before their reviews, but this is not always possible for those children who
live out of area or some distance from home. Most children are supported to
attend their reviews and complete consultation documents. IROs are not
always effective in ensuring that childrens plans are progressed through the
recommendation of specific actions. While they do raise concerns when case
planning is drifting, this is not evident in all childrens cases and there are
too few formal escalations recorded, with little evidence of the difference
that this has made for the child or young person. (Recommendation)



Although children and young people have access to an independent
advocacy service and there is no waiting list, advocacy is not well promoted
in childrens reviews or by their social workers. However, children looked
after do benefit from a well-established independent visitor service. Children
reported to inspectors that they value these relationships. Effective
processes for responding to childrens complaints are in place.


Good arrangements are in place to maintain and improve the health of
children and young people looked after. All initial and review health
assessments and corresponding health plans are carried out by a dedicated
community paediatrician. The number of assessments completed within the
required timescale has been maintained at last years rate of 88%. The vast
majority of children are up to date with their immunisations (86.8%) and
dental assessments (82.6%). The designated nurse located within the looked
after social work team helps to ensure a coordinated approach to childrens
and young peoples health. There is good support for their emotional health
and well-being through dedicated children looked after CAMHS provision, and
currently there are no children or young people looked after waiting for a
service. There is ongoing work to develop the use of the strength and
difficulties questionnaires that provides an opportunity to identify early
concerns about their emotional health. Information for 201415 shows that
the average score is 14.1, which is similar to comparators.


Appropriate support is available to educate children and young people about
the risks of drug and alcohol misuse. A single point of access to childrens
well-being services ensures timely assessment, support and intervention.
Two young people successfully completed treatment in the fourth quarter of
last year and have maintained abstinence. There are currently no children
looked after receiving treatment for substance misuse. Improved working
relationships between childrens social care, the youth offending service and
wider partners have reduced the number of children looked after involved in
offending behaviour from 19 in September 2015 to 13 at the time of the
inspection.


Most children looked after go to a good or better school. Their attendance at
school is generally good and compares well to children looked after in similar
areas. There have been no permanent exclusions of children looked after
since 2008, and the number of those who are subject to a fixed-term
exclusion is reducing well. The small number of children placed in alternative
provision are generally having their educational needs well met.


Personal education plans seen by inspectors were generally of good quality,
due to the effective work undertaken by the virtual school to improve the
quality of information used to plan childrens next steps in education. This
helps carers, for example, to take action to support childrens specific
learning and development needs. The pupil premium is mostly used
effectively to support their progress and attainment through individual tuition
and, increasingly, to support their social and emotional well-being.



The virtual school team knows the circumstances of individual children well
and routinely monitors their progress, including those children and young
people who are causing concern and those who are living outside of the
area. It intervenes quickly where outcomes for children start to decline. As a
result, children looked after receive timely and effective help that enables
them to stay in school and achieve well. The achievements of children and
young people looked after are celebrated on an individual level by education
professionals and their carers, and also at an annual celebration evening
where children receive recognition for their efforts. This is valued by children
and young people, as it promotes their self-esteem.


A high proportion of children looked after have special educational needs,
and most make good progress from their starting points. In 2014/15, at age
seven, a third of children looked after achieved age-related expectations in
reading and mathematics, and half did so in writing. Most make the progress
expected of all children between the ages of seven and 11, when nearly two
thirds achieve age-related expectations in English and mathematics. The
progress that they make from age 11 to 16 is significantly better than
children looked after nationally. In 2014/15, a quarter of 16-year-olds
achieved five GCSEs including English and mathematics. These are the best
results ever for children looked after in Bromley, narrowing the achievement
gap with other Bromley pupils. An increasing proportion of young people
who start Year 12 in education remain in education, reflecting the early
identification of young people who are at risk of becoming NEET (not in
education, employment or training). However, in this academic year the
proportion of young people dropping out in Year 12 has increased. The
virtual school currently lacks capacity in the team to support this cohort.
(Recommendation)


Procedures for monitoring children and young people who are missing from
care are ineffective. Of 287 children looked after, 11% (32) children had at
least one missing episode in the past 12 months. Overall, there were 184
missing episodes. Only 13 children were offered return interviews with an
independent provider. This means that risks to children and young people
are not well understood. Information is not gathered either to inform
prevention and support plans for individual children or to inform wider
strategic planning in relation to specific risks, such as sexual exploitation and
child trafficking. (Recommendation)


The current Living in Care Council (LinCC) is comprised of a group of children
and young people of differing ages, ethnic backgrounds, genders and
abilities. This cross-section of Bromleys children looked after population
ensures that the views of a diverse range of children and young people help
to shape childrens services. Children and young people have regular
meetings with key senior managers of childrens social care, elected
members and executives of the working party for safeguarding and
corporate parenting to help to influence service development, policy and
practice. They undertake practical tasks to enhance the positive experiences


of children looked after, including developing the LinCC website, and the
design and production of a welcome pack for children newly looked after.
Dedicated participation and engagement workers ensure that information is
communicated to children looked after through their carers and social
workers. This includes information about keeping safe online and support in
relation to bullying.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is inadequate

Children who are unable to return to their birth parents are not always
considered for adoption, and too many are not considered soon enough. This
means that too few children are adopted and, for those that are, the process
takes too long.


Only 10% of children leave care in Bromley through adoption, which is
considerably below the England average of 16%. The current three-year
average time in Bromley for children to be placed with their adoptive parents
after entering care is 686 days. This shows a worsening performance
compared to the published 201215 average, which was 659 days, and is 66
days slower than the England average for the same period.


The three-year average time for children to be matched with adopters,
following the granting of a placement order, is 252 days for 201215. While
there has been a small recent improvement in this measure, the three-year
average is worsening and currently stands at 260 days. This is considerably
slower than the Department for Education threshold of 121 days.


In Bromley, the reasons for this poor performance are not well understood
by managers. Performance is deteriorating. Managers suggest that the
reduction in the number of children adopted is due to an increase in special
guardianship orders being granted. However, there have been fewer this
year (12) than last year (23). This belief has inhibited scrutiny and
systematic exploration of the data. Although welcomed, the recent work by
the local authority concentrated entirely on the characteristics of the children
waiting to be adopted rather than the reasons behind the delay.
(Recommendation)


The delay experienced by children is characterised by overoptimistic
assessments of birth parents and families. This means that many children
are not considered for adoption or other permanence options soon enough.
Managers and IROs are not effectively challenging the delay. Inspectors
reviewed cases where even very young children had come into care, yet
adoption had not been considered at the earliest opportunity.


The local authority lacks the confidence and ability to evidence effectively to
court when adoption is the preferred plan. Inspectors considered cases
where a plan for adoption had been changed or was not considered while


assessments of wider family members were undertaken, even when these
were not likely to lead to a successful placement. A multi-agency working
group, involving managers from the local authority, representatives from the
court and Cafcass, has been ineffective in addressing this issue. Cases
evidenced parents being given multiple opportunities to demonstrate their
parenting ability before decisive action was taken, resulting in some children
remaining uncertain about their futures for too long. For adopted children,
this means that they do not settle into their forever families until they are
older.

In the vast majority of cases, children remain with the same foster carers
after entering care until they move in with their adoptive families. The local
authority has only very recently started to consider fostering-to-adopt, and
only one child has been placed in a fostering-to-adopt placement via agency
adopters.


Once a plan for adoption is confirmed, family finding is thorough, detailed
and sensitive to the needs of the child. However, too few children reach this
stage. In a small number of cases, there is delay as a result of social workers
spending too long identifying an ethnic match, rather than concentrating on
a search for parents who could best meet the needs of the child.


There are more approved adopters waiting for a child than children waiting
to be adopted, meaning that Bromley adopters can consider children from
outside the borough. This does not inhibit family finding, and inspectors saw
evidence of considerable efforts to achieve the right match for the child.


Adopter assessments are thorough, but they often take too long to complete
and performance on this measure is worsening. Initial contact to the
assessment commencing currently takes 136 days, compared to 82 days
nationally. The duration of assessment is currently 272 days, up from 260
days last year and above the national average of 231 days.


Prospective adopter reports (PARs) considered by inspectors were all of an
adequate standard. Strengths and vulnerabilities are appropriately identified,
although the quality of the analysis could more effectively reflect prospective
adopters ability to overcome their vulnerabilities. Adopters spoken to were
positive about their reception and assessment by Bromley, and considered
that they had been very well prepared for the experience of parenting an
adoptive child. Child permanence reports (CPRs) detail the family history and
give a clear picture of the child. However, in some cases, better analysis of
how the trauma experienced by children might affect them into adult life
would better inform the assessment for post-adoption support services.
Where brothers and sisters have a plan for adoption, there is evidence of
appropriate together or apart assessments.


Once family finding begins, children and families are thoughtfully matched
and there have been no placement breakdowns pre- or post-order for more


than two years. Matching reports comprehensively consider why parents
have been chosen to adopt the child, and how their skills and experiences
will enable the child to flourish. Adopters are offered the opportunity to meet
with a range of professionals involved in the childs life in order to build a
clear picture of what the child is like. The medical adviser speaks to parents
about the implications of any health issues in caring for the child, ensuring
that parents are well prepared and able to make realistic decisions about
their ability to offer a home to a child.

Introductions are managed well. Children are appropriately prepared for
moving in with their adoptive parents. Experienced foster carers know the
children well, and advise and support adopters during the transition period.
In many cases, they have continued to maintain contact after the child has
moved. This means that children who are adopted are helped in the early
stages to develop safe and secure attachments to their new parents. A
dedicated post-adoptive support team offers support to all families with
adoptive children who live in Bromley, assessing and addressing any
difficulties that the family may experience. Staff have a range of skills
including family therapy, theraplay and safebase training. This team also
offers support in maintaining contact between brothers and sisters, as well
as support to birth parents. Currently, 22 birth parents are receiving
counselling through the service. Inspectors saw some effective arrangements
to ensure that contact with family members was maintained, including where
brothers and sisters had been adopted by different families.


Life-story books seen during the inspection lacked some critical information
and are not always completed in a timely way. In some cases, considerable
delays mean that children do not have access to information that will help
them to understand their histories. Later-life letters are generally
thoughtfully crafted, and they provide a detailed and honest exploration of
the childs early life and how they came to be living with adoptive parents.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is inadequate



There is an insufficient range of safe and suitable housing available for care
leavers. The local authority regularly places a significant number of care
leavers in bed and breakfast accommodation, and has done so for several
years. Managers do not consider the risks that other residents may pose to
young people or assure themselves of the safety of care leavers placed in
bed and breakfast accommodation. During the inspection, two female care
leavers were moved to new accommodation following a disclosure that the
landlord had made inappropriate comments via text.


Too many young people stay in bed and breakfast accommodation
unnecessarily and for too long. At the time of the inspection, over a third of
the 16 young people in bed and breakfast accommodation, all aged 18 years
old or over, had been in this type of accommodation for more than six
months. Young people placed in these settings are frequently the most
vulnerable, live chaotic lifestyles and have exhausted all other housing
options available to them. Often, they do not engage well with the leaving
care team or other support that is available, placing themselves at
unacceptable risk and significantly decreasing their chances of securing good
outcomes for their futures.


Social workers and young peoples advisers find it difficult to maintain regular
and meaningful contact with young people who repeatedly move in and out
of temporary accommodation. Young people find it difficult to settle in one
place, obtain the help that they need to move forward in their lives, manage
their health, and achieve their educational and career goals. However, the
local authority is successful in promoting foster care as an option for young
people beyond their 18th birthday. In the last year, all those in foster care
placements who turned 18 years remained in stable placements with their
foster carers. Local authority staff fail to engage effectively with more
challenging young people. While young peoples advisers and social workers
know of young peoples needs, they struggle to engage a significant minority
of young people who have more challenging behaviour or are reluctant to
take up offers of help. Managers do not intervene quickly enough when
outcomes for young people are not improving or when young people do not
engage.


In most cases considered by inspectors, young people had an up-to-date
pathway plan. However, plans are too often insufficiently detailed regarding
the specific steps to be taken for young people to achieve their goals. Too
many plans are reliant on vague initial actions and, too often, there is no
effective contingency plan on what to do if this first step proves
unsuccessful. As a result, some more vulnerable care leavers do not engage
with the leaving care team or support services for long. In these cases, social
workers, young peoples advisers and managers do not know enough about
young peoples circumstances to be able to plan their next steps. For those
aged over 18 years, the offer of help to them is considered sufficient,
regardless of whether young people take up this offer. (Recommendation)


When young people do engage, the majority have good support from social
workers and young peoples advisers. They make good progress and take
increasing responsibility for themselves. Staff act as effective advocates for
young people with other agencies to ensure that they receive their benefits
and entitlements. However, some care leavers who are in settled
accommodation say that infrequent contact with their advisers leads to them
feeling isolated and lonely. When young people receive support from a
mentor, this helps to alleviate these feelings.



A specialist adviser supports young people into education, employment and
training (EET), which is a comparable number to care leavers in similar
areas. Inspectors saw good examples where work experience builds young
peoples readiness for work and leads to permanent employment
opportunities. However, almost a third of care leavers aged 19 years are not
engaged in education, employment or training (NEET), and this has been the
case for the last three years. The proportion of care leavers who move into
higher education is slightly lower than those in similar areas, despite
appropriate financial support being available to them.


Inspectors saw some examples where young peoples advisers provided
some useful support to care leavers in helping them to prepare for living
independently and managing their own affairs. An example is through
providing practical help with budgeting and developing plans to repay rent
arrears. A moving on workshop is available to care leavers to help them to
understand their responsibilities when they secure their own tenancies.
However, some felt that the workshop took place too far in advance of them
living independently, and they had forgotten what they had learned by the
time they had moved in. There is a sufficient range of funding available to
support care leavers as they move towards independence. For example,
funding is provided for essential books for those in further education,
clothing grants are made and young people receive a 2,500 allowance when
they obtain their first tenancy. Young people said that they are aware of
their entitlements, but told inspectors that not having access to the full
setting up home allowance prior to moving in meant that their first home
was not fully equipped when they took up their tenancies.


All care leavers are offered a face-to-face meeting with the looked after
childrens nurse before leaving care to receive their health history, recorded
on a health passport. However, only around half of the young people spoken
to by inspectors were aware of their health history, and none knew about
the health passport. The appointment of a dedicated nurse is intended to
develop new ways of sharing health information with care leavers and to
ensure that they have access to information to help them to manage their
own health as they become more independent.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Since the inspections by Ofsted in 2010 and 2012, failures of senior leadership and
weak management have resulted in a deterioration of services for childrens
safeguarding, children looked after, care leavers and children requiring adoption.
Elected members, the chief executive and senior leaders across the local authority
do not have a good enough understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of
their services for vulnerable children in need and those requiring protection. They
were unaware of the extensive deficits identified in this inspection.
Political leaders and chief officers state that vulnerable children are a top priority
for the council. This is not evident corporately or in service provision. While the
senior leadership of the council, the corporate parenting group and partner
agencies express high ambitions for children and young people in their care and
those leaving care, the services for these children and young people are
inadequate.
The interim DCS and her senior management team have continually absorbed
additional responsibilities in response to the local authoritys financial pressures.
This has led to reduced capacity across all areas of service, contributing to the lack
of managerial scrutiny and the identification of poor practice.
Weak management oversight of cases at all levels, including by senior managers,
is ineffective and not systematic. Performance management information is
insufficiently used to improve practice. There is an absence of critical enquiry.
Quality assurance arrangements are inadequate, and case auditing does not
demonstrate rigour in scrutinising the quality of work. Supervision does not
consistently take place in accordance with the local authoritys own stated policy.
Strategic managers do not routinely assess risks to those at risk of sexual
exploitation, and to children and young people who go missing.
The implementation of the current social work model is beginning to have an
impact in identifying risk in the MASH, and in the quality of some childrens
assessments in both the referral and assessment, and the safeguarding teams.
Staff report that this model is helping to bring clarity to their work.
The local authority and partner agencies work well together to provide good, early,
targeted support in children centres. The integrated troubled families project
(Bromley childrens project) is helping many families with entrenched difficulties to
improve their care and parenting.
The workforce development strategy is effective in attracting and supporting newly
qualified social workers.


Inspection findings

The lead member, the chief executive and the interim director of childrens
services (DCS) do not have a clear understanding of the strengths and
weaknesses of childrens services. They were unaware of the significant
deficits identified in this inspection. These included inconsistent responses to
identifying child protection risks, drift and delay in progressing work for
children looked after, poor management oversight and inadequate quality
assurances processes. Throughout the inspection, in response to these
failings, managers have taken action, demonstrating a commitment to
addressing such weaknesses. An example is the immediate changes to
ensure compliance with child protection procedures, and the devising of an
action plan to address concerns about the inconsistent quality of practice for
sexually exploited and missing children.


While there are clear lines of accountability and governance arrangements
between political, strategic and operational roles, this is not framed within a
shared strategic plan. Services for vulnerable children and their families are
given insufficient priority across the local authority. Senior officers,
corporately, do not work collaboratively enough to ensure that the needs of
Bromleys vulnerable children are championed. Elected members engage
with the childrens agenda and are active participants on the Bromley
Safeguarding Children Board, Safer Bromley Partnership, Corporate
Parenting, and Health and Wellbeing Boards. However, this is not leading to
effective collaboration or service improvement. Proposals by members to
address financial pressures lack sufficient analysis and understanding of the
underlying complexities and impact on childrens services, including the risks.
This inhibits the effectiveness of those with lead responsibility for childrens
social care in improving outcomes and sustaining longer-term change.


With the departure of the previous DCS in April 2015, interim arrangements
were made to delegate the statutory functions to the assistant directors
(ADs) for children and education services, supported by the chief executive.
The AD for children is the named statutory interim DCS. However, she has
limited authority corporately to lead, share or drive forward change. These
interim arrangements have continued for too long. At the same time, the
DCS and her senior management team have absorbed extensive additional
responsibilities as part of the councils financial pressures. This has reduced
capacity across all areas of service, contributing to poor managerial scrutiny
and management failures. (Recommendation)


Management oversight of cases, including scrutiny by senior managers, is
ineffective. As a result, managers do not routinely monitor and assess
progress and risk to all children. Social work caseloads in the referral and
assessment, and safeguarding teams are too high and do not create an
environment where social workers can do their job properly. Practice is not
consistently robust and, in too many cases, assessments and plans are not of


a good enough quality, leading to significant drift in progressing work.
(Recommendation)

Available performance management information is used insufficiently to drive
practice. There is a lack of critical enquiry by senior managers and leaders,
and a failure to interrogate data. For example, there is no data on children in
need, the largest cohort of children receiving the support of childrens
services. Quality assurance arrangements are inadequate, as case auditing
does not demonstrate rigour in the work carried out. Escalation processes
are not routinely utilised by IROs or conference chairs to alert senior
managers to the impact of the significant deficits in practice that are
identified in this inspection. (Recommendation)


The quality and frequency of formal case and professional supervision are
not of a consistently adequate standard. There are some examples of
supervision records utilising the local authority social work model, but the
large majority did not meet this standard. The supervision template is very
clear about what is to be achieved, but too few actions identified in previous
supervisions are reviewed. The better supervision records give clear
management direction, with timescales and rationale for decisions. However,
many records lack evidence of reflective practice and challenge. Actions are
not tracked between sessions, leading to drift in progressing plans for too
many children.


Placement stability for children looked after in foster care is strong, with a
high proportion living in family placements. At the time of inspection,
proposals by elected members to change the level of support to foster care
was causing considerable fragility in the system. Foster carers told inspectors
that they did not feel valued. The importance of ensuring that there are
sufficient local placements for children is a stated priority for the local
authority. The lead member for children and leader of the council gave
assurances to inspectors that childrens placements would not be destabilised
or children left at risk.


The corporate parenting strategy group, chaired by the interim DCS, and the
member-led corporate parent executive working group have had success in
improving health and educational outcomes for children looked after.
However, overall the pace of change has been too slow in fundamental areas
for too many children in care and care leavers. For example, in 2015 a task
and finish group was established to prevent homelessness and reduce the
number of care leavers in unsuitable accommodation. At the time of the
inspection, inspectors found that senior leaders were aware of the routine
practice of placing vulnerable care leavers in bed and breakfast
accommodation for extended periods. This is not acceptable. Inspectors
found that services for children looked after, care leavers and those requiring
adoption are inadequate.



Strategic arrangements for understanding, analysing and evaluating
outcomes for children at risk of sexual exploitation are underdeveloped. Prior
to the inspection, the local authority in partnership with police colleagues
revised the function of the multi-agency sexual exploitation (MASE) group.
They recognise that work is required to assess the profile of perpetrators and
victims, and to understand the circumstances and environments that make
children and young people more vulnerable to sexual exploitation. Plans to
disband the monthly multi-agency case-focused planning meeting were
withdrawn when inspectors raised concerns about the need to have a holistic
response that links children across agencies. (Recommendation)


Missing children procedures and protocols are not routinely followed.
Instead, there is a piecemeal approach. Too many children in care are not
being offered a return home interview. In cases seen of children missing
from home, the quality of the return home interviews by the teenage and
patenting support service (TAPSS) is good, with a holistic approach to
understanding family pressures and provision of effective intervention
following missing episodes. Inspectors were advised that this team was
being disbanded to find financial savings. Currently, there is no corporate
system for aggregating or cross-referencing information from return home
interviews with those children at risk of, or being, sexually exploited or
involved in gang activity.


Safeguarding and children looked after information is included in the joint
strategic needs assessment (JSNA). For example, there is comprehensive
analysis on the emotional and educational needs and outcomes for children
looked after. The JSNA highlights that health measures tend to be of
processes (for example, the number of health checks or dental checks),
rather than qualitative information on actual levels of health. There are
significant gaps in the JSNA for some groups of vulnerable children, for
example the high number of children known to early help services and
childrens social care as a result of parental domestic abuse, mental health
and substance misuse. There is no reference to child sexual exploitation or
those missing from home or care. Consequently, this limits senior leaders
understanding of prevalence, and impacts on local priority decisions by
leaders and their evaluation of whether resources could be commissioned to
ameliorate such issues.


The chair of Bromleys Health and Wellbeing Board (HWB) acknowledged
that it is still learning how to utilise the JSNA to best effect. Key priorities of
the HWB strategy include promoting the emotional well-being of children and
countering childhood obesity. The boards agenda is both demanding and
predominantly adult focused. The LSCB chair is a member, and ensures that
the safeguarding of vulnerable adults and children is discussed. The interface
with senior officers in childrens services is less apparent. However, holding
combined meetings with adult, children and health committees is reducing
silo working, and has been effective in improving the health and educational


outcomes of children looked after. There is little evidence that safeguarding
is a key focus for the HWB.

Bromley commissions an extensive range of early help and statutory services
for children. A number of senior managers corporately share responsibility,
leading to a lack of cohesion in approach, conflicting priorities and the
fragmented evaluation of services. The local authority has successfully
reviewed and recommissioned a single, targeted service for children with
emotional and mental health problems. There is evidence of effective work
with the clinical commissioning group, for example in jointly commissioning
residential services for disabled children. However, the DCS accepts that
more work is required if children and their families in Bromley are to benefit
from a carefully planned, dedicated and child-centred commissioning
strategy. (Recommendation)


The workforce strategy is comprehensive and ambitious. The local authority
has invested in access to good-quality training. This is reducing attrition
among qualified social work staff. There is a comprehensive and wellestablished training programme for 15 newly qualified social workers. This is
linked to local universities and is moderated independently, in partnership
with other local authorities. The implementation of the current social work
model is beginning to have an impact on identifying risks, and staff report
that this model is helping to bring clarity to their work. There is an effective
strategy to develop the skills and knowledge of senior practitioners.
However, the local authority recognises that its workforce strategy also
needs to focus on the development of its middle and senior managers.


Complaints are managed well by a designated complaints manager. Heads of
service and team managers receive a weekly update on all active complaints.
Learning from complaints is cascaded to managers and elected members on
a quarterly basis. There was an increase in complaints to childrens social
care, with 73 formal complaints in 201516 compared to 55 in 201415.
These relate mainly to childrens cases before the courts. Commissioned
independent advocates support children, resulting in most complaints made
by children being resolved informally.


Bromley proactively delivers in line with the Prevent duty, raising awareness
in schools and successfully intervening to prevent the escalation of concerns.
For example, recent cases demonstrate excellent multi-agency work when
the local authority was proactive in taking the matter to court, successfully
securing wardships for three children. The counter-terrorism unit expressed
considerable appreciation of the local authoritys open and professional
approach to this complex work.


The judiciary expressed significant concern about the quality of the childrens
services legal representation in court. The local authority does not instruct
sufficiently experienced lawyers in complex cases. Representations have
been made by the judge to the local authority on a number of occasions,


with little impact or improvement. Evidence is not prepared well. There is a
lack of understanding about what constitutes good evidence. Consequently,
the PLO is implemented neither effectively nor quickly enough. Senior
managers do not have a system to assure the quality and timeliness of
decisions. This results in drift and delay in children achieving legal
permanence.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) in Bromley requires improvement to
be good. Bromleys LSCB complies with its statutory responsibilities and the
requirements of Working together 2015. The chair of the board and its members
work closely together. Since the chair was appointed in April 2015, there have been
a number of improvements to board organisation and a greater focus on
safeguarding priorities. However, the board needs to develop a more critical
overview of practice and performance to understand fully the quality of practice in
safeguarding services, and the experiences of children and young people in Bromley.
The LSCBs understanding of the extent and prevalence of child sexual exploitation
and associated risks, particularly when young people go missing, is compromised by
poor data and poor qualitative information on practice.
There is insufficient overview by the LSCB of the introduction and effectiveness of
the local authority social work model of risk assessment. This is a key area of
practice improvement in Bromley, and the board needs to ensure that it has
oversight of its implementation, its impact on assessing need and the service
response to minimising risk to children.
The LSCBs engagement with young people needs focus, and the board has not yet
ensured that it hears the opinions of young people clearly and in a systematic way.
This presents as a missed opportunity to understand and respond to their needs.
A comprehensive multi-agency training programme ensures that a wide range of
staff benefit from key training in safeguarding issues. The programme is evaluated
for effectiveness, and it responds to the development needs of staff.
A multi-agency auditing programme looks at areas such as neglect and domestic
violence, as well as ensuring, through its S11 agency audit, that safeguarding
procedures are in place in all agencies working with children in Bromley. The board
conducts serious case reviews and case management reviews to identify issues. It
ensures that these are published and lessons learned.
The LSCB is active in ensuring that policies and procedures are in place, and that it
influences the development of practice. These procedures include on the issue of
female genital mutilation, ensuring that there is a child sexual abuse strategy in
place, and that children and families receive early help through the effective
operation of Bromleys early intervention model.


Recommendations

The LSCB should establish a performance dataset that ensures that it can
measure progress against its key priorities.


The LSCB should ensure that there is critical enquiry and challenge in
relation to the core safeguarding activity undertaken by all agencies.


The LSCB should actively seek the views and opinions of children and young
people, and engage them in a systematic manner in order to ensure that it is
aware of and benefits from their experiences.


The LSCB should ensure that multi-agency arrangements for the oversight of
children missing and at risk of sexual exploitation are underpinned by
effective information sharing, performance monitoring and action planning,
and are strategically coordinated and monitored by the board.


The LSCB should ensure that the arrangements for children privately
fostered comply with statutory guidance, and that they are safe and that
their health and well-being are properly promoted.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

Bromley Safeguarding Children Board complies with its statutory
responsibilities as defined in Working together 2015. It is appropriately
constituted and includes two lay members. Since the appointment of a new
chair in April 2015, the LSCB has been restructured and has reorganised its
sub-groups to focus more closely on priority areas such as vulnerable
children, and the development of policy and procedures. Although a
relatively recent development (autumn 2015), only one sub-group (training)
is now chaired by a social care manager, with others being chaired by senior
members of partnership agencies, including education and health. This
strengthens the collaborative commitment of all partners. LSCB members
consider that they work well together and that the creation of a leadership
group of sub-group chairs in autumn 2015 gave clear direction to the work of
the board. The chair acknowledges that the changes made reflect a need for
a greater level of practice focus and critical enquiry. (Recommendation)


The LSCBs business plan for 201518 identifies five key priority areas,
together with appropriate performance measures, including milestones and
rating of progress. However, it does not identify the implementation of the
current social work model across Bromley as a key measure to improving the
identification and minimisation of risk, and as an area that the LSCB should
monitor for effectiveness. This means that the board does not have sufficient
focus on a key area of practice that was introduced to make a difference to
children in Bromley.



Governance arrangements are not all yet in place to ensure that partners,
such as the Health and Wellbeing Board (HWB) and the Childrens Board, are
fulfilling their responsibilities to help, protect and care for children and young
people. A written partnership agreement has recently been proposed
between the LSCB and the HWB, setting out the nature of their relationship
and mutual expectations. However, the LSCB has kept the HWB aware of
issues, including raising self-harm and homelessness as topics for the HWB
to consider in their current review of partnership strategy. The chair of the
LSCB does not attend the Childrens Board and this is a gap, given that this
group has a focus on outcomes for children at risk in the community. This
means that the LSCB is not as influential as it should be in scrutinising and
challenging safeguarding activity.


The chair of the LSCB meets on a regular basis with the chief executive and
the DCS. The director of adult services also attends, in recognition of the
chair of the LSCBs additional role as chair of Bromleys adult safeguarding
board. This provides continuity across both safeguarding agendas. The chair
meets with elected members at board meetings and separately.


The board is provided with a dataset from individual agencies, including the
police, health and social care. However, the information provided has not yet
been tailored to the boards needs and omits key information, particularly in
relation to child sexual exploitation. There is no reporting of the total number
of young people missing, apart from those in care and those missing
education, and no data on the timeliness of return interviews or the
prevalence of domestic abuse. This means that the board cannot have a
clear picture of all relevant safeguarding activity. While some of these gaps
have been filled by other means, for example a recent report on missing
young people looked after provided to the vulnerable children sub-group, the
LSCB does not yet have a sufficiently focused set of performance data to rely
upon. (Recommendation)


The LSCB has a comprehensive multi-agency training programme. It ran 18
courses in 201415, with 535 people attending and a further 1,955
undertaking a variety of e-learning modules. There is an established
evaluative process, including post-course evaluation three months after the
event, and all training sub-group members observe training courses to
assess the quality of content and delivery. Feedback from learning is used to
inform future commissioning of training, together with an analysis of need
undertaken by the training sub-group. However, the annual training
evaluation report could be more informative in relation to the effectiveness
of courses, better to inform the board of the experiences of staff.


The LSCB undertakes regular monitoring of frontline activity. It has a multiagency audit programme, which considered reducing the risk of child sexual
exploitation, the response to MASH contacts and practice on domestic abuse.
An audit in relation to practice on neglect in 2014 has an ongoing action
plan, last updated in January 2016. As a result, the LSCB has been able to


produce a detailed improvement action plan based on audit outcomes, and
has a comprehensive overview of progress. A 201617 multi-agency audit
programme proposes a focus on the effectiveness of core groups and a
review of MASH effectiveness. However, it has not yet agreed how this
activity is to be funded to ensure that there is an appropriate level of
independence, and the board has identified this as an ongoing risk to the
auditing programme.

The LSCB has undertaken a range of activity to ensure that it both influences
and understands child sexual exploitation in Bromley. A review undertaken at
the end of 2014, supported by a further multi-agency audit in January 2015,
assessed whether risk had been reduced in child sexual exploitation cases.
The policy and procedures sub-group is currently ratifying an updated
protocol to counter child sexual exploitation. The LSCB also receives
information on disruption activity and cases that are considered at the multiagency sexual exploitation (MASE) panel. However, the understanding of the
extent and prevalence of child sexual exploitation and associated risks,
particularly of young people who go missing, is compromised by poor data
and poor qualitative information on practice. To date, the LSCB has not
demonstrated sufficient critical enquiry in these areas to ensure that it has a
robust overview of risk and practice.


A programme of section 11 audits on a two-yearly basis is overseen
effectively by the LSCB, with agency returns considered at a section 11
review panel. The current 201416 audit cycle is now complete, with only
one instance of agency non-compliance. The LSCB can evidence challenge
when audits have not met an appropriate standard through an action log,
updated at six-monthly intervals. This log is an effective measure of progress
and implementation. The LSCB has also sought to ensure that schools
complete section 175 audits, with a current completion rate of 63%. There is
recognition that some schools lack an understanding of the purpose of either
the audit or the function of the LSCB. On such occasions, the board has
sought to engage with them, on an individual level, to ensure compliance.


The LSCB has a local learning and improvement framework for statutory
partners, which sets out how it will monitor and review practice, and learn
lessons. It conducted and published a serious case review (SCR) regarding
Child E in February 2015 and oversaw a subsequent action plan monitoring
the progress of actions identified across the partnership. There has been
dissemination of lessons learned through single-agency briefings, a joint
social care and health seminar, and four multi-agency briefings. The LSCB
conducts multi-agency reviews of cases which do not meet the threshold for
a serious case review yet where there are safeguarding concerns. Wider
learning from SCRs is included in the LSCB training offered across a range of
courses, including those concerning domestic abuse and neglect.


The child death overview panel (CDOP) produces an annual report on activity
and a comprehensive analysis identifies trends. It is active in promoting


issues to improve awareness, including the dangers of co-sleeping and
encouraging resilience among young people to prevent self-harm.

The LSCB is active in ensuring that policies and procedures influence the
consistency and quality of practice. In December 2015, the threshold
document The childs journey in Bromley was revised, setting out threshold
criteria, referral pathways, and the role of early intervention and the use of
the CAF. The LSCB receives regular updates on numbers of CAFs and trends.
This supports a partnership understanding of the framework and the
importance of early joint working. Together with the Bromley adult
safeguarding board, the LSCB has also recently agreed and published a
multi-agency intervention framework for identifying, assessing and
responding to female genital mutilation. It has also put in place and updated
a protocol for escalating concerns and resolving professional differences. The
LSCBs domestic abuse audit has been influential in ensuring that domestic
abuse is a priority in the 201618 community safety plan.


A challenge log has recently been implemented formally to evidence
challenge in relation to practice, including the timeliness of initial health
assessments for children looked after, lack of engagement by some schools
in completing section 175 returns, and the use of missing and return home
interviews. Evidence of challenge is not always well recorded in LSCB
meeting minutes, or in sufficient depth in relation to practice.


The LSCB does not have a plan to engage with young people and has not
met with members of the Bromley Living in Care Council (LinCC). The LSCB
has not yet ensured that it hears the opinions of young people clearly and in
a systematic way. There is recognition that this is a gap, and the chair has
ensured that meetings are held in venues such as schools. This offers an
opportunity to meet with young people. A more planned approach is needed
to ensure that the LSCB is informed of young peoples views and that they
are offered an opportunity to contribute to the boards work.
(Recommendation)


The board publishes a detailed report annually. It considers a wide range of
LSCB activity, including the work of its sub-groups. It identifies and reflects
on the outcomes of multi-agency audits, including areas for development.
The report appropriately identifies business plan priorities, but could better
identify progress against these in order to offer a measure of its
performance. The LSCB does not sufficiently monitor the arrangements for
children and young people who are privately fostered. (Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This includes children and young
people who are looked after, and young people who are leaving care and starting
their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Marcie Taylor
Deputy lead inspector: Brenda McLaughlin
Team inspectors: Karen Wareing, Tracey Metcalfe, Anji Parker, Jon Bowman, Peter
McEntee
Shadow inspectors: Alison Smale, Sandra Jacobs-Walls
Senior data analyst: Judith Swindell
Quality assurance manager: Sean Tarpey


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


