Buckinghamshire County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 3 June  25 June 2014
Report published: 8 August 2014
The overall judgement is that childrens services are
inadequate
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Inadequate


Inadequate


Requires
Improvement


Requires
Improvement


Inadequate

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is
inadequate.
The LSCB is not demonstrating that it has effective arrangements or the required
skills to discharge its statutory duties.


Contents
Section 1: The local authority - Summary of findings
What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB



Section 1: The local authority - Summary of findings
Childrens services in Buckinghamshire are inadequate because:

Political leaders and chief officers state that childrens social care is not in the
top two priorities for the Council. This limits the effectiveness of those with lead
responsibility for Childrens Social Care to drive up standards and sustain
longer-term change.


Failures by Buckinghamshires safeguarding services are widespread and
serious. The result is that children are not being effectively protected. Children
and young people do always not receive help when they need it.


For some months, leaders in Buckinghamshire, including elected members,
have had concerns about the quality of services delivered by some social work
teams. However, there has been too little analysis of where problems lie and,
as a result; remedial action and investment have not led to improvements.


Failures in some parts of the service are serious, particularly in assessing and
responding to children and young people in need of help and protection. At the
time of this inspection, a high number of children in need of statutory
intervention and protection were without an allocated social worker. As a result,
too many of them are at risk of harm. The level of unallocated work is a longstanding problem.


Arrangements to prioritise unallocated work are unsafe. Some children who
require continuing help and protection are not allocated to a social worker.
Responses to them are piecemeal, with tasks allocated to different social
workers. Decisions to close cases without social workers seeing and speaking to
children exacerbate risks.


Case loads are too high in some areas of the service and this means that social
workers are unable to do their jobs effectively. Agencies do not agree about the
threshold for intervention by childrens social care.


Many case records are poor. They do not accurately reflect the childs
experiences and important documents are left blank.


Care for some looked after children is not good enough. Managers do not know
if all statutory visits are completed because performance information is missing.
Over 50% of looked after children are placed outside Buckinghamshire and this
affects the availability and timeliness of services to meet their needs.


Not all young people leaving care have an up-to-date plan. For some,
preparation for leaving care starts too late. In addition, the proportion of care
leavers who are not in education, employment or training (NEET) is significantly
higher than that for Buckinghamshires young people as a whole.


practice in many teams is inconsistent. At all levels, too many managers are
temporary.
A number of internal and external audits of social work practice have identified
concerns but managers have not taken effective action to address these.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
being assessed and ensure that any necessary action is taken to meet them.
the improvements needed in childrens social care.
document, that it is implemented and monitored effectively, and that it is
supported by clear guidance.
first-line managers to provide services that are safe, responsive and effective.
care, there is sufficient capacity in this part of the service to undertake the
work effectively, and that children are assessed swiftly so that their safety is
secured.
the needs and wishes of the child, provide a thorough assessment of parental
attributes, consider historical factors, and analyse risk and resilience factors in
detail.
line with legislation and case law, with consent obtained except in
circumstances where it would heighten risk of significant harm to a child or
young person. Ensure that historical information is included so that risks can be
better analysed and understood.
social workers, and have enough time with them to build and maintain positive
relationships.
an analysis of their cultural, religious and diversity needs, and detailed reasons
for key decisions.
consider the views of all relevant agencies and professionals when determining
how to proceed.
needs, with clear timescales and outcomes by which progress can be
measured.


the child protection plan and that escalation processes follow if parents fail to
engage.
childrens case files whether they are spoken to alone.
clearly recorded and supported by a risk assessment and support plan to enable
them to be reunited successfully.
are dealt with promptly and recorded accurately.


Areas for improvement
effectively, so that families receive support when their need is first identified.
include an updated assessment and analysis of the childs progress since the
previous review to inform future planning.
about children is contained in one place and can be easily accessed by staff.
that records of looked after reviews meetings, reports and minutes are on the
childs case file.
undertake their statutory responsibilities, including monitoring childrens care
plans and visiting children between statutory reviews.
permanence reports (CPRs) and about prospective adopters in adoption
assessments and ensure that a senior manager agrees the reports before they
go to the panel.
independence. These should include contingency arrangements, take account
of their education and health history, and be updated promptly as
circumstances change.
who live outside Buckinghamshire.
available in Buckinghamshire to meet needs, and that children are placed out of
area only when it is part of their care plan.
carers and to identify their support needs.
between looked after children and other pupils in Buckinghamshire and make
sure that looked after children have access to good and outstanding schools.
(We Do Care) and ensure that they are influential in revising the Care Leavers
Pledge.


people to remain with foster carers beyond the age of 18 and develop more
choice for care leavers accommodation, including when they need or wish to
settle outside the county.
apprenticeships and work-based learning.
employment or training and close the gap between them and other children
and young people in Buckinghamshire.
fostered children in accordance with regulations and guidance.
levels have timely, relevant and accurate performance and quality assurance
information to enable them to do their jobs effectively and deliver
improvements.
Partnership Board, the Buckinghamshire Safeguarding Children Board (BSCB)
and the Health and Well-being Board so that improved outcomes for children
and young people are prioritised, tracked and evaluated across the partnership.


The local authority has the following strengths:
Buckinghamshire. Very recent caseload reductions in some teams are making a
positive difference. In some cases, feedback from parents and children showed
that social workers had made a real difference to their lives.
is supported by ten sessional workers and a duty rota for senior managers.
missing or are at risk of sexual exploitation are effective.
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and the district judges.
The work of the Family Court team is well regarded by the judiciary. It is
helping to reduce court time and leading to timely decisions for children.
and Alcohol Court (FDAC). This is an example of good, innovative practice.
vulnerable children and their families. Children and young people are consulted
on these and influence their design.
services, including drug and alcohol outreach. Young carers have access to an
array of support services and take-up is high. Support services for disabled
children are also good in terms of choice and quality.
to do so throughout their school careers. The After Care team supports them
well.
to their family would be unsafe or would not meet the childs needs
satisfactorily.
analysis of these incidents has been used to improve the service.
and well-established, and there is investment in on-the-job-training for 17 staff.


Information about this inspection
The inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people
who have needed or still need help, protection or both of these. This also includes
children and young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving
care and starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of social work and the difference adults make to
the lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff worked with families and each other and discussed the
effectiveness of the help and care given to children and young people. Wherever
possible, they talked to children, young people and their families. In addition, the
inspectors have tried to understand to what extent the local authority knows how
well it is performing and what difference it makes for the people it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006. The
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the
Local Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and one
additional inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Brenda McLaughlin
Team inspectors: Sean Tarpey, Carolyn Spray, Fiona Parker, Neil Penswick, Chris
Davies and Dominic Porter-Moore.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 117,900children and young people under the age of 18 live
in Buckinghamshire. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 11% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 7.2% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 5.7% (the national average is 15.1%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 20.9%
of all children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in England as a
whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the
area are Asian or Asian British at 12%.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an
additional language:
 in primary schools is 16.1% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 13.6%% (the national average is 13.6%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2014, assessment had identified 2,428 children as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 31 March 2014, 263 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is an increase from 190 at 31 March 2013.
 At 31 March 2014, three children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is the same as at 31 March 2013.
Children looked after in this area
 At 9 June 2014, 444 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 38 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 400 (34 per


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where these were available.
The categories below may overlap.


authority area
authority area
area
 six live with parents, of whom 17% live out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months
 there have been 30 adoptions
subsequently returned to be looked after
 nine children and young people have ceased to be looked after and
moved on to independent living
 one young person has ceased to be looked after and is now living in a
house of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home. It was not judged to be
good or outstanding in its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Buckinghamshires safeguarding arrangements /
arrangements for the protection of children was in January 2011. The local
authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of Buckinghamshires services for looked after
children was in January 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since January 2006.
 The Chair of the LSCB has been in post since 2006.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
Key Judgement
The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Judgement Grade
Inadequate

serious. The result is that children are not being effectively protected. Children
and young people do always not receive help when they need it.
threshold for statutory intervention by the First Response Team (FRT) did not
have an allocated social worker. In March 2014, the number of unallocated
cases was high. The local authority commissioned an external agency to work
with these children. Many were living in neglectful and unsafe circumstances
and had waited months to receive a service.
assessment, child protection, management oversight and supervision. This
leaves children and young people at risk of harm.
report high levels of concern about intervention by childrens social care.
Referrers are not responded to routinely, communication is poor and
professionals are worried that children are at risk.
universal services, such as health and schools, is leading to increased referrals
to social work services. Recent serious case reviews identified these concerns
but they have not been addressed.
do not contain enough information for an appropriate assessment of risk to be
made, resulting in additional work for frontline childrens social care teams.
families, a significant proportion of work is seriously inadequate and it takes too
long for social workers to see vulnerable children.
have focused on implementing new systems and, in doing so, have failed to
recognise that the requirements of basic social work practice were not being
met. Caseloads in many teams are too high, meaning social workers cannot do
their job effectively. As a result, some children at risk and in care are not visited
regularly by their social workers. The quality of assessments is poor.


inspectors tracked and sampled showed a history of repeat referrals, with the
unresolved concerns being re-presented. The childs history is not taken into
account routinely when determining whether a child needs help. The result is
that decisions are based on incomplete risk assessments.
revised duty system is improving the response to referrals. The timeliness of
child protection strategy discussions has improved, although these are normally
telephone conversations only between the social care manager and the police.
This therefore excludes other professionals known to be involved with the child
and limits the effectiveness of the discussions.
services. Families first (troubled families initiative) is a cross agency
collaborative approach that has identified 417 families at the end of June 2013.
They worked with 261 families and successfully helped 35 families to meet their
goals. Its Family Resilience Service and childrens centres use evidence-based
tools, such as the Family Star and Graded Care Profile. This assessment and
planning tool replaces the Common Assessment Framework, but it is applied
only by local authority services and those commissioned by them. There is little
evidence that the wider partnership understands and applies it. This seriously
diminishes the critical role that agencies such as health, schools and adult
services play in helping children. It also leads to inadequate co-ordination of
early help services. This means that children do not always receive help early
enough to ensure that their needs are met and do not escalate.
services, including drug and alcohol outreach. Young carers have access to an
array of support services and take-up of these is high. Support services for
disabled children are also good in terms of choice and quality. Feedback from
parents and young people provides some evidence of their positive impact and
improved outcomes.
management oversight. There is an over-reliance on locum social workers. This
workforce instability means frequent changes of social worker for children and
makes it harder for them to build meaningful and trusting relationships with
them.
accurate view of the quality of practice. Individual performance management is
poor, levels of supervision are inconsistent and management oversight is
lacking. All this means that social workers lack the support they need to
safeguard children effectively.
March 2013 from 190 to 263. Of these, 23% had a repeat child protection plan


compared with 11% during the preceding year. This indicates that children are
being taken off child protection plans too early and before risks have been
reduced effectively. There is no step down protocol with universal services to
ensure that children coming off child protection plans continue to receive
structured help.
the plan to end. However, most of the plans simply list tasks: they are not
specific, do not have clear timescales and do not specify what the intended
outcomes are. Most core group meetings review a familys circumstances rather
than measure progress, leading to drift and delay. The core groups do not act
or escalate matters where parents are not cooperating.
always reflected in case records. There is little evidence of social workers
working directly with children. This is largely delegated to other services such
as Senior and Junior Catch or Womens Aid refuge support.
the chronologies are incomplete or not up to date. Records of management
decisions and weekly unit meetings are not comprehensive. Some records, such
as core group minutes are duplicated to sibling case files, which mean that they
are not always personal to the child. This prevents new workers and managers
from swiftly understanding when they take over a case or when the allocated
social worker is absent. It also reduces the value of the records to children
when they read them.
the cases allocated to the team and for group reflection. Such meetings are less
effective in the children in need teams because of the complexity of the work
and poor staff retention.
gender identity or sexuality are not detailed enough in assessments or
addressed in plans. This information is critical in helping children understand
their experiences.
mental health, domestic violence or substance misuse are adversely affecting
children. The county commissions a wide range of preventive and support
services to work with families.
relevant agencies, enabling information about vulnerable children to be shared
effectively and for action planning to take place for high-risk cases. The
appointment of two domestic abuse advisors in childrens services ensures that


all decision-making and planning about children at risk of harm from domestic
abuse is informed by good-quality information and multiagency working.
work is supported by ten sessional workers and a senior manager duty rota.
The relationship with the police is good. Day-time managers in childrens social
care confirm that the interface with the EDT works well.
workers. They undertake assessment work under instruction from managers
and the family court. They also assist with viability assessments of family and
friends as potential carers, and welfare reports ordered by the courts. The
judiciary and legal services praise the quality of the teams court reports and
confirm that it has contributed significantly to ensuring that the average length
of court proceedings is 26 weeks. This reduces delay for children in achieving
permanence.
Assessment Conference (SERAC) have good multi-agency attendance and share
information about young people. RUSafe, a Barnardos service jointly
commissioned by health, the local authority and police, visits all children on
their return after they have been missing and provides a range of support
services. The launch in schools of Chelsea's Choice (a theatre production that is
raising awareness of child sexual exploitation among young people in the UK)
has led to increased referrals, including self-referrals, to RUSafe.
service for hard to reach young people.
resources has resulted in the Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO) not
being able to respond promptly to allegations of harm or potential harm caused
by professionals. Records are not always accurate. In one case seen, unsafe
recruitment practice was evident but the recording of the LADOs actions was
unclear. The LADO remains without an adequate database and this affects how
managers record and quality assure the work.
The capacity of the team has been reduced and it is not always meeting
regulatory requirements. The number of privately fostered children is low at
only three. There is a lack of awareness across the county about the
importance of notifying the authority of such arrangements.
effectively. However, case files of the small number who cannot be traced are
closed without ensuring that they are safe from harm.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Key Judgement
The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Judgement Grade
Inadequate

came into care too late. This was the result of poor practice and poor
assessments, resulting in delayed decision-making by managers. However,
when childrens needs and risks are assessed appropriately, decisions to look
after them are timely. Inspectors did not find any children who were in care
unnecessarily.
on a voluntary basis to determine whether their circumstances have changed
sufficiently for them to return to their birth families. Inspectors saw a number
of cases where children had recently returned home, but none of these young
people had had a risk assessment to consider whether previous concerns had
been ameliorated. For a small number of children this led to continued
instability and further periods in care. Managers decision-making was not clear.
their placements. A number of sampled cases showed that social workers do
not visit their looked after children often enough. In some cases, statutory
guidance setting out the minimum frequency of visits is not followed. Managers
ineffective oversight of this work and poor-quality recording mean that they do
not know how prevalent this is or the impact it may be having on children and
young people.
initiate care proceedings. The Court Social Work Team provides a specialist
service to assess childrens needs, avoid delays and prepare court care plans in
care proceedings. In the last quarter, the local authority has met the 26-week
national target for completing care proceedings. Family group conferences are
used to identify how extended families can support parents to provide care for
their children and to consider suitable alternatives where this is not possible. If
family and friends are potential carers, they are assessed without delay to
determine their viability to provide care and permanence for children via
increased use of Special Guardianship orders.
review. Parallel planning addresses contingencies and helps to avoid delays.
living long-term with their foster carers are formalised. This is being achieved
through formal matching agreements. These include the wishes of the


child/young person and are ratified at a permanence panel. This is important to
help children and young people feel secure about where they will be living if
they cannot return to their families. For the majority of children, placement
stability is good.
that shows they know the children better than the case records reflect.
Childrens views, wishes and feelings are not always evident in case records, so
it is not clear how well they are able to contribute to their plans. Care plans
prepared for the courts, however, represent childrens views well and their
wishes are clearly influential in shaping their futures.
This helps children to understand and deal with their difficult experiences, make
sense of their complex feelings and explore their identity. The availability of this
resource has recently increased, with specialist workers undertaking it, but not
all looked after children are yet benefiting.
them to express their views and so inform decisions about them. However,
those placed out of area do not always have timely access to independent
visitors. Currently, 30 children are waiting for this support.
all their statutory responsibilities, including monitoring childrens progress and
visiting them between reviews. They prioritise the children who are most in
need of visits, routinely see all children alone before their reviews and challenge
poor practice on behalf of individuals. However, a lack of capacity in the
Children in Need teams means the challenge from IROs is not having a
significant impact on overall practice for looked after children.
the number of reviews which take place without a social work report. This
means that childrens progress and changing needs are not always considered.
Although IROs provide a safety net in these cases, there is a risk that important
information will be missed and plans not tailored to meet changing needs.
blank plans and review reports entered on the system and key documents
stored in other systems. Case records do not accurately reflect the childs
journey and the reasons for key decisions. This limits social workers ability to
talk to children in the future about their lives and new social workers
understanding of the case. This also limits the capacity of IROs and managers
to track young peoples progress effectively.
than expected progress from their starting points and, overall, they are doing
almost as well as other children in the same age group by the end of Key Stage


Buckinghamshire has widened by the age of 16. As is the case nationally the
worst performing group comprises those who become looked after in their
teens.
five GCSEs at A* to C including English and mathematics. This is in stark
contrast to the 71% rate for all children in Buckinghamshire and to the 15.3%
for all looked after children in England.
many of which are selective. School placements and moves for looked after
children are managed well and, although choice is problematic in rural areas,
the county provides good additional support and seeks to minimise disruption
to the childrens education. Many children who move live with carers outside of
the countys boundaries are able to maintain their school placement.
progress and attendance of all children looked after and reviews their Personal
Educational Plans (PEPs). The virtual school also provides pastoral and
behavioural support. Monitoring by the ECPC underpins decisions about how
best to support each child, including through direct teaching, commissioned
tuition, mentoring and enrichment activities. For some children with high
aspirations, trips to universities and taster days are very effective in helping
them to progress to higher education. Teachers, carers and pupils regard the
ECPCs tailored support and challenge very positively. The ECPC is also
monitoring closely the use of the Pupil Premium, although it is too soon to
measure impact.
places or were on the roll of a school part time and also with an alternative
education provider. Five pupils were on a schools roll but not attending for 25
hours; they had tuition and youth provision brokered and monitored by the
virtual school ECPC, both in the county and in other local authority areas.
years, 18 incidents have been logged. Looked after childrens absence from
school overall is low at less than 5%.
The local authority provides six residential beds in the county and 111 local
authority foster carers. This means that over 50% of looked after children are
placed out of the county. For particular reasons, some children need to live
away from their home area, but most do not. The majority of placements out of
the county are the result of insufficient resources within it and not because of
assessed needs. For children placed out of area, distance adversely affects their
relationships with family, the frequency of their visits home, the ability to
maintain continuity of school place and access to health assessments.


some good work to increase access to placements that support children and
young peoples cultural needs. Through the consortium, work has been done
with a mosque to provide placements for seven children. Placements are also
arranged for young asylum seekers in communities that meet their needs.
Young people with specific cultural needs receive well-coordinated, tailored
support.
child becomes looked after, so any health needs are not tackled early enough.
This is particularly worrying in cases of long-term neglect where information
about health is needed to inform assessments and long-term plans.
foster carers did not have annual reviews last year. The result is that oversight
to confirm their continuing suitability and identify any support, training and
development needs is insufficient, although foster carers say they are well
supported. Supervising social workers do not always visit them often enough
and do not provide sufficient support and supervision.
quality and usefulness in helping them to support children and young people,
as well as manage and understand their behaviour.
children are taken into the care of the local authority if risks cannot be safely
managed at home. The majority of young people at risk of child sexual
exploitation are placed out of the area for their own protection. When
necessary, in a very few cases, secure accommodation has been used to ensure
their safety. Senior managers monitor children who go missing effectively and
they are subject to ongoing risk assessments.
children as a whole, including those placed out of area. It is underdeveloped
and the pledge has not been updated since 2012. Senior managers are
insufficiently involved and fail to drive support for this work. The few members
who attend have pursued areas of particular interest and have contributed to
small but significant improvements in services, including the website for We do
care which is about to be launched. However, the impact and reach of the
Council overall are minimal.
leisure activities.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is
requires improvement
where a return to their family would be unsafe or would not meet their needs
satisfactorily.
become one of adoption. The average time between children entering care and
moving in with their adoptive family is 474 days, a significant improvement on
the average of 649 days over the last three years. The time between
Buckinghamshire receiving court authority to place a child and the authority
deciding on a match to an adoptive family averages 200 days. This is better
than performance nationally but not as good as that for similar authorities (at
proceedings before their adoptions are completed. This is just above the
national figure (45%) and that for similar authorities (41%).
adoption (43) are in line with national figures and those for similar authorities.
has improved recently, but overall performance is not as good as that of similar
authorities. Some children experience unnecessary delays in finding a
permanent home. The delays investigated by inspectors were because some
social workers had not completed work in a timely manner and because family
finding was not sufficiently robust. Although, rightly, temporary staff have been
taken on to add capacity, the quality of their work is inconsistent.
support from social workers. However, they were critical of the timeliness of
adoption work, with many describing delays. Almost 80% of approved families,
experienced delays, performance which is worse than for similar authorities
(71%) and the national average (58%). However, performance in placing
babies for adoption is better.
Permanency and Children in Care Teams. This is improving management
oversight and ensuring that cases are allocated appropriately: some managers
had been carrying out direct work, limiting their own capacity to manage.
experienced changes of social worker, meaning they lack important, continuing
support from one individual. This is a particular problem for children who have


already experienced significant and traumatic changes. Adoption assessments
are not always of good quality and this has led to unnecessary delays for a
small number of children and adopters. Ofsteds last inspection of adoption
services in October 2011 identified the quality of assessments as a weakness.
This has not been rectified. Inspectors came across a small number of
examples of distressed children and their adoptive families who had to cope
with further delays because the adoption panel had rejected poor-quality
reports.
Reports are not consistently satisfactory, yet these are essential to ensure that
children are matched with the right adoptive parents and to give prospective
adopters the information they need.
scrutinising proposals to match children with adoptive parents, with evidence of
good challenge by the chair and the agency decision maker. The part-time
panel advisor, legal services and the panels medical experts provide good
support.
analysis of these has been used to improve the service. For instance, children
are now not placed at the beginning of the summer holidays.
they receive. The range of pre- and post-adoption support, including advice
lines, surgeries, and family and friends groups, is good. The local authority
employs two clinical psychologists to support families and help prevent adoption
placements breaking down. This work is of a high standard. The authority also
provides a post-adoption letter box service to enable children to receive agreed
correspondence from their birth families.

The graded judgement about the experiences and progress of
care leavers is that it requires improvement
live, through effective direct work from the After Care Team.
personal advisers in the After Care team. Staff assess young peoples changing
needs effectively and, as a result, are able to provide the necessary help and
support. The teams successful outreach support to raise care leavers
expectations is attracting increasing numbers to come back to ask for support
up to the age of 26, when they are either still in education or need assistance.
they make direct contact with and support for care leavers a priority, allowing


them to build good, purposeful relationships with them, and to understand and
respond to young peoples aspirations and feelings.
pathway plan or equivalent. This means that managers do not have an explicit
record of the young persons views and assessed needs for review and quality
assurance. However, plans that are in place reflect and are shaped by young
people. The absence of personal advisers as a result of sickness and long-term
training in the After Care team means that many young people have too short a
time to prepare for leaving care. Young people who spoke to inspectors
confirmed this; they said that such work starts too late.
They are collaborating with other agencies (health and education) to ensure
that young peoples needs are prioritised. Supervision and a team approach
help practitioners to manage their work, and some are now updating plans.
However, workloads in the team remain high and more work is required to
sustain improved practice.
youth offending teams, and drug and alcohol services to support young people
who need these services are good. Young people receive accurate information
and guidance about their rights and responsibilities. Support for young parents
is particularly well established. Services for the few asylum seekers and
refugees known to the After Care team support them well across a broad range
of legal, financial and health matters.
training (NEET) is too high at 25%. Although this is lower than the national
average for care leavers, the rate is much higher than that for their peers in
Buckinghamshire (6%).The figure of 25% represents 38 care leavers between
older looked after children, with too few gaining useful qualifications, skills and
experience for work. Provision for care leavers to take up vocational training
and work-based learning is insufficient. Very few care leavers are currently in
apprenticeships and only one of these is within the authoritys services.
who are without qualifications, including some young parents, to return to
flexible learning in colleges. These young people make good progress from a
low starting point. The challenge remains for the service to expand its impact to
encompass the majority of young people who are not currently engaged in
education and training.
practically and through the option of remaining with their foster carers to go on
to higher education. Currently 17 are at university and 10 more are on track to


go in the near future. While this is positive, it represents only 11% of care
leavers.
are aware of the possibility of remaining with their foster carers beyond their
lodgings and, for most, in their own tenancies. Some housing options offer
young people bespoke guidance on practical and financial skills to maintain
their tenancy. Personal advisers play a big part in helping care leavers to
manage independently.
choice. Seven are currently in houses in multiple occupation and one young
person is in bed and breakfast accommodation. In all such cases, the
accommodation is assessed for suitability and risk assessments developed in
relation to the young persons needs. The range of accommodation is being
expanded further. This benefits those who are able to live in Buckinghamshire.
However, staff reported that the choices for those who wish to remain living
outside of the county are more challenging. Care leavers know about advocacy,
access to interpreters, bursaries for further and higher education, and how to
complain. Their feedback to the After Care team shows that they are happy
with the range of services and the level of contact offered by most personal
advisers. Managers have responded appropriately to complaints by young
people.
that are provided for them, but representation of care leavers on We Do Care
is low and continuity is fragile. At a time when the authority is considering
revising the Care Leavers Pledge, care leavers have too little opportunity to
exchange their views and have a say.


Leadership, management and governance
Key Judgement
Leadership, management and
governance

Judgement Grade
Inadequate

childrens social care over the past 12 months. They have consistently agreed
to additional funding to increase capacity. However, there is insufficient analysis
and understanding of the issues, underlying complexities and continuing risks
to childrens services, leading to reactive or retrospective council responses
rather than those based on effective strategic planning. Responses include
injections of cash to cover overspends. As a result, any sustainable impact in
tackling the longstanding weaknesses is limited and too many vulnerable
children in Buckinghamshire remain at risk of harm.
highest priority for the County Council. This limits the opportunity for those with
lead responsibility for childrens social care to tackle deficiencies effectively,
drive up standards and achieve sustainable improvements.
Buckinghamshire Safeguarding Children Board (BSCB) and the Health and Wellbeing Board to make outcomes for children a shared priority are not aligned.
This means that the collective accountability of these boards in helping and
protecting vulnerable children is inhibited.
Member for Childrens Services, with cross-party member engagement, district
councillors, officers of the County Council and a representative from the
independent advocacy service. However, the panels work is underdeveloped.
Members of the panel do not have sufficient knowledge and understanding of
their roles and responsibilities to make critical enquiries about the quality of
services for looked after children. This is essential if outcomes for all children in
care and care leavers are to improve.
district judges, and attendance at the Family Justice Board is good. The work of
the Family Court team is well regarded by the judiciary and by solicitors acting
for parents. This is helping to reduce court time and leading to timely decisions
for children. In addition, there is financial commitment from and investment by
childrens services for creating the Family Drug and Alcohol Court (FDAC). This
will be the third in the country and is an example of innovative practice.
newly qualified social workers. This is linked to local universities and moderated
in partnership with other local authorities. Positive investment in a grow your
own approach through the Frontline initiative has recruited eight staff to begin


work and on-the-job training in September 2014. Nine staff members are
undertaking social work training with the Open University. While these
developments are welcome, their potential impact is some way from realisation.
All levels in the organisation rely too much on locum staff. Managers and social
workers come and go, leading to significant instability in the workforce.
Children and their families experience frequent changes in social workers, often
at short notice. This has a negative impact on children developing meaningful
relationships with their social workers and leads to drift and delay.
impact of poor performance on vulnerable children. Performance management
information and effective quality assurance are not established. As a result,
senior leaders have not analysed, in detail, the deep-seated problems, the
findings from which could drive improvement. Internal or external audits that
have taken place have identified concerns, but subsequent action has been
limited and ineffective.
ineffective and not systematic. Supervision does not occur in accordance with
the local authoritys own policy. As a result, managers do not routinely monitor
and assess progress and risk to children.
to children with no allocated social worker were unsafe. Some children,
including those who had alleged physical abuse, were not seen, and some
remained in neglectful and unsafe circumstances after they were referred to
childrens social care.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after, and the welfare of care
leavers is safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place. However, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services in which widespread or
serious failures create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm or result in
looked after children or care leavers not having their welfare safeguarded and
promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
inadequate.

Priority and immediate action:
Early Intervention Strategy so that children and their families have timely
access to early help and support.
fully by all partners, supported by clear guidance, including on partners roles
and responsibilities, and implemented and monitored effectively.
established across Buckinghamshire, and that governance arrangements within
the Board and with other key strategic bodies are effective in identifying and
prioritising work to meet the needs of children, young people and their families.
provide sufficient resources for the Board to undertake its core business.
between partner agencies and how to use it.
necessary.
Areas for improvement
area. Individual agencies must own the findings of audits and use this
information effectively to promote improvement.
and supported by promoting awareness of private fostering.
multi-agency safeguarding practice. This should include robust analysis of


safeguarding data, including information from all key partner agencies so that
issues and implications for multi-agency safeguarding practice are identified
and addressed.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the BSCB
partnerships. However, partnership working is undeveloped and ineffective.
Recognition of responsibilities and the sharing of accountabilities for helping
and protecting children are limited.
Councils Chief Executive are defined and include formal regular meetings.
However, these arrangements have not led to the serious and widespread risks
to children in social care being fully understood, addressed or prioritised.
required.
fulfilling their statutory duties to help and protect children. This fundamental
failing has delayed the recognition of deficits in services. Consequently, some
children and young people at risk of harm and requiring statutory services from
childrens social care have not received them in a timely manner. Assessments
of risk and need have been delayed. The BSCB has not been effective in
ensuring that partners work together to reduce risk for all children who are
identified as needing assessment, support and intervention.
the Monitoring and Evaluation sub-group undertake some monitoring of
performance, this is too restricted to childrens social care data. The Board does
not have a performance dataset from across the partnership. The focus of the
information presented is too narrow and the Board members are not sufficiently
enquiring to understand and challenge day-to-day practice. As a result, practice
and performance remain poor.
of the safeguarding arrangements across the hospitals within the
Buckinghamshire Healthcare Trust. This complex review was effective as it
worked across both adults and childrens services. More recently the BSCB has
considered the findings of a recent audit in relation to the appropriateness of
referrals to the sexual abuse referral centre (SARC). This has uncovered poor
practice in relation to the recording of S47 strategy meetings. The BSCB has
failed to ensure that all key partners contribute fully and actively to improving
the delivery of prevention and early help services. Partners have been too slow
to take on full responsibility for their roles in promoting childrens welfare. The
Early Help Strategy and offer is a very recent development. The capacity of the


Board to progress its ambitious work plan faces significant difficulties.
Buckinghamshire County Councils proposed budget cuts and agencies
reluctance to commit resources have contributed to financial pressures. This
has led to the postponement of the Annual BSCB Conference. Due to issues of
capacity some partners agencies are unable carry out individual agency
safeguarding audits under section 11 of the Children Act 2004.
funding cuts. The appointment of a BSCB Training Manager is for one year only
as funding is not assured beyond this. Frontline auditing activity has not
occurred as agencies report that their capacity is not sufficient to release
managers or practitioners to undertake such work. Attendance at some subgroups is variable. Some sub-groups lack vice-chairs and there are too many
changes in membership.
such as poor partnership knowledge and compliance with the Harder to Reach
protocol, but they have not focused on front-line practice.
However, review of their impact is not undertaken routinely or systematically.
The BSCB therefore cannot be assured that these policies and procedures have
improved practice to safeguard children. Inspectors found variable knowledge,
for example, about compliance with and the use of the child protection, medical
and escalation policies.
piecemeal and the accompanying guidance has not yet been published.
Similarly, the information-sharing protocol to govern work within the proposed
Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH) is yet to be finalised and formally
agreed. This results in confusion and poor practice in relation to consent and
confidentiality issues.
people and professionals of issues relating to missing children and those at risk
of child sexual exploitation. A variety of approaches has been used to raise
young peoples awareness of sexual exploitation and to minimise risk for those
at risk. Chelseas Choice, a drama piece on this topic, has been shown to young
people in secondary schools across the county. Evaluation highlights much
evidence of positive feedback from these initiatives. A strong feature is that all
RUSafe staff attend performances to give opportunities for young people to
discuss concerns and use the service.
Actions to promote agency and public awareness of private fostering
arrangements have not led to more children being identified. The BSCB needs
to do more to promote such awareness so that children, young people and
carers can be assessed and offered support.


objectives. A system for sharing electronically with all schools all notifications
from the police of domestic violence has now been re-established. The E-Safety
group has been effective in engaging positively with children and young people
to raise awareness of risks when using the internet. A new initiative deals with
gang-related issues, and a further initiative contributes to the Prevent agenda
through work with the police and local communities to identify young people
who are at risk of being influenced by extremists. However, some statutory
requirements in safeguarding practice remain unmet.
challenging partners through Section 11 audits and for contributing to learning.
These processes have been broadened to include scrutiny of single-agency
training. Arrangements for peer scrutiny and quality control of the Section 11
audits are effective in demonstrating challenge and impact. For example,
District Councils environmental health staff have now received training in
recognising neglect.
progress of reviews and the implementation of recommendations that arise are
monitored and reported to the Board. In the last 12 months, the BSCB made
two new notifications to Ofsted, both of which led to SCRs. Five SCRs have
been concluded, of which four have been published. One is not yet published
because of current court proceedings.
have been effective in raising their awareness of key issues such as teenage
suicide; harder to reach young people; domestic abuse and risk to babies and
those unborn.
Buckinghamshires SCRs, namely the need to promote escalation and challenge
within and between partner agencies. Work in this area must be a priority.
broad range of safeguarding issues. To some extent the training has been
developed to tackle local and national issues that emerge, including learning
from SCRs. All courses are evaluated on the day and efforts are also made to
contact the participants later to consider the longitudinal impact of training. All
BSCB courses have been modified to reflect the requirements of Working
Together to Safeguard Children 2013. New courses have been developed on
child sexual exploitation, escalation, conflict resolution and challenge. However,
the Boards capacity to maintain breadth in its training activity is significantly
compromised, both by funding restrictions and because some agencies do not
release staff to participate.


performance data, but it lacks analysis of key themes, such as the increasing
population of looked after children or the high percentage of re-referrals. The
report makes no reference to privately fostered children and young people
other than to say that they are a priority. These are significant deficits.
issues. For example, the Health and Well-being Board has been asked to
develop a suicide prevention action plan and there has been challenge to the
authority on budgetary cuts to childrens social care. However, the Board
remains concerned about the lack of police representatives at initial and review
child protection conferences, attendance by health professionals and input from
them to strategy discussions. As a result, the LSCB has not been able to
demonstrate effective influence on agencies in terms of addressing deficiencies
in practice.


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Its evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and its impact is evaluated regularly. The LSCB provides
robust and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas
for improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
above.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It does not
understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to identify
where improvements can be made


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


