Coventry City Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 28 January5 February 2014
The overall judgement is inadequate
There are widespread and serious failures that create or leave children being harmed
or at risk of harm.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

Inadequate


Requires
Improvement


Requires
Improvement


Requires
Improvement


Inadequate

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is
inadequate
The LSCB is not demonstrating that it has effective arrangements in place to
discharge its statutory duties.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents

Section 1: The Local Authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness local safeguarding children board


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB



Section 1: The Local Authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority has serious weaknesses and is not yet good because

Too many children and young people in Coventry who need help and protection
are not seen swiftly enough or provided with a timely assessment of their
needs, which means that they are left at risk of harm.


Leaders and managers have not tackled key weaknesses in childrens social
care quickly enough to ensure that children and young people are effectively
helped and protected. Concerns about the capacity of the service to manage
the volume of work in childrens social care have been known for some time
and were highlighted in the Local Government Association (LGA) review of
childrens services in March 2013.


Social workers in the referral and assessment teams have very high caseloads,
and this means that they cannot do their job properly. The lack of robust
management oversight of social workers caseloads means that managers do
not know whether all children have been seen or assessed. Social workers do
not always receive the right level of supervision from their managers to enable
them to discuss cases fully and make the right decisions for children and young
people, to improve their outcomes and ensure their safety and welfare.


Domestic abuse notifications were not all jointly screened between social care
and the police at the time of the inspection to ensure that there was timely
sharing of information to assess risk for children.


When child protection concerns are identified, the arrangements for the
management of child protection strategy discussions or meetings to discuss
these concerns are not always effective enough. The police do not routinely
attend all child protection discussions or strategy meetings with social care
managers. In too many cases, there are delays in convening and recording the
outcomes of these meetings, leaving some children for too long before the right
decisions are taken to protect them. The local authority is aware of this and is
currently reviewing these arrangements with the police.


A significant rise in the number of children requiring a child protection
conference has resulted in the Independent Reviewing Service being unable to
meet demand. Most initial child protection conferences are held more than 15
days after the strategy meeting decision to proceed to conference so, even
when it has been agreed that children are at risk of harm, some children have
to wait too long before there is a plan in place to protect them. Police do not
attend all initial child protection conferences, nor do they always provide
reports when these are required. All of these factors result in delays in
information sharing and appropriate decision making to ensure that children are
safe.



Too many assessments for children who need help and protection are not
completed within appropriate timescales and they are not always of a good
quality. Some assessments are not sufficiently child-focused, and they do not
always consider all aspects of parental behaviour and the impact of this on
children.


When children and families experience problems and need help, support is not
always sufficiently targeted or coordinated. The early help and intervention
strategy has recently been agreed but is not yet fully implemented. Not all
partners are fully engaged in the early help offer; for example, health visitors
undertake very few common assessments. Schools report that this results in
many children entering education without their needs having been fully
addressed, and this affects their learning. The lack of a coordinated early help
offer has a significant impact on services as problems escalate, and this
contributes to the increasing levels of referrals to childrens social care.


Independent reviewing officers, who monitor plans for children who are looked
after, have high caseloads. This means that they are not always able to track
childrens progress and intervene in their cases to promote care plans and
review decisions to ensure that their outcomes are improving.

life story work to help them understand the reasons for adoption.
very low, and carers assessments are not always completed promptly.
interview to ensure that they have the support they need to keep them safe.
plans are not always of good enough quality, as they do not analyse young
peoples aspirations well enough with regards to long term goals and
employment. This reduces the effectiveness of the advice and support they
receive.
system for monitoring whether all young people who leave care have their full
health histories in place.
performing and what they need to do better is not always reliable, and this
means they cant always be clear about the number of children who receive
social work visits or if they get their meetings on time.
The local authority has the following strengths


support of the Chief Executive and the local authority and there is clear
evidence of decisive action now being taken to address areas of concern.
Significant funding has recently been agreed for 26 additional posts within
childrens services to address the workload issues, although this investment has
not yet had a full impact as not all staff are yet in post. In addition, substantial
funding has been agreed to provide a range of new services for children and
families experiencing domestic abuse, which includes a single point of access to
services.
term neglect without the right action being taken. Targeted work to address
neglect and emotional abuse with children under the age of four has resulted in
an appropriate increase in the number of children who are becoming looked
after.
of CAF (common assessment framework) coordinators and close liaison with
schools have led to an improvement in the numbers of CAFs being undertaken,
so that many more families can now access the help they need early enough to
prevent problems escalating.
help keep them safe, a wide range of services are available for children and
their families, and in many cases these interventions lead to improved
outcomes.
Good use is made of family group conferences when care options are being
considered for children and young people. Planning for permanency for children
at an early stage is improving, with good evidence that a range of options are
increasingly used well to ensure that children secure permanent placements
early. The use of specialist long-term residential placements has led to some
good outcomes for children and young people. The percentage of children
placed in families is good, with many children placed together with their
brothers and sisters.
and when they need alternative provision this is readily available, of good
quality and children receive their full entitlement to 25 hours provision per
week.
Social workers and personal advisors now work together in teams and have
good access to information from different partners and services, which they use
to meet the individual needs of young people. Provision and opportunities for
care leavers have improved over the last three years and a very large majority
of young people progress to education or training at the end of Year 11.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
people are referred to childrens social care they are seen and assessed swiftly,
so that their safety is secured.
identified in the fundamental service review and the peer review to drive
improvements in practice.
and effectively targeted through the implementation of the early help strategy,
so that families receive support when need is first identified, and the number of
referrals to childrens social care is reduced.
oversight of social workers caseloads, so that children and families receive the
help and protection they need. Social workers and Independent Reviewing
Officers caseloads should be manageable, so that they can undertake their
work effectively.
to be reviewed to ensure that, as a minimum, a local authority social worker,
their manager, a health professional and a police representative are involved,
so that all relevant information can be shared and recorded effectively to assess
risk for children.
completed and recorded in a timely way to ensure that information is effectively
shared, children are seen and risks assessed, and that children receive the right
help and protection they need.
all relevant information can be shared and considered so that the right actions
are taken to ensure childrens safety.
a thorough assessment of parental problems the impact of these on children,
and a thorough analysis of all risk factors, to inform planning.
needs, with clear outcomes and timescales by which progress can be
measured.
within timescales.


Areas for improvement
children, so that they can get to know them well and they can fully understand
their needs and promote their welfare.
ensure that life story work is undertaken promptly, so that children can
understand the reasons for this decision and be well prepared for their future.
young people leaving care have full information about their health histories in
the form of health passports.
children, so that they know and understand their wishes and feelings and can
then robustly challenge all agencies involved to ensure that childrens needs are
met.
interview so that professionals understand why they went missing and what
steps can be taken to ensure that this does not happen again.
people are clear and long-term plans for their education and employment are
identified at an early stage to ensure young people receive the support they
need.
leave the care of the local authority.
improve to bring this performance in line with national targets.
specific needs of children for appropriate permanent placements.

Develop the workforce strategy to attract and retain skilled and experienced
permanent staff in Coventry, and ensure all staff receive regular supervision
that provides the opportunity for challenge, reflection and professional
development.

are driving improvements to promote high standards of professional practice so
that children are safe.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Wendy Ghaffar
Team inspectors: Sean Tarpey, Deborah Barazetti-Scott, Gary Lamb, Dick OBrien,
Jansy Kelly, Kenneth Jones, Nancy Meehan, Stephanie Murray.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 There are currently approximately 70,500 children and young people in
Coventry aged between 0-17 years old out of a total population of 316,900
(22%). This includes 13,900 children under three years old. (Source: mid
attending primary, secondary and special schools this breaks down as
follows (source: Jan 2013 School Census):
 in primary schools 21% of pupils (this includes children in nurseries)
(the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools 18% of pupils (the national average is 15%)
 in special schools 41% of pupils (the national average is 37%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for
approximately 39% of all children living in the area, compared with 26% in
the country as a whole (Census 2011).
 The largest minority ethnic group of children and young people in the
Borough are Asian/Asian British at 18.1% (Census 2011)
 There are over 100 languages spoken in Coventry. The proportion of
children and young people with English as an additional language is as
follows (source: Jan 2013 School Census):
 in primary schools it is 28.7% (the national average is 18%).
 in secondary schools it is 25.1% (the national average is 14%)
 in special schools it is 19.2%.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 December 2013, 4,330 children had been identified through
assessment as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This
is an increase from 3,085 at 31 March 2013.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 At 31 December 2013, 657 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is an increase from 519 at 31 March 2013.
 At 31 March 2013, four children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from two children at 31 March 2012.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 December 2013, 633 children are being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 88.9 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 619
(86.9 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2013.
 Of the 633 children looked after at 31 December 2013:
(50.6%) were out of City
City
were out of City, with 197 of these less than 20 miles from home; 38
local children (8.3%) were placed in foster care more than 20 miles
from home
 a small number of children (26) were placed with parents
 the remaining 63 children were in various types of placement
including adoptive placements and independent living.
 In the 12 months to 31 March 2013:
 there were 40 adoption orders
subsequently returned to being looked after
independent living.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The Local Authority operates two childrens homes. These were both judged
to be good in their most recent Ofsted inspection.


 The previous inspection of Coventry Childrens Services for safeguarding and
looked after children was in March 2011. The Local Authority was judged to
be good for safeguarding, adequate for looked after childrens services and
good for overall effectiveness.
 The Local Authoritys fostering service was judged to be good in the most
recent Ofsted inspection, and adoption services were judged to be adequate
in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
Other information about this area
 In September 2013 Coventry City Council established the People
Directorate, which brought together the former Community Services and
Children Learning and Young People Directorates. The role of Executive
Director of People was introduced, which takes on the responsibility of the
Director of Childrens Services and Director of Adult Services. The current
Director was appointed to this post in September 2013.
 The Chair of the LSCB has been in post since September 2011.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
are inadequate
services are not always well targeted and coordinated, and this means that
children and families may not receive help that is appropriate for their specific
needs, nor early enough to prevent problems escalating. A Prevention and Early
Intervention Strategy has been agreed, but is not yet fully implemented, and
not all partners are fully engaged in early intervention and prevention work.
However, the local authority and partners have invested in prevention and early
intervention services with some evidence of impact. The Parenting Service
provides Triple P parenting courses at universal, targeted, and specialist levels,
and parents report good outcomes from this support, with improvements in
their childrens behaviour. Childrens centres provide groups to support parents
whose children are looked after, and a range of family support services.
Early Help Hub works well in supporting agencies to be clear about how and
when to refer families into social care. A Common Assessment Framework
(CAF) coordinator is based in the early help hub and ensures a prompt
response to families who are referred for an early help assessment. The recent
establishment of the Children and Family First teams and the increase in the
number of CAF coordinators, together with improved links with schools, have
resulted in an increased offer of early help. The number of CAFs is increasing
and these assessments and offers of help are particularly well embedded in
schools. There are some good examples of improved outcomes as a result of
this work, particularly in improvements in school attendance rates for some
young people.
review has resulted in improvements in communication with the referral and
assessment service, including feedback from childrens social care when a
referral had been made. However, despite targeted training for health
professionals, the numbers of CAFs undertaken by health staff remains
extremely low. This means that services for children under the age of two are
not always well coordinated to improve outcomes. Some schools report that
children enter school without their needs having being addressed at the preschool stage, and this affects their learning.
to identified need, such as 0-2 year olds, and has begun to reshape services to
meet these needs. For example, a pilot project in two childrens centres to bring
together health visitors, midwives and GPs is beginning to have an impact in
providing continuity of care for some of the most vulnerable families. However,
this service is not available across the city and, overall, partner agencies are not


getting involved with families quickly enough to prevent problems from
becoming worse.
care and thresholds are appropriate. Where thresholds for social care services
are met, there is effective management decision making at the point of referral,
and clear management direction to identify action needed; these cases are
forwarded appropriately to the referral and assessment team for social care
intervention. However, children are not always seen quickly enough, and their
need for help and protection is not always assessed promptly, and this means
that too many are left at risk of harm.
inadequate. Delays in the recording of significant information, such as strategy
meetings and child protection enquiries, mean that up-to-date information is
not always readily available to professionals when determining risks to children.
sharing between agencies to identify risks and protect children is not sufficiently
robust. During the inspection, cases were identified where there were delays in
childrens social care receiving information on domestic abuse notifications,
following screening by the police. In a small number of these cases, this
resulted in delays of several weeks before incidents were reviewed by a social
worker. This was a key issue highlighted in the most recent Serious Case
Review published by Coventry, and it is still not resolved. The process of joint
screening of medium and high risk domestic abuse notifications at a weekly
meeting attended by the police, childrens social care and health, has serious
weaknesses. Health professionals do not receive sufficient notice of cases to be
discussed, and are therefore unable to bring relevant information about the
family to inform the assessment of risk. Problems in the screening of domestic
abuse notifications has been acknowledged by partner agencies and known for
some time, and a new system of joint screening of all notifications was
introduced whilst the inspection was on going, but the impact of this was not
seen. This is an interim measure prior to the establishment of the Multi-Agency
Safeguarding Hub (MASH) planned for the summer of 2014.
arranged, but the police do not routinely attend these meetings. Police only
attend strategy meetings in the most high risk and complex cases. In most
other circumstances, an email is sent to the police referral unit requesting a
strategy discussion. If the police respond in time, a strategy discussion with
childrens social care is held and the details from the discussion will inform the
subsequent strategy meeting. However, there are numerous occasions when
the police do not respond in time and this means that there is no strategy
discussion with the police and therefore necessary information is not always
available to inform decision making at the strategy meeting. Currently, partners
do not work together robustly enough to ensure that children are adequately


protected. The local authority is aware of this and is currently reviewing these
arrangements with the police.
strategy discussions and meetings, and inspectors could not find records of
meetings held on some childrens files. Concerns about the recording of
strategy minutes were identified in the action plan for a recent Serious Case
Review on the death of a child and referred to in the recent update of the
progress of the plan, yet these issues have still not been rectified.
suitably qualified and experienced social workers; and when joint work is
undertaken with the police, child protection enquiries are effective. However,
the outcomes of these investigations are not always routinely recorded in a
timely manner, so that all key information about a child is available and up to
date on the childs file. This has serious repercussions when, for example, the
out-of-hours service has to deal with a crisis involving a child who is known to
social care, and they do not have the full information available to fully assess
the risks.
completed in timescales and this has resulted in some children not receiving the
help they need quickly enough. The delays in commencing and completing
assessments are attributed to the very high caseloads of social workers in the
referral and assessment teams, some of whom have caseloads where they have
responsibility for 60 children. A lack of robust management oversight of these
cases has meant that managers cannot be assured that all children have been
seen and their risks assessed.
social care since March 2012. Throughout 2013, the rate of referrals was
significantly higher than the national average. At 31 December 2013, 4,330
children had been identified through assessment as being formally in need of a
specialist childrens service. This is an increase from 3,085 at 31 March 2013.
Between March 2012 and November 2013, there was a 20% increase in the
number of children and young people made subject to child protection plans.
Senior and middle managers are fully aware of the difficulties and the impact
on practice due to this increase in activity, but have been slow to respond.
Managers report that it is difficult to close down work as new work is
prioritised, and supervision notes indicated that managers were stressed and
feeling under considerable pressure. As an interim measure, to address the
capacity issues in the referral and assessment team, additional agency staff
have been recruited. However, these measures have not been sufficient to
meet demand or to ensure that all children are seen quickly enough. An
additional team has now been created in the referral and assessment team, but
this only became operational on 3 February 2014. Funding for additional posts
in the neighbourhood teams has also been agreed, but permanent staff have
not yet been appointed.


neighbourhood teams are not allocated specifically to social workers, although
they are overseen by managers. Tasks are progressed through duty
arrangements within teams. This means that some children and families do not
receive a consistent service from an allocated social worker, and children and
families do not have the opportunity to develop stable working relationships
with social workers. Such pressures are reported by managers and social
workers to have been compounded by the consolidation of business support
services. Most operational staff report that they are now completing tasks
which they previously considered administrative.
model is widely used, the analysis of risk is not always sufficiently thorough and
child focused in all assessments. Assessments of complex cases that include
domestic abuse, parental substance misuse and mental health do not always
analyse all aspects of parental behaviours in terms of their impact on children.
used well to consider historical context and risk factors. The voice of the child
was evident in many, although not all, assessments, with some examples of
very good consideration of ethnicity, culture and language, and effective use of
interpreters to ensure that the views of children are sought. In addition, the
behaviour and interaction of young children with their parents was analysed
well in some cases.
protection conference, there is often a significant delay before meetings are
held. Data indicates that 60% of conferences are held later than 15 days after
the strategy meeting has agreed that the case should go to conference. This
means that there is a lost opportunity to ensure that all information is
effectively shared in a timely manner, with measures put in place swiftly to
reduce risk to children. In some cases, the lack of attendance or submission of
reports from police at initial child protection conferences means that the full
range of risks to children is not known; this could result in poor decision
making, and potentially leaves children at higher risk of significant harm. The
police are currently reviewing attendance issues. Minutes of meetings from
child protection conferences currently take more than two weeks, and often
much longer, to be distributed to professionals. Performance on the timeliness
of review conferences is much better, and nearly all review conferences are
held in time.
protection conferences, and they report that the use of the signs of safety
model helps them to understand what they need to do to keep their children
safe. Case conferences observed during the inspection were well managed,
with a sensitive approach to the engagement of parents. Children are not
routinely engaged in child protection conferences, although independent
advocacy services are available for children, and the system for accessing this is


well used. The advocacy service gathers childrens views before conferences to
ensure that their voices are heard.
child protection chairs about the quality of reports and progress of plans, and
this is a lost opportunity to identify trends and promote good practice.
effective in identifying and meeting childrens needs. However, in some cases
plans seen do not reflect childrens needs, and timescales are not clearly
identified to enable professionals, parents and children to know what actions
should be taken and when they should be completed, so that childrens
circumstances improve. In most cases, core groups are regularly held and well
attended by professionals, and many provide effective monitoring of the
progress of plans.
range of services are available to help support them. The Intensive Case
Support Panel is well attended by a range of agencies and is effective in
promoting the progress of plans by ensuring that children and their families
receive the right support and services. In cases reviewed by inspectors, many
examples were seen of these interventions resulting in good outcomes for
children. For example, children and young people were supported to
understand how to keep safe and work through their experiences of abuse;
how to develop their sense of self-esteem and build more positive relationships
with family and friends; and how to improve attendance at school and reduce
antisocial behaviour. Services include the NSPCC working with neglect,
Compass drug and alcohol treatment for under 17s, the Young Carers service,
the Multi Systemic Therapy team, the Barnardos Defuze project that supports
children who have experienced domestic abuse, and a specialist counselling
service for girls and young women who have experienced sexual abuse.
signpost them to other services. The Troubled Families programme has good
links with housing services, police, the youth offending service and probation,
so that those in need of intensive support are easily identified. The service has
identified 83% of the 905 troubled families initially targeted by government,
and has had some good success in helping families into work and preventing
children entering care. The team has been recognised by the Department for
Communities and Local Government as evidencing best practice in identifying,
tracking and working well with families.
and referred through to a multi agency assessment conference (MARAC), good
information sharing and timely action means that these families receive an
appropriate service to help reduce risks to them. These meetings reflect a clear
understanding of the dangers posed to children living in circumstances of
domestic abuse and actions that need to be taken by partners to reduce risks to


ensure their safety. The thresholds for referral to these meetings are clear, but
the large majority of referrals are from the police, suggesting that more work
needs to be done to ensure all of those working with children know the criteria
for a case to be discussed at a MARAC.
fostering arrangements is extremely low. Of those who are known to the
service, carer assessments are not always completed in timescales that meet
minimum statutory requirements, which means that childrens safety and wellbeing is not always assessed in a timely manner.
and/or who are at risk from Child Sexual Exploitation (CSE) benefit from a
coordinated multi-agency response and they are linked with appropriate
support and preventative services to assist them in understanding risk and
keeping themselves safe. Systems are in place to track children who are at risk
of CSE through the multi-agency screening panel (MASP). However, not all
children and young people who have been missing from home or from
education are able to reflect upon their missing episode with an independent
person and identify potential risks through a return interview, particularly those
young people of secondary school age who should receive this input from the
youth service. This represents a missed opportunity to identify trends and
provide support through early help.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence require improvement
receive is better than the experiences of children who need help and protection.
However, the demand for the service is high and the number of looked after
children continues to rise; in March 2013 it was 619, which is 87 per 10,000
children, compared with the England average of 60 per 10,000. The service is
over stretched in key areas, and independent reviewing officer caseloads are
high. Social worker caseloads are more manageable in the Neighbourhood and
Looked after Children teams than in the Referral and Assessment teams, but
their work is complex and they are also required to undertake duty tasks in
their own teams. As a result of this, some work and plans are not good enough
to ensure that childrens needs are comprehensively met. However, there are
examples of good, effective work with children, leading to improved outcomes,
with the best work completed in cases where there are few changes in the
allocated worker.
after, including changes in demographics, increased birth rates in some of the
most deprived communities, high levels of domestic abuse and substance
misuse and a legacy of un-met need, particularly relating to the long-term
neglect of some children. These issues have been recognised by the local
authority, and targeted work to address neglect and emotional abuse with
children under four years of age has resulted in an appropriate increase in the
number of children who are becoming looked after. The threshold for access to
the looked after children service is set at the right level. Inspectors found no
cases of children made subject to the care system inappropriately.
Step-up procedures and practice to support planning for children is increasingly
effective, including the use of the Access to Resource panel and LAC tracking
system to ensure children are getting the help they need, and to make sure
that the right decisions are being taken to avoid children being left in unsafe
situations. Effective use is made of parallel planning and twin tracking of cases.
Step down arrangements from care work well. Special Guardianship Orders
have been used in 53 cases in the last year to successfully divert children from
being looked after, 29 of these were for children in long-term care. Children
who return home are well supported, with good use of family group
conferences, and plans and services that are appropriate and ensure continuing
support for children and their families. The proportion of children who have left
care and were re-admitted is low at 16 (6%) between April and December
Effective partnership work between Cafcass, guardians and the courts, in family
justice meetings, helps to support appropriate and timely action to plan
permanence for children. Social workers and their managers have access to


good quality legal advice and training. Letters before proceedings are used well
and are followed by effective pre-proceeding meetings which involve parents,
so that they are clear about local authority concerns and the actions that are
being taken to protect their children.
assessments are good and are sharply focused on reducing risks; they include
clear analysis and make good use of research and risk assessment techniques.
The courts are increasingly confident in the quality of in-house social work
parenting assessments and this has reduced the need for independent social
work assessments, which had previously contributed to delays in decision
making. There has been a real effort to improve the voice of the child in
assessments, which is demonstrated well in the most recent assessments seen.
A small number of assessments are not completed in time, leading to delays in
the development of plans for some children. A small minority of assessments do
not contain sufficient analysis of risk and protective factors. Chronologies are
nearly always in place, but these do not consistently provide a good overview of
childrens circumstances.
children and young people report that their social worker does not spend
enough time with them when they visit. Only 82% of looked after children see
their social worker at the required frequency. Nearly all the looked after
childrens cases are complex and challenging, requiring significant input from
workers to improve outcomes for children. Many social workers have to spend
one day a week on duty within their own teams, and this results in them
constantly prioritising and re-prioritising their workload, so their response to
childrens needs is not always timely. In the most recent work seen by
inspectors, there are examples of social workers visiting children more
frequently to progress care plans.
measurable outcomes and clear timescales; and a very small minority of
children (9%) do not have an up-to-date care plan. The vast majority of care
plans ensure that children are encouraged, where appropriate, to keep in
contact with families. Issues of diversity including ethnicity, culture and religion
are routinely considered in care plans, for example, ensuring the involvement of
parents in selecting an appropriate place of worship near to a childs placement.
The recently implemented care planning, placement and case review
regulations that govern young people received into custody have been
implemented effectively. Only one young person is placed in bed and breakfast
provision, and an appropriate placement has now been offered.
range of options are explored and used to achieve permanence for children,
including specialist long-term residential placements out of City. Two of these
cases were tracked for this inspection and there is clear evidence that the
placements are making a positive, demonstrable difference for those children. A


number of additional cases were also sampled of children and young people
who are placed out of the City and these cases demonstrated effective work,
including consistent, focussed care planning and regular visits to children. The
number of looked after children placed with families is good. Of the 625 looked
after children in Coventry, 432 are in foster care placements, and 84% are
placed with families. Appropriate consideration is given to ensuring that
children are placed with their siblings, and 63% of children are placed with their
brother or sister. Performance on short-term placement stability is good. The
rate of children living more than 20 miles from the community where they live
is low at 12% (77).
placement decisions are made. This ensures that foster carers and other
providers can meet the specific cultural and religious needs of children. Other
examples include ensuring that young people have appropriate support to
explore issues of gender identity.
support of foster carers. Placement sufficiency with in-house foster carers is a
significant challenge for the local authority. The strategy for the recruitment of
in-house foster carers has not been effective and numbers continue to decline,
which is resulting in the high use of Independent Fostering Agencies (IFAs) at
additional cost to the authority. Plans to increase the number of in-house foster
carers are well developed, but as yet there is little evidence of impact.
last inspections. There is a clear policy to place children in good or better
provision and action is taken to ensure children live in safe places. The local
authority takes appropriate action to respond to Ofsted inspection judgements
when services are not judged good.
improving from a low base. The proportion of looked after children who receive
an initial health assessment within 15 days of notification has improved to 84%,
and 87% of annual health assessment reviews have been completed this year
to date (December 2013). However, the latest management performance
information shows that only 55% of children have received a regular dental
health check in the last year, which is very poor performance.
improved outcomes for children. For example, therapeutic interventions such as
CAMHS and the Journeys service help to support children with complex needs,
which is making a demonstrable positive difference to their well-being. There
has been a steady reduction in the number of looked after young people who
have been convicted of an offence for the first time in the year ending
December 2013, with the number very low at only 12 young people.


Attendance rates for looked after children are good at 94%. There have been
no recent permanent exclusions of looked after children, and fixed term
exclusions have reduced and are below the national average. Pupils make
better progress between Key Stage 2 and Key Stage 4 than the national
average for looked after children. Attainment for looked after children at Key
Stage 4 shows steady improvement over three years. Good alternative provision
is provided at Key Stage 3, and four Pupil Referral Units (PRUs) ensure that
young people receive 25 hours provision a week.
a third of looked after children and young people attend schools which require
improvement or are inadequate. Personal Education Plans (PEPs) are not
always sufficiently detailed to ensure that all academic targets are clear to
consistently support improvement in educational outcomes. Completion rates
have improved recently, with 89% completed in 2013. There is effective
tracking of pupils progress in Coventry secondary schools by the Looked after
Childrens Education Service (LACES) team, with support and challenge
promoting improvement.
considerably higher (110120) than those recommended in the IRO Handbook
(5070). This affects the scope and depth of work undertaken to track and
intervene in childrens cases to promote care plans and review decisions to
ensure that children are making good progress. IROs have limited time to
prepare children for their review and to explain how decisions affect them.
Despite this, officers have effectively prioritised the support they give to
children placed a long way from the Coventry area and 96% of childrens
statutory reviews are held on time, with IROs ensuring that children and young
peoples attendance at reviews is good at 86%. Reviews are well attended by
all professionals and recent work demonstrates that a real effort is being made
to ensure that childrens views are represented. Carers report that they are
involved in meetings, their views are taken into account and they receive copies
of care plans, but they do not consistently receive a copy of the notes made at
reviews.
complain and the system is well used by children and families. However, the
large majority (78%) of complaint investigations are not dealt with within the
ten day timescale. More compliments were received than complaints about the
looked after childrens service, Specialist and Youth Offending Services during
April 2012 to March 2013.
outside the City. The Advocacy Service is well-established and has experienced
staff, some of whom have British Sign Language (BSL) and Makaton skills,
which ensures that childrens voices are heard. The use of interpreters is wellembedded. An independent visiting service is available to all looked after


children but the take up rates are low, with only 23 children receiving a service.
Young people who use the service report that they are very satisfied with the
advocacy and independent visiting service, with 94-100% giving positive
feedback in all the key areas.
and those who are at risk of sexual exploitation. Where risks are identified,
these are effectively considered through the Multi-Agency Screening Panel. In
cases seen there is good joint work between staff in childrens homes and the
police and there are examples of appropriate support being identified and
delivered to individual young people as part of their plan to reduce risk,
including those placed a long way from Coventry.
practice and there are many examples of children and young people shaping
and influencing services, leading to real change and improvements which have
made a demonstrable difference to childrens lives. Representatives from the
Voices of Care Council identified that young people attending college could earn
more than those undertaking apprenticeships. This was raised with elected
members and additional payments for care leaver apprenticeships were agreed.
Young people in the council were influential in the development of supported
accommodation and took part in the tender evaluation for the project. Children
and young people reported to inspectors that the CiCC has promoted their
sense of belonging and helped raise their self-esteem. Practice is embedded
and effective, with mature links between children and young people in care and
elected members; children and young people told inspectors that they knew
elected members well. A service pledge is in place which was written by
children and young people, and they report that they know and understand
their basic rights and expectations of the service they receive whilst they are in
care. However, there were examples when children and young people felt they
were not given an appropriate response to individual requests; these had been
challenged by the CiCC, who received an immediate response from the
corporate parenting panel that issues would be addressed. Good arrangements
are in place to support the involvement of children and young people placed
outside Coventry through the well-used, dedicated CiCC website.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is requires improvement
placement. However, decisive and targeted action to address this has resulted
in an increase in the number of children being placed for adoption and recent
significant improvements in the time that this takes, although there remains a
legacy of some children who are still not matched to an adoptive family.
Managers have a clear understanding of the strengths and areas for
development of the service, and progress has been made in addressing the
areas identified in the adoption inspection in 2013.


moving in with their adoptive family, which is 213 days longer than the national
target. Since then there has been a good improvement, with a reduction in the
time taken for a child to be placed for adoption and this figure is forecast to
reduce to 630 days by April 2014. This would be a significant narrowing of the
gap between Coventrys performance and the national target, but remains an
area where further improvement is needed, since the national target is now 547
days. Court processes affect this performance and outcomes of hearings are
not yet being concluded within the recommended 26 weeks. The time taken by
Coventry between receiving Court authority to place a child and the child being
placed for adoption has improved very strongly, but still doesnt meet the
national target of 152 days.
know them well and provide consistently good links with potential adopters.
These links help provide accurate information to inform good matching. Social
workers mostly provide well-prepared documentation which helps to facilitate
court processes. However, chronologies in child permanence reports are overly
focussed on parents and dont always provide a comprehensive or clear picture
of key events in childrens lives. In addition, work with children to ensure that
they understand as fully as possible the reasons why they are in care and why
they are to be adopted, is not timely. As a result, children frequently enter
adoption introductions without life story work being completed. Until recently,
there have also been delays in arrangements with health services for adoption
medicals for children, which has slowed down the process of planning for some
children who need permanency. Arrangements for medicals are now
appropriate and timely.
welcoming response to their initial enquiries about becoming an adopter.
Essential checks, such as with the police and referees, are subject to wellembedded and suitable processes. All reports seen by inspectors regarding
prospective adopters address issues from applicants backgrounds, experience
and values. The adoption service actively encourages, and has been successful
in, the recruitment of adoptive parents from a wide range of backgrounds,
including ethnicity and sexual orientation. Preparation groups are seen as
helpful by adopters, who often recognise how the groups expand their
knowledge of the challenges and meaning of adoption. The input of adopters at
these groups is welcomed by all prospective adopters.
and the Agency Decision Maker makes decisions speedily and thoroughly. A
national six-month two-stage target for approving adopters was introduced in
July 2013, but it is too early to measure how well this target is being met.
Following a recent increase in enquiries, not all adoption applicants were able
to access preparation groups promptly because of a lack of social work
capacity. Currently, Coventry has 42 approved adopters not yet matched to
children. There are 70 children with an adoption plan and not yet matched, of


whom 27 have robust plans in place with identified adopters. Coventry is
making appropriate and timely referrals of adopters to the Adoption Register.
well organised and paced to meet the needs of the child. All adopters comment
very positively on the accurate information they are provided with in documents
and DVDs about the child as they are now. Medical advice during matching on
childrens health is now prompt and helpful.
adopters assessment to transfer the adopters to a new social worker, who
supports them when they have a placement. All adopters spoken to by
inspectors criticised this practice, since it means that the adopters are still
getting to know their new support social worker when they are entering the
important stage of matching and introductions.
improvement on 201213, when 40 children were placed in the whole year.
Coventry is ambitious and tenacious regarding the placement of brothers and
sisters together and has performed well in this respect. The ethnic and cultural
backgrounds of looked after children are well represented in the group of
approved adopters and those in assessments. In many cases, children are
appropriately matched for adoption with families who can meet their ethnic and
cultural needs. Coventry provides a variety of forms of permanence, including
adoption, Special Guardianship Orders and Fostering to Adopt. Fostering to
Adopt is now established, with five children placed this year by this route,
which is aimed at reducing avoidable changes of carers, particularly for very
young children.
adopters through specialist workers with high levels of skills, such as in play
therapy and Theraplay. There are currently 15 children receiving adoption
support and none waiting for this service. The support includes a flexible variety
of services through individual work, groups and workshops. Support to birth
family members is provided by a commissioned service. The service has
developed to meet individual needs, for example by linking birth parents to
other parents who have had similar experiences, to provide more support; and
the service is well used by birth families.
The graded judgment for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
requires improvement
established last year. However, while the very large majority (85%) of care
leavers now have a pathway plan, and targeted work is underway to ensure all
young people have a plan, their quality is too variable. Plans identify the
immediate needs of young people, and this ensures that they receive the
support and health care they need. Social workers and personal advisors (PAs)


know their young people well. However, plans do not analyse young peoples
aspirations well enough with regard to long-term goals and employment, and
this reduces the effectiveness of the advice and support they receive.
independence which social workers and Personal Advisors could draw upon to
support pathway planning, and to which young people could contribute. Young
people who spoke to inspectors felt that they were safe where they live. There
is, however, no systematic approach to reviewing risk and local intelligence to
ensure locations are safe when care leavers take up tenancies.
good access to information from different partners and services, which they use
to address the individual needs of young people. Regular contact with young
people is forging purposeful relationships, and the arrangements are beginning
to overcome concerns previously voiced by care leavers that they have to
spend time getting to know new people on their journey to independence.
employment has reduced well (from 51% in 201011) to 34% in 201213,
which is now below the national average (36%); the very large majority of
young people progress to education or training at the end of Year 11. The
Looked after Childrens Education Service (LACES) team has started to work
more closely with Route 21, to improve planning for progression post-16 and to
track young peoples progress. Care leavers living outside the City do not
benefit to the same extent from the support and challenge provided by the
LACES team to city schools, colleges and other providers, as the team does not
have the capacity to undertake visits to schools out of authority. However, upto-date attendance information about the progress of young people placed out
of the City is provided through Welfare Call, and this information is used as an
indicator of concern, with appropriate action taken when required.
years and are now good, as indicated by the very large majority of young
people progressing to education or training at the end of Year 11 and reducing
NEET levels. Taster opportunities in a range of vocational areas and an access
to apprenticeships programme help young people to develop their employability
skills, confidence and motivation. Around 10% of apprenticeships offered by the
local authority are taken up by care leavers.
transport and accommodation and paid a bursary. Good partnership work is
currently undertaken by Warwick University and the local authority to support
progress to higher education. There are currently 15 young people at university
in receipt of financial support from the council, some of whom are studying for
masters degrees.


through the Voices of Care Council, and acts on their recommendations; for
example, in developing options for supported accommodation. Social workers
and personal advisers do not, however, always ensure that care leavers know
about all of their rights when they leave care.
issues, they are provided with prompt access to commissioned health services.
However, not enough attention is given to ensure young people attend
appointments, engage with services and take responsibility for their behaviour.
While the Looked after Children nurse offers young people leaving care the
opportunity to discuss their health histories and to receive a written copy of
this, there is no monitoring of how many young people take up this offer and
no system of health passports for all young people leaving care.
accommodation options and are encouraged to stay with their foster carers.
The City is in the process of agreeing a Staying Put policy. Around 27 care
leavers have benefitted from this arrangement annually for the last two years.
Care leavers have priority for social housing, and tenancies for those who can
live independently are secured within three months of their 18th birthday.


Leadership, management and governance are inadequate
childrens social care which have been known for some time, to ensure that
children and young people are effectively safeguarded. While the local authority
can articulate the strengths and weaknesses of the service as identified in their
recent self-assessment, including the actions that need to be taken to tackle
these weaknesses, actions have been too slow and too many children remain at
risk of harm.
goals of the review, to reduce the number of looked after children and increase
the sufficiency of in-house foster care provision, and thereby capture associated
savings, have not been met. The number of looked after children has continued
to increase and the provision of in-house foster carers is not sufficient, with an
over-reliance on Independent Fostering Agencies at a significant cost to the
authority.
was commissioned by the local authority in March 2013, found that the
increasing rate of referrals, child protection concerns, and rising number of
looked after children, indicated a service overstretched in terms of capacity and
financial resources, and the situation was unsustainable. This review led to an
action plan to tackle the identified weaknesses, but the response from leaders
and managers was insufficiently robust and has not led to significant
improvement in the quality of services for children and young people.
and there has been an increase in the number of children subject to child
protection plans. A range of factors have combined to cause increased activity
across childrens social care and a high demand for services. A recent serious
case review attracted national and local media attention, and has resulted in
heightened public and professional awareness of issues of abuse and an
increased number of referrals into childrens social care. Reported domestic
abuse rates in Coventry are the highest in the West Midlands and there is a
significant peak in births in the two most deprived wards in the city. While
leaders and managers have been aware of these issues, they are only now
starting to take proactive measures to address these concerns.
sufficiently well embedded and systematic, and this means that case work is
not being driven so that children receive the help and protection they need at
the right time. The quality and frequency of social work supervision is too
variable. Supervision does not routinely occur in accordance with the local
authoritys own policy; it is too task orientated and is not sufficiently reflective.
This inhibits learning and opportunities for positive challenge. Newly qualified
social workers do not always have a protected caseload.


enable them to monitor performance on a daily basis, and a leadership
dashboard to provide up-to-date data on a range of indicators, such as the
numbers of child protection plans and number of care leavers. However, it is
reliant on the inputting of data into the authoritys integrated childrens system
by operational staff, which does not work well in all areas as some staff have
too little time to input information in a timely and efficient manner. As a result,
not all areas of the data are reliable, and some management reports cannot be
collated effectively. This affects the ability of managers to comprehensively use
performance information to drive improvements in practice.
activity and reported on a monthly basis to the Childrens Social Care and Early
Intervention Performance Board, which the Chief Executive and Lead Member
regularly attend. Performance has improved in some areas as a result of this
oversight, for example improved tracking of children who are voluntarily
accommodated under Section 20 of the Children Act 1989, where children are
in care for more than three months.
strengthen the service, and this is underpinned by a good internal selfassessment and a Childrens Services Improvement Plan. As a result of this, the
Director has secured significant investment in additional staffing to deal with
the influx of work. New posts have been created, with the establishment of six
additional permanent social work posts and 12 temporary posts for up to 18
months. Currently, 15% of the workforce is agency staff, but this is expected to
reduce as permanent staff are appointed. Funding for an additional permanent
manager and temporary manager has also been sourced. Such appointments
have assisted in the creation of a further team to work within the referral and
assessment service to ease pressure by creating a five-week duty cycle. As this
team only went live on 3 February 2014, the impact of the new investment is
yet to be seen. In addition, funding for a team manager and six IROs has been
agreed. In recognition of the high rates of domestic abuse the council has also
agreed an additional 250,000 for the development of domestic abuse services.
practice, including the capability of a small minority of managers, and a review
of the suitability of all foster carers has resulted in some leaving the service.
Targeted work has been undertaken to address historic drift and delay in cases
of neglect and emotional abuse, which has appropriately resulted in more
children becoming looked after.
old, piloted work is in place in two childrens centres to identify and provide
early help to the most vulnerable mothers of new-born babies. However, the
local authority recognises the need for its partners to be better engaged in


early help if this is to be fully effective in reducing demands on child protection
services, and this is a significant challenge for the partnership to address.
and many have been effective in supporting children and young people and
preventing them from entering the care system. This includes the multisystemic therapy team, family group conferences and the work of the crisis
intervention service, which operates an out-of-hours service and provides
immediate support to young people on the edge of care. In addition, work has
been successful in reducing drift and delay and securing permanency for
children who become looked after. This has been achieved for many children
through good use of parallel planning, timely use of the Public Law Outline and
improvements in the quality of parenting assessments for the court. An
increasing number of children are being placed for adoption, and planning for
permanency has improved. The Children and Family First teams were also
established as a result of the review, and have resulted in an increased number
of early help assessments.
skills and expertise such as training for the Court Based Assessment Service
provided by the Tavistock Clinic. A small minority of staff report difficulties in
attending training due to high caseloads. Training for managers requires further
development as there are only limited opportunities available for their
professional development.
within childrens services. Deputy Cabinet members are in place to drive
improvements and there is currently a task and finish group including elected
members, officers and young people, to consider how childrens views can
inform and improve services for looked after children ; for example, there is
acknowledgement that a greater priority needs to be given to life story work.
Members fulfil their corporate parenting responsibilities well and there are good
and cogent examples of corporate parents promoting and supporting looked
after children and young people to succeed, including financial support for
young people to progress into higher education. Looked after children report
that they know the elected members well and feel supported by them. The lines
of accountability between the Chief Executive, Executive Director of the People
Directorate (DCS) and Lead Member are strong. Linkages between the Health
and Well Being Board, the Coventry Safeguarding Children Board and the Joint
Commissioning Board are not yet well embedded, although work is in progress
to establish clear reporting and accountability.
commission services holistically, exemplified by the current tender process to
provide support and accommodation to victims of domestic abuse. The tender
includes services for victims and their children as well as perpetrators. Under
the established Children and Young People Commissioning Group there are
examples of cost-effective commissioning arrangements. These include the re-


commissioning of tier-two mental health services, which has expanded service
provision and established a single point of entry for children and families. Such
work was informed by analysis of data and consultation with key stakeholders,
including children, young people and their families.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness local safeguarding children
board
The effectiveness of the LSCB is inadequate
Priority and immediate action
responsibilities for their roles as set out in Working Together to Safeguard
Children (Department for Education, 2013) to ensure that effective practices
are in place to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in Coventry.
serious case reviews, and that this results in an improvement in outcomes for
children.
Early Intervention Strategy, so that children and their families have timely
access to early help support.
available, including audit findings and performance management information,
to undertake a robust analysis of the effectiveness of services to help and
protect children.
Areas for improvement
children and young people are identified and supported.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
effectively to ensure safeguarding arrangements safely reduce risk for all
children identified as needing assessment, support and intervention.
Insufficient progress has been made in some aspects of multi-agency working
between the police, childrens social care and health, particularly at an early
stage, when childrens needs are first identified. For example, very few health
visitors undertake CAFs, and this means that some young children do not have
their needs assessed at an early enough stage to prevent problems from
getting worse. Some issues identified in a recently published Serious Case
Review action plan, for partners to take robust action have not been addressed
quickly enough; for example, partnership work between police, health and
childrens social care to tackle concerns relating to the joint screening of
domestic abuse notifications has been slow to develop. In addition, delays in
the recording and distribution of strategy meeting minutes remains a problem.


has not been effective in ensuring timely improvement in some key areas of
work. Concerns remain about the availability of police for strategy discussions
and attendance at initial child protection conferences.
priority for the Board, the number of children known to partners who are
privately fostered remains extremely low, and actions to promote agency
awareness of this issue have not yet had an impact.
been too slow to take on full responsibility for their roles in promoting the
welfare of children at an early stage. In recognition of this, the LSCB convened
two multi-agency summits in the Autumn of 2013 at which, with the support of
the DCS and the Chief Executive, they secured the sign-up of partner agencies
to the Prevention and Early Intervention Strategy. However, the strategy and
the early help offer should have been in place at a much earlier stage, and it is
only now due to be implemented. These recent developments are yet to have
an impact on the high rate of referrals into childrens social care and this is a
key area for development for the Board.
of multi-agency procedures, including the well-regarded threshold document
and inter-agency safeguarding procedures. A set of supervision standards have
been developed and are currently being rolled out within agencies across the
partnership. Systematic review of the impact of the Boards work, however, has
not been undertaken and therefore the CSCB cannot be assured that activity
has led to improvement in practice to safeguard children.
this year, one of which is progressing to a serious case review and the other is
awaiting a decision. One serious case review has been published in 2013 and
two others have been completed and are awaiting publication.
safeguarding in schools. Learning from serious case reviews has been
incorporated into the safeguarding training programme for schools. The
Safeguarding of Children in Education Subgroup monitors education staffs
attendance at CSCB training and briefing events and provides follow-up
briefings for those not present. The CSCB is currently auditing all schools to
ensure compliance with the recommendation from a recent serious case review
that schools ensure a robust system exists for the recording of injuries or
concerns about a child, and that staff are clear about the role of the designated
teacher and that this role is used appropriately. Learning from serious case
reviews has also been widely disseminated to a range of professionals through
training workshops, the CSCB annual conference, leaflets and posters across
the partnership.


CSCB during the past twelve months. This has covered a broad range of
safeguarding issues, including factors relating to severe emotional abuse and
neglect (highlighted as a recommendation within the recent high-profile SCR)
and issues of diversity, such as Female Genital Mutilation, honour based
violence and forced marriage. Training programmes are routinely evaluated and
updated and inspectors saw evidence that this training was having a positive
impact in some areas in improving practice with children and families. For
example, staff spoken to during the inspection reported that training on the
findings of serious case reviews had raised their awareness of the need to
routinely use interpreters to speak to children alone, and there was clear
evidence of this practice being utilised in case files seen.
Children Board to engage faith groups and voluntary organisations across both
areas to ensure that staff in these organisations have a full understanding of
their safeguarding responsibilities and know what to do if they have concerns
about risks to children.
months. They have improved aspects of information sharing between the police
and schools, and a system of electronic sharing of all domestic violence
notifications from the police to all schools is now established. This information
includes specific guidance on what action schools should take to promote the
welfare of children, and is leading to increased take up of CAF by schools and
some good outcomes for children.
children, young people and professionals of the nature and extent of issues for
missing children and those at risk of CSE. A variety of approaches have been
used to raise awareness and minimise risk for young people at risk of sexual
exploitation. For example the See something, say something initiative has led
to specific work across the police, licensing, childrens social care, health and
safety, and the fire service, to target bed and breakfast establishments that are
causing concern. Chelseas Choice, a drama piece to increase awareness of the
risks of sexual exploitation, has been delivered to young people across the city
in secondary schools, colleges, care homes and the YMCA. While there is much
evidence of positive feedback from these initiatives, the impact has not been
evaluated yet.
inform the development of some individual projects, for example, involving
young people in the development of a leaflet to raise awareness of child sexual
exploitation and of childrens experiences informing training, for example in
relation to Female Genital Mutilation and Forced Marriage. However there is
less evidence of young peoples views being routinely sought to inform service
improvement.


Board over the year 20122013, including lessons learned from SCRs and child
deaths. However, outcomes from individual agency safeguarding audits
undertaken in spring 2012 have not been included, and an overview of work in
relation to the investigations of allegations against professionals does not
feature within the report. Although performance data are included within the
report, these are not linked to an assessment of the performance and
effectiveness of local services, so that the increasing level of demand for
childrens social care is not analysed or addressed in detail.


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, workbased
learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and
other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


