London Borough of Croydon
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 20 June  13 July 2017
Report published: 4 September 2017

Childrens services in Croydon are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Inadequate


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
There are widespread and serious failures in the services provided to children and
their families in Croydon that leave some children at risk of significant harm.
Inspectors identified a legacy of poor practice characterised by drift and delay in the
provision of key services. Weak managerial oversight at all levels has not ensured
that basic social work practice is of a good enough standard. Children do not receive
robust and timely responses to ensure that risk is reduced and their needs are met.
The local authority was required to take immediate action in a small number of cases
identified by inspectors during the inspection.
Since the local authority was inspected in 2012, there has been significant
deterioration in the quality of service provision. Poor managerial oversight of cases
fails to ensure that basic social work practice is of a good enough standard. This
means that not all children receive help in a robust and timely manner. The
workloads of social workers in some teams are high and this presents a serious
barrier to providing effective services for children. The turnover of staff in many
teams, coupled with the many transition points, further inhibits the building of
trusting relationships between social workers and children.
When children are missing or are at risk of sexual exploitation, poor recognition and
response to these concerns is not reducing risk to them effectively. Too few children
looked after who go missing are spoken to when they return, therefore the
understanding of associated risks is weak. While strategic partnership understanding
has improved, the response to children who are at risk from sexual exploitation is
underdeveloped. When circumstances for some children do not improve, the local
authority is either too slow to take action or reduces the level of support without
evidence of demonstrable progress. This means that some children remain in
harmful situations for too long.
Too many children wait too long for a decision to be made as to whether they need
to be looked after, or they return home without sufficient support. This has left them
at risk of significant harm from neglectful parenting. The pre-proceedings phase of
the Public Law Outline (PLO) is not used often enough or early enough to ensure
that parents are aware of the potentially serious consequences of poor or harmful
parenting.
The chief executive and current director of childrens services (DCS) recognised the
breadth and depth of this decline and they commissioned a number of detailed
external service reviews on their appointments in July 2016. The local authority is at
a very early stage in addressing the poor practice identified. Some improvements
have been made, for example in the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH).
However, action plans to address deficits are focused on process or structure and
there is insufficient consideration of improving outcomes for children. This has
created delay in addressing and targeting the areas of greatest concern.


Most children looked after live in stable foster placements where they are cared for
well. However, many carers feel poorly supported and the fostering service is not
compliant with all regulations. There is good consideration of most childrens diverse
needs in placement matches. In the majority of cases, social workers see children
regularly, although evidence of purposeful direct work is more limited.
Political leaders and chief officers say that vulnerable children are a top priority for
the council. Effectively supporting such a high number of unaccompanied asylum
seekers is a formidable challenge that has been a priority. However, this prioritisation
is not having the same impact on the rest of the frontline services. There has been
political and senior leader support for increasing capacity at senior manager level and
there have been some recent appointments to additional manager posts. There is
evidence of some recent improvements, including a strengthening of work within the
MASH. This has led to more effective management oversight of practice by a
dedicated project manager who oversees all decisions within 24 hours. A specialist
team of social workers and managers works closely and effectively with the Home
Office to ensure a strong and caring initial response to children arriving alone in the
country.
The range and coordination of early help provision for children and families are not
fully established. Individual partner agencies are unclear about the early help offer
and have not been involved in developing a shared approach to delivering services.
Inconsistent application of thresholds and a lack of recognition of risk are commonly
evident in assessments and plans, including where risks escalate. Multi-agency
participation in and contribution to the support of children in need are not robust or
sufficiently effective.
A lack of challenge from the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has not
assisted in raising safeguarding standards in the local authority. It is too soon to see
the impact of engagement of key strategic partners in improving services for
children, as services are newly commissioned or are at the planning stage and there
is not yet an evaluation of improvement.
More recently, children who cannot live with their families have been increasingly
considered for adoption, but delays remain. The quality of childrens permanence
reports (CPRs) is variable. Adopters are assessed well and report being supported.
The large majority of care leavers are in education, employment or training and they
report strong and consistent support from their personal advisers. However, not
enough young people live with their foster carers beyond the age of 18. Too few
care leavers have the opportunity to move to independent accommodation when
they are ready to do so. Preparation of young people for independent living is
inconsistent and not all are fully aware of their entitlements. The quality and
timeliness of pathway planning are too variable.
The corporate parenting panel expresses a commitment to improving the lives of
children. However, the local authority overall has not prioritised and planned
sufficiently to improve outcomes for enough children.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home, which was judged good in its
most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
May 2012. The local authority was judged adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in May 2012. The local authority was judged adequate.
Local leadership
 The DCS has been in post since July 2016.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services.
 The chief executive has been in post since July 2016.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since March 2016.
 The local authority uses a systemic model of social work.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 93,435 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Croydon. This is 25% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 23% of the local authoritys children are living in low-income
families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 19% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 17% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 58% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
African and Caribbean.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 36% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 26% (the national average is 16%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 Croydon has a high number of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children (364 as
at 19 June 2017), which is 48% of the total children looked after population.
Child protection in this area
 At 19 June 2017, 1,789 children had been identified through assessment (in the
previous 12 months) as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service.
This is a decrease from 1,839 as at 19 June 2016.
 At 19 June 2017, 399 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 360 at 31 March 2016.
 At 19 June 2017, 37 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from 18 at 31 March 2016.
 Since the last inspection, 14 serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and 11 serious case reviews (SCRs) have been completed or were ongoing
at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At the time of inspection, at 19 June 2017, 760 children were being looked after
by the local authority (a rate of 81.5 per 10,000 children). Of this number:
 four lived in residential special schools3 and they lived out of the authority
area
 seven lived with parents, of whom 43% lived out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 20 adoptions (June 2016 to May 2017)
returned to be looked after
living
in multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Recommendations

Ensure that managers have sufficient oversight of practice, and provide social
workers with effective, clearly recorded supervision to support good social work
practice.


Establish a stable workforce through purposeful recruitment and retention
activity that includes targeted training for frontline staff and managers so that
they have the skills and knowledge to better protect and care for children. Take
steps to ensure that the workloads of social workers are manageable, and that
they have sufficient time to complete essential work.


Ensure that there is appropriate and timely action with regard to understanding
and reducing risk to all children, especially those at risk of sexual exploitation
and those who go missing from home or care. Ensure that social workers have
the necessary skills and knowledge to help children at risk of sexual
exploitation.


Ensure that children missing from home or care have every opportunity to
speak to an independent person about the reasons they go missing so that
appropriate action can be taken to effectively support them, and reduce risk.


Ensure that all plans for children contain achievable, realistic goals and that
timescales and contingency planning are specific, and include sufficient support
for children who return home. Ensure that the individual needs of brothers and
sisters are identified and met.


Ensure that thresholds are rigorously applied at all levels, including care
thresholds and the timely and proportionate use of the pre-proceedings phase
of the PLO, so that children who cannot live with their parents find permanent
alternative homes as quickly as possible.


Ensure that strategy discussions include information gathered from all partners,
and result in clear planning and recording of actions and the rationale for
decisions.


Review the roles and responsibilities of managers at all levels in relation to
decisions about childrens permanent care, to ensure that they are confident
and competent enough to make these decisions. Establish robust tracking
processes to ensure that plans are progressed and delay is minimised.


Ensure that there is routine and comprehensive oversight of all decisions and
actions relating to children who are subject to pre-proceedings or court
proceedings, to eliminate all avoidable delay in deciding permanent
arrangements for children.


officers (IROs) provide appropriate challenge that prevents drift and delay in
planning for children. Ensure that formal escalation systems are used to record
and monitor actions raised, to make sure that purposeful work is done in order
to achieve improved outcomes for children.
ensure that partner agencies have a shared understanding of the early help
strategy and associated thresholds.
needs, including historical information, and ensure that all information is
rigorously analysed and updated when circumstances for children change.
the work of this service meets all relevant regulations.
planning and timeliness of adoption improve for all children. Ensure that there
is focused family-finding activity for children with adoption plans, to minimise
delays.
to ensure that all children who would like this can access these services.
arrangements.
and detailed, and include contingency planning, to support good outcomes for
all care leavers.
foster carers, so that care leavers who want to stay with their former foster
carers can benefit from greater permanency and support as they move towards
independent adulthood.
it is the right time for them to do so. Improve the help/assistance provided
during their transition to independent living through more consistently good
preparation and support. This should include accurate, comprehensive and upto-date information about young peoples rights and entitlements.
improving all areas of poor practice for children looked after and care leavers.
Improve the analysis of complaints and the understanding of the reasons why
children, families and foster carers complain, in order to address issues raised.


Summary for children and young people
 Too many services for children and young people in Croydon are poor. This
means that not all children are kept safe from harm or are helped early enough.
 Senior leaders know that services need to be better, but they have taken too long
to take action to improve them.
 When professionals tell social workers that they are worried about children and
young people, not all available information is collected to help them to decide
quickly what services will best support them and their families.
 Managers have not made sure that all social workers have enough time to ensure
that children and young people are visited often in order to understand how they
feel and what they need. This means that they do not always gather all the
information they need to understand what life is like for children and young
people in Croydon, and to make plans to help them improve their lives.
 Too many children and young people in Croydon have too many different social
workers, which means that it is hard to trust and make positive relationships with
their social workers as they change too often.
 Managers are not giving social workers the help that they need in order to make
sure that they are getting things right for children and young people, and taking
action that will help them quickly enough.
 When children and young people are missing, there is not always enough
information gathered about the risks that they face. This means that the risks to
children and young people, especially dangers from adults sexually exploiting
them or from gangs, are not always known and the best help and support are not
always given.
 Managers are not making decisions quickly enough when children need to come
into care. It also takes too long for some children and young people to get to
know where they will live until they are adults. Not enough children and young
people are staying with their carers after they are 18 years of age.
 Most children and young people who live with foster carers feel settled with
carers who know them well and who listen to them.
 Recently, more children have had plans to be adopted and, once this decision is
made, they receive a better service.
 Most care leavers have workers who they like and trust and many young people
are working, training or in further education. However, too few young people
leaving care move to live independently and many are not helped enough to
know how to manage money and how to look after themselves well.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Inadequate

Summary
Services for children in need of help and protection in Croydon are inadequate.
Serious and widespread failings leave some children at risk of significant harm.
Weak managerial oversight at all levels has not ensured that basic social work
practice is of a good enough standard. Children do not receive robust and timely
responses to ensure that risk is reduced and their needs are met. The local
authority was required to take additional steps in some cases during the inspection
to be assured that the children were not at immediate risk of harm.
The inconsistent application of thresholds and a failure to recognise risk are
common features in too many cases. When circumstances for children do not
improve, the local authority is too slow to take action. This means that some
children are left in harmful situations for too long.
The workloads of some social workers, in some teams, are too high. This is a
serious barrier to their providing effective services for children. There is too great a
turnover of staff in many teams, which makes building trusting relationships
between social workers and children difficult.
The range and coordination of early help provision for children and families are
underdeveloped. However, partner agencies are at the early stages of working
together to develop a new, shared approach to delivering services.
Most assessments do not effectively consider history or parental capacity or
analyse risk. Additionally, the majority of childrens plans are not of good quality,
and are too narrowly focused. Progress is often limited and actions are not
achieved before plans are closed. Work with some children drifts without
reassessment or analysis of change.
Child protection chairs and partner agencies are not currently using formal
systems, child protection conferences and core groups to effectively challenge drift
and delay in planning for children.
When children are missing or they are at risk of sexual exploitation, the recognition
of and response to these concerns are not effectively reducing risk to them.
Stronger arrangements are in place for tracking children who are missing from
education.
The local authority has undertaken awareness raising to protect children from
radicalisation and to take appropriate action to support children who are at risk.
Effective multi-agency services for girls at risk of genital mutilation are in place.


Inspection findings
the right level or at the right time and previous concerns about children are
given insufficient consideration. When risks to children escalate, or do not
reduce, the local authority fails to intervene quickly enough.
too demanding in both volume and complexity. Some staff told inspectors that
they are overwhelmed by the amount of work, and are unable to complete
essential tasks, such as visiting children regularly and completing assessments
within timescales.
opportunity to build trusting relationships with their social workers. Some newly
allocated workers then struggle to capture a genuine understanding of
childrens lived experience, by routinely reading the history or taking account
of, and building on, previous social work to progress childrens plans. This
means that social workers have to start over again for too many families.
while regular, are not effective. Social workers do not receive sufficient support,
direction or challenge to ensure that children receive effective and timely help.
underdeveloped. Partner agencies remain unclear about the purpose of the
early help offer. However, they are at the early stages of working together to
develop a new approach, building on the Best Start Programme, which is
helping to further develop a shared approach to delivering services. The early
help hub facilitates access to services and supports professionals in completing
early help assessments. However, there is an insufficient range of evidencebased interventions to support families. The evaluation of work is not taking
place, which means that it is difficult to measure impact or demonstrate that
the work is sustainable and is making a difference for children.
(Recommendation)
Non social work staff can hold cases for several days without the early help
screening team making a decision. For example, some cases wait too long
before being allocated for a social work assessment.


joint targeted area inspection (JTAI) of MASH arrangements 12 months ago has
resulted in better practice, with more effective management oversight of work
in the MASH. There is more timely and robust management action taken by a
dedicated project manager, who signs off all decisions within 24 hours. Daily
MASH discussions take place to effectively share information and agree actions
on individual cases.
authority and by partner agencies are inconsistent. The number of contacts that
lead to no further action continues to be high at 60%, although this has
reduced from 80% at the time of the JTAI. Several different referral pathways
into childrens services exist and this is confusing for partners, and means that
some contacts are made through the wrong pathway. (Recommendation)
telephone call with the police child abuse investigation team (CAIT). Other
relevant agencies are not routinely involved, which means that multi-agency
sharing of comprehensive information is not available to inform decisions. A
high number of child protection enquiries (63%) do not lead to an initial child
protection conference. This means that there may be another missed
opportunity for multi-agency discussion and a shared approach to planning for
children. (Recommendation)
analysed and there is insufficient consideration of families historical
information. Childrens identity and cultural needs are not fully explored during
the assessment process. While the views of children and their parents are
recorded in the majority of cases, meaningful work with children in order to
really understand their lived experiences is weak. Brothers and sisters are
referred to collectively in assessments and many childrens individual needs are
overlooked. Some children who live in families in which there is a particular
focus on one child are not referred to in assessments. Assessments are not
routinely updated and new information is not analysed to reflect what may be
significant changes in childrens circumstances. (Recommendation)
used to inform assessments and, in too many cases, the impact of chronic
neglect on children is not fully addressed.


goals and timescales are not clear enough. Specific contingency planning is
missing. This means that some families do not understand the consequences if
progress is not made to address concerns. Social workers do not visit all
children regularly enough to monitor whether plans are making a positive
difference to their lives. Brothers and sisters are considered together on shared
plans and in the vast majority of cases these do not consider or address their
individual needs. In many cases, child protection plans are ceased too soon,
before sufficient progress has been made. For example, in some cases, plans
end when parents have just started to engage in work to address long-standing
domestic abuse, even though their ability to make and sustain improvement
has not been demonstrated. (Recommendation)
stronger examples in the specialist team of whole-family assessments and work
to support brothers and sisters. However, practice is less effective when there
are presenting safeguarding concerns. Workers do not recognise and take
timely action to address neglect for all of these children, reflecting the poor
practice found in other teams.
plans and recordings, where social workers go the extra mile to ensure that
childrens thoughts and feelings are reflected in their plans and case records.
groups do not all ensure that plans are used to measure and promote
improvement and they do not challenge each other when there is delay in
progress. This leads to a lack of purposeful and effective work and too many
children experience unacceptable drift and delay.
challenge or use the formal alert system to highlight poor practice. Child
protection chairs often have informal conversations with social workers and
managers which are not recorded. This means that it is difficult to monitor
agreed actions and progress. (Recommendation)
Croydon. Inspectors did not see any cases where advocacy had been offered or
used to support children in need of help and protection, or to support their
parents, to help them understand and fully participate in the process.
are not taking place for the majority of children, which means that the
opportunity to gather critical information, identify risks and take timely
protective action is lost.


workers do not have sufficient knowledge and understanding of sexual
exploitation to enable them to help children. Recognised models and tools for
assessing the risk of child sexual exploitation are not used and the majority of
staff have not received training in the skills needed to support children who are
exploited. (Recommendation)
constitutes a private fostering arrangement. Several cases were seen where an
assessment should have been completed to ensure that children were
appropriately cared for, which means that some children live in circumstances
where the suitability and commitment of carers are unknown.
(Recommendation)
about staff or volunteers are in place and strategy meetings are proportionate.
However, there is no formal tracking system to ensure that work is completed
and within timescales, which means that the implications for some children are
not known and acted on.
assessment conferences (MARACs). MARACs are well attended by relevant
partner agencies and there is timely reporting on actions. However, too many
children living in families affected by domestic abuse do not receive the
appropriate level of help and protection to substantially reduce risk.
mutilation. A comprehensive risk assessment tool is in place and its use is
leading to better identification of the risk of female genital mutilation. A
dedicated health worker efficiently coordinates links across relevant agencies,
and promotes the education of parents and community groups. A range of
professionals from other agencies and local authorities have benefited from
understanding their approach.
to children of extremism and radicalisation. Training has been provided to the
majority of schools in the area and appropriate referrals are made to the
Channel panel.


education. The children missing education welfare officer works closely with
schools to ensure that children missing education are identified quickly.
Education welfare officers work closely with schools and other partners to
ensure that children return to school and improve their attendance. Alternative
provision meets the needs of children and young people effectively. Children
who are electively home educated (EHE) are well monitored. The EHE officer
ensures that all families who are considering EHE are offered and receive home
visits or face-to-face meetings. The EHE officer contacts a wide range of
appropriate agencies to identify any potential risks to children whose parents do
not engage.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Inadequate

Summary
Services for children looked after by Croydon are inadequate. Inspectors identified
too many children who have waited too long for a decision to be made as to
whether they should be looked after, or who have returned home without
sufficient support. The pre-proceedings phase of the PLO is not used often or early
enough to ensure that parents are aware of the potentially serious consequences
of poor or harmful parenting. Parallel planning is not embedded, and drift and
delay adversely affect children at all stages of care planning.
Too few children looked after who go missing are spoken to when they return, and
the analysis of associated risks is weak. The response to children who are at risk
from sexual exploitation is also underdeveloped, and assessments and plans to
reduce future harm are rarely evident.
Most children looked after live in stable foster placements where they are cared for
well. However, many carers feel poorly supported, and the fostering service is not
compliant with all regulations. In the majority of cases, social workers see children
regularly. However, there is limited purposeful direct work to help them.
Childrens health assessments and reviews are increasingly timely. Children,
parents and carers engage with statutory reviews, and most meetings are a
comprehensive account of childrens lives. Overall, IROs know children well, but
they do not always stay in touch with all children between childrens reviews and
they do not challenge delay assertively enough.
Teachers find the involvement of the virtual school helpful, but the majority of
personal education plans (PEPs) need to be improved.
Children who cannot live with their families are increasingly considered for
adoption, but delays exist. The quality of CPRs is variable. Adopters are well
assessed and supported.
Not enough young people live with their foster carers beyond the age of 18 years.
Too few care leavers have the opportunity to move to independent
accommodation when they are ready to do so. Preparation of young people for
independent living is inconsistent and not all are fully aware of their entitlements.
The quality of pathway planning is too variable. However, the large majority of
care leavers are in education, employment or training, and they report strong and
consistent support from their personal advisers.


Inspection findings
should be looked after and this means that they continue to live in neglectful or
harmful situations for longer than is necessary. If they return home from care,
plans and packages of support are not always sufficiently robust to avoid
problems recurring.
the PLO, which is a legal requirement. This means that an important step in
engaging with families and planning for childrens legal permanence is bypassed
and parents do not always have the opportunity to change their behaviour, or
have a clear understanding of the consequences of not doing so. Although the
number of children in pre-proceedings is increasing, it is still too low. Child
protection plans that are not effective continue for too long when more decisive
action is needed and when the care threshold is likely to be met. This leaves
children at risk of further harm.
permanence planning were significantly underdeveloped. This created delays
for children at all stages, from the decision that the legal threshold for care
proceedings is met, through to a permanent placement match being decided.
Inspectors saw a number of cases where children have experienced drift and
delay due to assessments not being commissioned or completed on time, or
statements and applications submitted to court late. This slows childrens
journeys towards secure and permanent homes. (Recommendation)
September 2016, and the recent increased attention of senior managers are
beginning to have a positive effect on services, from a low base. Inspectors
noted some improvements in the oversight of care proceedings and preproceedings from April this year. Targeted training and mentoring of staff are
increasing their skills. These early signs of change are also reported by the
Child and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), which has
noted that, although practice remains inconsistent, the timeliness and quality of
court assessments and care plans are improving.
increasingly understand what is expected of them. However, senior leaders
have been much too slow to establish minimum standards and these are not
embedded in practice. Permanency planning meetings are not always ambitious
or assertive enough to ensure that a range of permanence options are
considered and pursued for children of all ages. This demonstrates a lack of
ambition to achieve the best positive permanence option for all children.
Contingency and parallel planning are often not evident and this leads to
avoidable delays for children when a preferred care plan, such as a family care
arrangement, proves to be unviable. (Recommendation)


are evident. Some children wait for up to a year to know where they will live for
the remainder of their childhood and beyond. Foster carers told inspectors that
this is difficult and unsettling for children. Once decisions have been made, it is
positive that social workers and managers mark these important events with
certificates and celebratory activities.
updates and actions, close attention to overall care plans for children and
purposeful challenge of delay are rarely evident. In a number of cases
important risk factors are not sufficiently explored and in a few cases they are
not mentioned at all. Clarity about accountability for important decisions for
children looked after is not established or evident in recording.
experiences. When a conversation is offered, children often refuse to engage. A
lack of persistence and creativity in considering why children run away, whom
they are with, where they go and the risks they face, is a key weakness. This is
because it limits professionals understanding of childrens lives and reduces
opportunities to make them safer. Leaders and partners have put in place
appropriate strategic arrangements, including a commissioned service that
provides high-quality support. However, practice is highly inconsistent;
comprehensive risk assessments and assertive planning to safeguard children
are rare, leaving them vulnerable to harm. (Recommendation)
of childrens lives and histories. Better performance information is enabling
managers to monitor some important aspects of support for children looked
after, including the frequency of social work visits. Visits are regular for the
majority of children, including those who live out of the authority area,
although records do not always evidence purposeful direct work with children.
Some children wait too long for important direct work, such as life story work,
but inspectors also saw some good examples of creative time spent with
children, including singing, using pictures to help them to understand their
country of birth and playing make-believe games. Children told us that they see
their social workers often and most find them friendly and helpful.
an advocate and this means that very few children have the benefit of an
independent supporter who can help them to express their views, challenge
their plans, or raise something that they are worried about. There is a waiting
list for children who have asked for an independent visitor. When children do
spend time with independent visitors, they value this support and friendship.
(Recommendation)


foster family. Placement stability is good. Less than one in 10 children moved
placements more than twice in the 12 months preceding the inspection. There
is sufficient choice for children with regard to in-house foster carers and
independent fostering agencies. Almost half of Croydons 760 children looked
after cohort are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children. Inspectors saw
detailed age assessments and some positive matches of children with carers
who understand and celebrate their culture and faith. However, a small
minority of less well-matched children are losing touch with their culture or
language.
good-quality care to children. The foster carers who spoke with inspectors
talked warmly and protectively about the children they are caring for. A strong
commitment to children looked after as much-loved members of families is
commonplace among these carers. One foster carer said, We are very lucky to
have him in our family. Children told us that they are happy and settled with
their carers: They are like my mum and dad; We do fun things together like
other families; They sort out injustice at school; and, If Im feeling down she
always asks me about it.
the fostering service. A recent independent review identified similar concerns,
including a lack of out-of-hours support, irregular supervision, poor
communication, lack of delegated authority, insufficient consideration of
matching for children and carers not being listened to when they try to
challenge poor care planning. The fostering service is not consistently compliant
with regulatory standards; unannounced visits are irregular, annual reviews are
delayed and delegated authority is not consistently in place. Inspectors also
identified children living in unregulated placements where emergency and
viability assessments are delayed or not completed within timescales, so that
potential risks relating to these households are not fully understood.
(Recommendation)
the virtual school team provides helpful support and challenge. They reported
that this has improved during the last year. Although the virtual school team
has provided training for social workers and designated teachers, the quality of
the majority of PEPs requires improvement. Key areas for improvement
included the quality of target setting and recording the use of pupil premium
funding and the voice of the child. Some children told inspectors that within
their PEP meetings they are not praised enough for the things they have
achieved. At the time of the inspection, the introduction of e-PEPs, to support
quality improvement, was imminent.


schools judged as inadequate. The virtual school team works closely with the
small number of schools that require improvement, to ensure that they receive
the support that they need. Children looked after in Croydon achieve less well
than their peers in neighbouring authorities and nationally at each key stage of
education. Results at key stage 4 are improving, but remain just below the
national rates. This improvement is a significant achievement due to the high
proportion of children looked after who are unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children, many of whom have minimal previous experience of education and
speak little English on their arrival. The virtual school team has ensured that
good arrangements are in place for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children to
enrol in schools quickly. Courses for speakers of other languages are quickly
sourced for those who need to improve their English. In addition, a short
course is provided for those children who have had very little or no formal
education prior to their arrival in the United Kingdom.
children are aware of the dangers of extremism and radicalisation as well as
what to do if they experience bullying or the inappropriate use of social media.
Survey responses indicate that the number of children who report experiencing
bullying is falling. Children looked after told inspectors that their foster carers
and teachers have acted quickly to stop bullying when children have
experienced this at school.
with registered providers. All children who attend these providers receive fulltime timetables. In addition, a registered tuition service, Springboard, provides
bespoke support to children, most of whom have medical or complex special
educational needs. A small number of children looked after are supported
through the tuition service and have part-time timetables.
of initial health assessments from a low base. However, children looked after
nurses are not always notified quickly enough when children come into care,
leading to delays in some childrens health needs being understood. Children
looked after nurses acknowledge that greater specificity in health-related
actions would improve consistency of follow-up and oversight of childrens
health needs. Children looked after nurses increasingly engage creatively with
hard-to-reach young people, but they have insufficient capacity to be closely
involved in childrens day-to-day care plans, for example by attending statutory
reviews.


permanence service, the remainder are allocated to social workers in over 25
teams and units. This presents a significant challenge for senior managers in
achieving consistency of practice across the service. It has also made it more
difficult for the child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS) to ensure
that all social workers know about the children looked after CAMHS provision
and associated consultation offer. Although some positive work is taking place,
inspectors reviewed a number of cases where children or carers who need
therapeutic support have waited too long for advice about childrens behaviour
or direct support, such as play therapy.
reviews do not outline and analyse childrens life experiences alongside recent
events comprehensively enough to compensate for this deficit. Care plans are
brief and rarely include any detail about childrens day-to-day lives, aspirations
or overall plans for permanence. This reduces the ability of social workers,
carers and professionals to ensure that they are working together purposefully
to improve childrens outcomes.
to an inefficient system for arranging meetings. In most cases, children, carers
and parents engage with or contribute to these meetings and the majority of
records are comprehensive accounts of childrens lives and achievements. In
most cases, contact arrangements with friends and family members are
considered well. Some children told inspectors that reviews are too long and
that they sometimes feel that adults are talking about them, not with them.
IROs have established long-term relationships with some children, but they
acknowledge that they have insufficient time to stay in close touch with children
to progress their plans. Inspectors saw some evidence of IROs providing
challenge regarding childrens care plans, but high-level intervention was not
evident enough in those cases where children have experienced most delay.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
rising. Since June 2016, 32 children who have a wide range of needs, ethnic
backgrounds and ages, and groups of brothers and sisters, have been placed
for adoption, of whom 22 children have been successfully adopted, including
three children placed under foster to adopt arrangements. This performance
has improved from 201516 as a result of continued focus on making earlier
decisions and an increased number of decisions with regard to children to be
placed for adoption: 19 in 201516, rising to 44 in 201617, and this trend is
likely to continue into 201718.


children across the wider service is weak and needs improvement. Inspectors
saw that the impact and legacy of this are that children are waiting longer for
adoption, for example, where decisions to progress pre-proceedings within the
PLO and care proceedings are delayed, and where care planning is poor once
children are looked after.
plans for permanence more robustly, these have not provided sufficient scrutiny
and oversight to ensure that plans for adoption are strong and timely for all
children. Inspectors observed avoidable delays, for example when decisions to
achieve permanence are not quick enough, and some delays in family finding
that impact on the timeliness of matching for a few children with adoptive
families. The local authority acknowledges that improvements in permanence
planning are very recent and that this area requires continued focus and robust
oversight to improve performance further. (Recommendation)
published national thresholds on key indicators. This performance links to the
legacy of poor permanence planning across the service. It takes too long for a
child in Croydon, from becoming looked after, to be living with an adoptive
family. However, the recently improved focus on practice with regard to placing
children for adoption is resulting in more timely matches to permanent homes
for some children.
adopted. A systematic focus on and tighter management of permanence
planning are needed across the wider service to ensure the timeliness of
adoption for all children, once the agency decision-maker (ADM) makes the
appropriate decision that this is the best plan.
appropriate use of the South London Adoption Consortium for the provision of
preparation groups. Adopters met during the inspection reported that their
preparation and assessment were well managed and they commented
favourably on the professionalism and support provided by the adoption staff.
One adopter had specifically chosen Croydon due to a positive
recommendation.
comprehensive, checks and references are progressed appropriately, and that
prospective adopters are visited regularly and seen alone. This enables their
strengths, motivation and ability to parent adopted children to be well
considered. However, assessments are not all completed within the six-month
timescales, although some delay is appropriate, for example adopters
requesting to have a break between stage one and stage two of the process.


panel chair and the ADM. In the better reports, childrens and birth familys
details are thorough and include all aspects of the childs life, including relevant
decisions and details that may be required in later life. Weaker reports are not
clear. They lack important information and do not provide the rationale for
decision-making or up-to-date information, which are extremely important in
helping children to understand their early experiences. Recent workshops for
social workers to improve practice have addressed the quality of reports, but it
is too early to see their impact.
other relevant adoption services to match children with adoptive families that
meet their needs. Some delay in the family finding process for children waiting
was identified during the inspection and tighter monitoring is required in order
to improve this in future.
identified. Adoption placement reports successfully identify childrens needs and
the ways in which adopters will meet them. Minutes of the adoption panel
reflect appropriate scrutiny and challenge, and recorded decisions by the ADM
are comprehensive. The adopters met during the inspection who have been
matched with children reported that the process was timely and that they were
well supported.
experienced panel chair. Panel minutes and recommendations for children and
adopters are clear, evidencing a well-balanced rationale. ADM decisions are
timely and well considered. Issues identified at adoption panel regarding the
work and performance of the adoption agency are highlighted in a six-monthly
reporting cycle. These are progressed in order to improve learning and practice,
for example the provision of workshops for social workers to improve the
quality of CPRs.
appropriate, evidencing a child-centred approach. Later life letters sampled
were sensitively written, with attention to the likely emotional response of the
child when older.
including facilitation of direct contact between birth family members, letterbox
arrangements, birth records counselling and intermediary support. Experienced
staff provide support to adopters and children, including therapeutic services
and interventions, and they liaise and commission relevant additional postadoptive support services if needed. Applications to the adoption support fund
result in appropriate support for families and plans are in place to extend this
more fully in the future.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
time of the inspection (705), half of whom were unaccompanied asylumseeking young people who had become looked after in Croydon. Social workers
and personal advisers are in touch with a very large majority of their care
leavers (92%) and most personal advisers and social workers are tenacious in
their efforts to re-establish contact with those not in touch. Most care leavers
receive appropriate help with progressing smoothly to independent living.
However, a minority do not receive sufficient support to meet their needs, and
are less well prepared for the transition to adulthood.
starts too late. Workers begin pathway plans just before the care leaver
becomes 18 years of age, rather than in the three months before they reach
their 16th birthday. This delay affects their transition to adulthood because
establishing relationships with personal advisers does not begin early enough.
Not all plans contain sufficient detail or consideration of contingencies and they
do not all reflect the views of young people well. (Recommendation)
by the children looked after nurse before they reach 18 years of age. They
receive key information about their health histories. However, while most care
leavers receive appropriate healthcare, there are insufficient specific health
services available to care leavers to promote and support them after the age of
sufficiently prepared for living independently. Care leavers told inspectors of
their different experiences of how well they are supported after leaving care.
While some talked about very good preparation and support from their personal
advisers, including help with learning how to budget and to cook, others said
that they were not helped to prepare themselves well. For example, a minority
of care leavers got into financial difficulty because no one had told them that
they needed to pay council tax when moving to private accommodation.


proportion of Croydon care leavers benefit from living with their former foster
carers beyond the age of 18 years than in neighbouring authorities or
nationally. Some care leavers and foster carers reported that they believed that
staying-put arrangements are only available until the age of 18 if they remain in
full-time education. In addition, care plans often say that children will remain in
placement until 18 years of age. Both of these factors undermine efforts to
ensure that more care leavers benefit from the security and stability of
continuing to live with their foster carers as they transition to independent
adulthood. (Recommendation)
training, which is better than rates achieved by neighbouring authorities or
nationally. Senior leaders are working to improve opportunities for care leavers
in a borough with strong economic growth, for example by expanding existing
contracts to ensure that commissioned partners and the authority itself offer
apprenticeship opportunities specifically aimed at care leavers.
the time of the inspection, there were 100 young people taking degree courses
and a small but increasing number on higher apprenticeships. These young
people continue to benefit from good support provided by their social workers
or personal advisers. This support extends to the provision of accommodation
for those who want to return to Croydon during university breaks.
being included in a well-written care leavers handbook. Inconsistent support
for individual care leavers and a lack of focus in pathway plans mean that not
all care leavers have a good understanding of, and access to, their
entitlements.
leavers have limited options for moving on to independent living when they are
ready to do so. More care leavers are living in shared accommodation, following
a decision by senior managers to reduce the number of commissioned selfcontained housing options. Although care leavers interviewed said that their
shared accommodation arrangements were working well, some felt ready, and
would prefer, to live independently. The fact that care leavers are not given any
priority to help them to secure social housing reduces their options further. A
very small number of care leavers are homeless or in emergency
accommodation. At the time of the inspection, one care leaver was in shortterm bed and breakfast accommodation and, although his circumstances were
well assessed and supported, this is not acceptable practice. (Recommendation)


very high regard. They said that their workers were proud of them and their
achievements. One said that she regarded her personal adviser and the broader
care leaving team as her family. There are also some examples of creative and
innovative ideas that are supporting care leavers to be as fully informed as
possible about available support. For example, a personal adviser has
developed a range of very high-quality YouTube guides under the banner
former-relevant TV to help care leavers learn a range of useful skills, including
how to select, and use, good-quality private rental websites.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Services for vulnerable children in Croydon are inadequate. There are widespread
and serious failures in the services provided to children and their families in
Croydon that leave some children at risk of significant harm. Senior leaders
identified a legacy of poor practice and weak managerial oversight at all levels.
However, they have not ensured that basic social work practice is of a good
enough standard. The serious and widespread issues across the service had not
been fully understood by elected members or senior managers until this inspection
and this corporate failure has led to a lack of prioritisation and timely action. This
has resulted in too many children remaining at risk of escalating or actual harm
characterised by drift and delay.
Work in strengthening partnership working and understanding local need has been
more successful. Work has taken place with partners since the JTAI to strengthen
the effectiveness of work in the MASH and improve performance management
information. This now includes a comprehensive monthly dashboard, performance
clinics and performance meetings, including a monthly safeguarding meeting
chaired by the leader of the council. However, this monitoring does not translate
into commensurate action that improves practice.
Managers, in particular, do not provide enough guidance or direction to social
workers to ensure improved outcomes for children. Conference chairs and IROs do
not routinely or effectively challenge poorer practice.
The corporate parenting panel has been effective in championing some issues that
have led to better outcomes for children looked after, for example improved
placement stability and access to education, employment and training. The
corporate parenting panel expresses a commitment to improving the lives of
children. However, the local authority overall has not prioritised and planned
sufficiently to improve outcomes for enough children.
More recent commissioning partnerships demonstrate improvement in some
services, but more work is required to ensure that contracts and resources reflect
the level of need for children.
The local authority has begun to implement a new recruitment and retention
strategy, but work to date has been ineffective in addressing vacancy rates and
staff turnover, and in ensuring that there is appropriate support for newly qualified
social workers.
Work is taking place to give children a greater strategic voice, but this is yet to
translate into practice. The lived experience of a high number of children is
unknown or not clearly understood and advocacy to support children is limited.


Inspection findings
management information and structures in Croydon. However, these measures
have failed to result in the improvements that are required to ensure that
children are safe and well cared for. The serious and widespread issues across
the service had not been fully understood by elected members or senior
managers until this inspection and this corporate failure has led to a lack of
prioritisation and timely action. This has resulted in too many children
remaining at risk of escalating or actual harm.
procedures has resulted in a lack of care and protection. Inspectors also
referred a number of children, for whom there were significant concerns, to the
local authority. All of these cases were accepted by Croydons senior managers
and almost all required immediate action to ensure the safety of the children.
The local authority has referred one case to the Croydon Safeguarding Children
Board (CSCB) for a learning lessons review.
concerns, senior leaders commissioned a number of detailed external service
reviews and undertook two practice weeks, which included all managers across
the service auditing and observing practice. Leaders therefore became aware of
the serious deficits in frontline practice, but they failed to correctly prioritise the
areas of greatest concern. The local authority is at a very early stage in
addressing the poor practice identified. However, some improvements have
been made, for example in the MASH. Senior managers have put in place an
improvement board, an improvement plan, service plans and a range of action
plans that are currently focused on improving processes and structures; there is
an insufficient focus on the experience of children. This has created delay in
addressing the serious and widespread practice issues.
regular meetings between officers and elected members, with clear lines of
accountability and governance arrangements between political, strategic and
operational roles. However, a significant number of meetings and discussions
take place informally and there is a lack of formal minutes to demonstrate and
evidence accountability and agreed actions. This means that there is no formal
record to demonstrate a clear line of sight from elected members and senior
managers to frontline practice.
Senior leaders recognise that these require strengthening, and have therefore
begun a review of these arrangements. This review includes the Childrens
Partnership Group, the Health and Wellbeing Board, the CSCB and the local
strategic partnership.


unaccompanied asylum-seeking children. A specialist team of social workers
and managers works closely and effectively with the Home Office to ensure a
strong and caring initial response to children arriving alone in the country. This
work extends well beyond the borough, liaising with other areas across the
country as part of the national dispersal scheme and including involvement in
crisis work, such as the Calais camps.
the borough by building a detailed and relevant picture of the community. This
has included the development of strategic partnership arrangements for
children at risk of radicalisation and extremism, child sexual exploitation, going
missing, trafficking, female genital mutilation and gangs. Together with the
police and other partners, Operation Raptor and Operation Rosario have
helped Croydon to develop a profile of concerns and increase disruption
activity. The borough has also entered into new partnerships and research
projects to broaden knowledge about child sexual exploitation and female
genital mutilation, and has created a new senior level group to share
information about the highest-risk children.
work insufficiently informs and improves operational frontline practice. Too
many frontline practitioners do not follow child sexual exploitation and missing
procedures to protect children. Inspectors saw several cases where workers
and frontline managers had failed to identify, assess or respond appropriately
to children at risk of sexual exploitation. Despite Croydon having one of the
highest numbers of missing children nationally, procedures and protocols for
children missing from home and care are not fully established or routinely
followed. Not enough children receive return home interviews and risk
assessments are rarely completed. As a result, vital information that would
inform the partnership about these children is lost, which impedes preventative
action to avoid further harm.
of the CSCB. This report found serious failings that resulted in 10 key areas for
improvement for the board. The chief executive also challenged the partnership
representatives of the board about the lack of senior level engagement. Despite
these actions, the board has not improved its effectiveness in understanding
the quality of help and support provided to children and families in Croydon.
shared understanding and joint work. However, partnership working in frontline
services needs strengthening. This is very apparent in the lack of multi-agency
understanding of thresholds across the childs journey. Meaningful engagement
and challenge from partners in key discussions and meetings aimed at
protecting children, such as strategy discussions and core group meetings, are
lacking. This means that childrens plans do not benefit from full multi-agency
involvement.


in Croydon, but it is now beginning to have some impact. Similarly, the
appointment of a new case progression manager is beginning to ensure more
consistent court practice. However, while the local authority demonstrates an
effective relationship with Cafcass, the relationship with the judiciary is poor.
Despite very recent improvements, the judiciary expressed considerable
concern about the quality and timeliness of legal representation in court. It
highlighted a number of practice concerns, which included poor recognition of
neglect, poor planning for children, resulting in significant delays, and a culture
of crisis management in Croydon.
information and this has resulted in improved performance management data.
This includes a monthly dashboard, performance clinics and performance
meetings, including a monthly safeguarding meeting chaired by the leader of
the council. However, data is not collected in all areas to inform practice
improvements, for example complaints from children and families. Despite
weekly and daily monitoring of some priority areas of child protection
processes, this monitoring does not translate into commensurate action that
improves practice in key areas. Some managers do not understand
performance data and, as a result, there are gaps in key areas of performance
oversight, such as missing children. Performance management is therefore not
informing practice improvement sufficiently.
However, information is not routinely collated and analysed to aid
understanding of inconsistent practice and outcomes. Auditing activity takes
place regularly and inspectors noted that audit findings were accurate in 75%
of cases seen. However, managers do not systematically follow up on agreed
actions, and escalation processes are not routinely utilised by child protection
chairs and IROs to alert senior managers to the impact of deficits in practice,
for example delays in planning for permanence or insufficient progress in plans.
commissioned services are informed by the needs of children in most cases.
Commissioned services, underpinned by dedicated needs analysis, build on the
information contained in the joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA). Partners
recognise that further work is required to strengthen the JSNA and the Health
and Wellbeing Board is considering this. The local authority has developed joint
commissioning with the clinical commissioning group and together they have
successfully commissioned a number of services that include a new CAMHS
contract. However, not all contracts meet the needs of children. The advocacy
contract, which began in January 2017, provides an issue-based service only
and precludes children who are looked after and care leavers.


for placements. Placement stability for children looked after in foster care is
strong and a high proportion of children live in family placements. However, a
group of foster carers told inspectors that they do not feel valued and do not all
receive the support that they need.
parenting panel, actively engages with children and advocates on their behalf.
Changes to the corporate parenting panel mean that all children across the
borough can become involved in topic-based discussions. As a result, the panel
has been effective in championing some issues for children and young people.
For example, last year young people were part of a takeover of the scrutiny
committee, during which they explored housing issues for young people.
practice priorities in the improvement plan. More work is also required to
engage the Children in Care Council. A new draft engagement strategy is
currently being debated and refined, which will begin to take these issues
forward and further develop childrens involvement in scrutiny and the cabinet.
At the time of the inspection, Croydon was hosting a youth congress to debate
young peoples engagement, at which there were over 200 delegates.
(Recommendation)
Croydon. However, this desire is not evident in most cases seen on this
inspection. Inspectors consistently saw a lack of understanding of the lived
experience of children, a lack of involvement of children in their plans and
limited access to advocacy and independent visitors for children.
further development. A new corporate team has been set up and the first
children and families quarterly report was recently presented to childrens
services senior managers. It contains only basic information; it lacks analysis
and does not identify the sources of complaints. There is also no routine
monitoring of complaints from children looked after. As a result, managers do
not know how many children make complaints, nor their reasons for doing so.
Further work is required to ensure that practitioners and managers have
received training, and that a culture of feedback is embedded.
(Recommendation)
majority of cases seen by inspectors. For some, there were long gaps in the
frequency of supervision, and records show a lack of reflection and clarity about
actions required in a significant number of cases. This leads to a lack of
direction and purposeful work with children, and contributes to unnecessary
drift and delay. Senior managers have not created good conditions in which
social workers can flourish. A number of social workers told inspectors that they
are not clear about what they need to do. (Recommendation)


This is particularly true for social workers in the care planning units and for new
social workers undertaking their assessed and supported year in employment
(ASYE). The vast majority of ASYEs who spoke to inspectors said that they feel
overwhelmed. They do not all have protected caseloads and therefore do not
receive the support and supervision that they require to work effectively with
children.
underdeveloped and, consequently, it has not affected turnover and vacancy
rates. More work is therefore required to ensure that there is a more stable
workforce, particularly for children in need and those on child protection plans.
Work has been slow to target training and learning opportunities to those who
need them, following findings from external reviews and practice weeks. As a
result, action is required to ensure that social workers and managers have the
skills they require to properly protect and care for children. (Recommendation)


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
Executive summary
The CSCB is inadequate. It has not fully established effective arrangements for
discharging its statutory functions. In particular, it does not understand the
experiences of children and young people locally, and has failed to sufficiently
monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of frontline practice.
While board members are aware of inadequate practice identified in previous
multi-agency audits, SCRs and the findings from practice weeks, they do not
provide effective challenge, or take sufficient timely action to address the poor
practice and serious and widespread risks to vulnerable children in Croydon. There
has been too great a focus on process that has led to insufficient understanding
and prioritisation of required actions.
The board lacks direction and purpose, despite undertaking considerable activity,
and it is unclear what difference this is making for children. The annual report and
business plan are overly optimistic about progress, lack rigour and are not
evidence based.
The early help strategy is insufficiently coordinated and implemented and the
board has not ensured that pathways to early help services are well understood
and applied. Ineffective action to address this fundamental deficit means that the
board cannot be assured that children are receiving the right level of help at the
right time.
The board leads the overall strategic approach to child sexual exploitation and
children missing from home and care. While it is successfully raising awareness
across a range of settings, poor scrutiny by the board means that it is not aware
that basic child protection procedures for children at risk of sexual exploitation and
those missing from home or care are not being followed.
Agreement for SCRs is in line with statutory guidance; learning is disseminated,
but is not embedded in frontline practice. The board receives an appropriate range
of reports about private fostering, the work of the designated officer and IROs.
However, more rigour is required from board members to ensure that the
information in these self-reports is triangulated.
There is national and international recognition for work in protecting children from
female genital mutilation and for work in supporting unaccompanied asylumseeking children in Croydon. There is significant engagement with the community
and faith groups to raise awareness of specific issues facing children.


Recommendations
effective processes that monitor and evaluate actions for their impact on
outcomes for children.
between children at risk of child sexual exploitation, those who go missing,
gang affiliation and county lines, and to achieve a consistent application of the
boards procedures for these children.
quality assurance activity and to judge the effectiveness of services, particularly
in relation to early help, children in need of help and protection and those in
care.
action to ensure shared understanding and consistent application of thresholds
across the partnership.
effectiveness of frontline practice. This is to provide evidence of the boards
focus on outcomes, demonstrating that it is making a difference to vulnerable
local children.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
for discharging its statutory functions. In particular, it does not understand the
experiences of children and young people locally, and has failed to sufficiently
monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of frontline practice.
monthly meetings with the chief executive, the executive director of people and
the lead member for children. However, these have not led to senior leaders
fully understanding the serious and widespread risks to children identified
during this inspection.
is little evidence to demonstrate that strategic bodies hold each other to
account, and that these arrangements are effective in safeguarding children in
Croydon. Consequently, the partnerships response to safeguarding children is
not assured.


board has not ensured that pathways to early help services are well understood
or applied. Over a year ago, the JTAI identified that partners have insufficient
understanding of thresholds and ineffective action taken by the partnership to
address this fundamental deficit means that there are still no assurances that
children are receiving the right level of help at the right time.
(Recommendation)
Board members noted recurring themes in findings from their multi-agency
audits, practice week and learning reviews. Minutes of meetings recorded
comments by board members that partners were not working together as a
collective and that relationships were fractured. The CSCB failed to recognise,
monitor and systematically evaluate the seriousness of these findings.
Insufficient challenge by the board in holding partners to account for these
failures has resulted in too many children being left unprotected at the time of
this review. (Recommendation)
the child sexual exploitation and missing sub-group and there are plans to
extend the work of the group to include all exploited and vulnerable children.
This group has successfully raised awareness across a range of settings that
includes direct work in schools leading to earlier identification of children at risk
and collaborative work with voluntary sector projects based in sexual health
clinics. Despite this, inspectors found that too many practitioners do not follow
the safeguarding boards basic procedures for assessing the needs of children
at risk of sexual exploitation or those who go missing from home and care.
Return home interviews and risk assessments are not routinely undertaken and,
as a result, these children are not adequately protected from ongoing harm.
(Recommendation)
reliable analysis showing that the profile of children at risk in Croydon is largely
one of small groups of peer-to-peer risk and gang-associated incidents. While
data indicates that children at risk of sexual exploitation are not linked with
county lines, the report shows that missing children are. The analysis from
Operation Raptor shows that 60 children are involved in cross-county drug
activity. This includes nine children looked after in Croydon and 15 from other
local authorities. The partnership has not done enough to understand and
address the poor practice in this area.


However, there is too much focus on process, which has affected the ability of
the board to know if outcomes for children have improved. The board still lacks
direction and purpose and, while there is considerable activity, it is unclear
what difference it is making for children. The board does not ask the right
questions and board members are too accepting of self-reporting. The annual
report states that the board achieved eight of the 10 priorities set out in its
business plan. This analysis is overly optimistic and lacks rigour. It is not
evidence based and does not accurately reflect the failure to safeguard children
and young people in Croydon. (Recommendation)
that the voice of the child should underpin the work of the board. The chair has
persistently requested that partners evidence the impact of their agencys work
in protecting children; they have not complied with this request. This questions
the authority of the chair and whether agencies fully understand and know if
children who have contact with their individual agencies receive help
proportionate to their presenting risks and needs. Recent changes to the
section 11 audit are aimed at making this more robust.
information. This is a positive development as it includes the new monthly
dashboard and shared database. More work is essential in order to align the
top-line data with qualitative information, as currently there is insufficient
impact on the persistent shortfalls that inspectors found in services for children
who need help and protection and for those in care. (Recommendation)
commissioned in 201617; the associated recommendations are appropriately
monitored and reported to the board. Learning from SCRs, while disseminated
to all agencies, is not embedded in frontline practice. While there is a
comprehensive learning and development programme that provides
opportunities to engage effectively with partners, more work is needed to
evaluate and evidence the impact of training in all agencies.
fostering and the work of the designated officer and IROs. There is more rigour
required by board members to ensure that the information in these self-reports
is triangulated.
deaths effectively. The annual report is thorough and analytical and all deaths
are reviewed within a year of the death. The CDOP has taken action at local
and regional levels to drive changes. The chair participates in pan-London
workshops coordinated by the Healthy London Partnership CDOP, during which
good practice is shared and learning opportunities are maximised in an effort to
reduce the risk of child deaths in the future. Rapid response meetings are
appropriately prioritised and effective.


specific groups of children. For example, there is national and international
recognition for work in protecting children from female genital mutilation and
for work in supporting unaccompanied asylum-seeking children in Croydon. In
addition, meaningful engagement with the community and faith groups has
raised awareness of specific issues facing children who are sexually exploited or
affected by gangs, or who go missing from home and care. Improved
collaboration and joint work with social housing providers and a recent initiative
with a local premier league football club ensure understanding and prioritisation
of children and their families.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Marcie Taylor
Deputy lead inspector: Natalie Trentham
Team inspectors: Peter McEntee, Susan Myers, Stephanie Murray, Louise Warren,
Mark Shackleton, Brenda McLaughlin
Senior data analyst: Tania Corbin
Quality assurance manager: Sean Tarpey


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


