Cumbria County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 3 March  25 March 2015
Report published: 13 May 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services are inadequate
There are widespread or serious failures in the delivery of services for looked after
children which result in their welfare not being safeguarded and promoted.
Leaders and managers have not been able to demonstrate sufficient understanding
of failures in services for looked after children, and have been ineffective in
prioritising, challenging and making improvements in relation to looked after children
services.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.2
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires improvement

permanence

Inadequate


Requires improvement


Requires improvement



Inadequate

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.

Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Cumbria are inadequate because:
Leadership and management
 From a low base, leaders and managers have made progress in improving
safeguarding services. They have not yet been as effective in tackling the serious
failures in relation to the experiences of looked after children, although there are
examples of positive achievements. Too many looked after children have
experienced unacceptable drift in decision-making and delay in the progress of
their plans.
 Management oversight across all areas of work is weak. This leaves poor practice
unchallenged, and too many childrens needs are unmet and plans not
progressed within the childs timescale.
 The Independent Reviewing Officer (IRO) service is not effectively championing
the needs of looked after children; nor is their practice consistently robust when
considering the risks to children subject to child protection plans.
 There are insufficient resources to meet the emotional well-being needs of looked
after children.
 Strategic planning to respond to both child sexual exploitation and domestic
abuse is underdeveloped.

Quality of practice
 Social work practice is too variable, and too often childrens plans, including those
for looked after children, are not reviewed and progressed in a timely manner.
 Assessments to inform decision-making and plans for looked after children are
not always completed in a timescale that meets the childs needs.
 Some child protection assessments are too long, and do not focus sufficiently on
risk in a way that enables families and professionals to understand exactly what
the concern is.
 When safeguarding concerns have reduced, in some cases step-down
arrangements are not robust and are closed prematurely by childrens social care.
 Not all homeless 16 and 17 year olds in Cumbria are provided with a service that
effectively meets their needs.
 Care leavers do not receive the minimum 2,000 setting up home grant as
recommended in statutory guidance.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Leadership and management

Develop a coherent, overarching strategy and action plan to drive the
improvement of the looked after childrens service. Ensure that robust
arrangements are in place to monitor the progress of the action plan.


Complete the review of the care planning arrangements for all looked after
children and care leavers to ensure that plans are progressing promptly and
improving outcomes for children and young people.


Strengthen the management oversight of all cases to ensure that childrens
plans prioritise risk and that their welfare is promoted. Frontline managers
should systematically check and record that all agreed actions in respect of
individual children and young people are followed up within agreed timescales.


Ensure that performance information and strategic assessments appropriately
consider the actual experience of children and young people in Cumbria.


With partners, review current strategies and action plans for child sexual
exploitation to ensure that plans are progressing with the required urgency.

Looked after children

Ensure that IROs fulfil all aspects of the IRO Handbook. In particular they
should track the progress of care plans between statutory reviews and take
prompt action when concerns arise.

Areas for improvement

Leadership and management

With partners, ensure that professionals are fully aware of their responsibilities
to identify and respond to the early help needs of families.


Review outcomes for children who receive early help to ensure that the help
provided is effective in the short and long term.


Ensure that the emotional and mental health needs of looked after children can
be met and that there is prompt access to specialist services.

children.
young people return from a missing episode.


Looked after children and care leavers
informed by up-to-date social work reports detailing the progress made by the
young person. Minutes and plans should be distributed quickly to relevant
parties so that everyone is clear about their part in supporting the child or
young person.
place to track and monitor the progress of those plans. Where there is a range
of different permanency options for children, these must be considered at the
earliest opportunity and plans expedited to ensure permanency is secured.
completion to improve robustness of planning and avoid drift and delay.
chronologies, up-to-date plans, risk assessments and other key documents
pertaining to childrens individual circumstances.

Help and protection
children when child protection planning ceases. This should include
consideration of thresholds and ensuring that the right level of help is provided
by the right professionals.
informed by robust risk assessments.
looked after. Where they refuse this they should be supported by a multiagency child in need plan to ensure that their needs are met.

Care leavers
young people and the progress they are making towards independence is
clearly charted and regularly reviewed.
foster carers after the age of 18 are able to do so. This includes young people
placed in foster homes which are managed by independent fostering agencies.
the length of time they have to wait to secure it. Provide better support to care
leavers to prevent tenancy breakdowns.


Participation of looked after children and care leavers
understand their rights and entitlements and know about the Pledge. Actively
encourage them to participate in the children in care and care leaver forums,
and to be informed of their work.

Adoption
current requirements at stage one and stage two.

The local authoritys strengths
relatively short period of time, and from a low base, have improved
safeguarding arrangements for the most vulnerable children in Cumbria. The
local authority is in a stronger place now to take forward improvements and
build on the progress that has been made in the recent months to tackle the
shortfalls identified in this inspection.
culture within the local authority and across the partnership.
response to meeting the needs of children locally, and this is making a
difference across the county.
services at a time of financial austerity. This has resulted in the creation of
additional social worker posts, expansion of the Edge of Care service model,
creation of the early help team, and development of the social work academy.
understand their life experiences and share their wishes and feelings. The
childs voice is consistently heard and is increasingly having a positive impact on
the work undertaken with all family members.
within assessments and this results in plans that are influenced by the childs
unique identity and culture.
young children.
successful outcomes for older children, those with complex needs and larger
sibling groups.


Progress since the last inspection
children was undertaken in May 2013. The local authority was judged to be
inadequate. The help and protection of children is now judged to require
improvement.
appointed in September 2014 following an interim period in the role from the
end of February 2014. Since his interim appointment, Childrens Services has
made significant progress, from a low base, in tackling critical issues around the
help and protection of children, culture change, social work capacity and
working to effectively engage the wider partnership that helps and protects
children. However, services for looked after children have not had the same
level of prioritisation and focus.
have been tackled and improvement is evident. Most significantly, the
introduction of a multi-agency safeguarding hub in November 2014 and the
engagement of partners in early help assessments have improved the range of
responses to children when concerns are first identified. When there are child
protection concerns, effective multi-agency strategy meetings and where
necessary, child protection investigations are now initiated promptly. The
wishes and feelings of children are routinely obtained, with much evidence of
effective direct work undertaken with children and young people. Core group
meetings are now held regularly. Advocacy support is available to all children
and young people known to childrens social care.
inspection still require improvement. The rationale for managers decisions is
not always clearly recorded in files. Managers supervision of social workers
does not always allow opportunities for critical reflection. Parents are not
always provided with reports in sufficient time before child protection
conferences. The quality and use of chronologies remain inconsistent.
April 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
effectively tackled; some have deteriorated and some still require improvement.
Most significantly, a coherent overarching strategy for looked after childrens
services is still not in place to effectively drive improvement of the looked after
childrens service. Health assessments for many children when they first
become looked after are not timely. Services to meet the emotional, mental
health and behavioural needs of looked after children are not available quickly
enough.


inadequate safeguarding arrangements, services for looked after children have
not been afforded the same priority by senior leaders to drive forward required
improvements. Management oversight is not identifying and tackling practice
deficits promptly. As a result, too many looked after children experience delay
in having their long-term needs assessed and met.
line with statutory guidance. Despite this, the IRO service is not fulfilling the full
range of responsibilities set out in the IRO handbook. As a result, plans for too
many looked after children are drifting.


Summary for children and young people
 Senior managers have not always identified quickly enough when children are not
getting a good enough service. This means that too many looked after children
do not receive the service they need.
 Independent reviewing officers that chair looked after childrens reviews do not
always make sure that children get all the help they need quickly enough.
 When children are not safe, professionals such as social workers, teachers and
the police act quickly to protect them.
 Too many managers do not always make sure that staff are doing what they
should be doing. This means that too many children do not receive the help and
support they need, when they need it.
 Some children have had too many social workers. This means that it is hard for
them to build trusting relationships when the social worker keeps changing.
 When children have a social worker they see them regularly. Social workers are
now better at listening to the children they work with than they used to be.
 Some good arrangements have been put in place to try and help children when
they first have problems at home or at school. However, children and families
have not been asked if this help is working and making things better for them.
 Sometimes professionals could help children and young people who may be at
risk of child sexual exploitation earlier. When children, young people and their
families do get a service, it helps keep them safe from child sexual exploitation.
 When children go missing, new arrangements mean that an independent
professional will offer to visit them when they come home so that they can
support them and help keep them safe.
 Children who need help with their emotional health do not always get it, and this
can cause more problems for them and their family.
 Personal advisers keep in touch with almost all young people when they leave
care. However, in the last year, young people have not been given enough
money to help them set up their own home when they left care.
 When some r young people leaving care drop out of college or their first job, they
do not get the help they need quickly enough to make other arrangements.
 The adoption team works hard to find new families for children who cannot stay
at home. However, the adoption team are not told early enough by social workers
that this is what some children need.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area
 Approximately 94,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Cumbria. This is 19% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 15% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 12% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 9% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 2% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 2% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 2% (the national average is 14%).
 Cumbria is the second largest geographic county in England. Children live in
communities which range from isolated rural settlements and farms to market
towns and larger urban conurbations. Of the countys population, 51% live in
rural areas, compared with 19% of the population in England and Wales.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 January 2015, 3,374 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 January 2015, 348 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 595 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 January 2015, eight children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is the same as at 31 March 2014.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 January 2015, 664 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 70.6 per 10,000 children). This is a marginal increase from 663 (70.5 per


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


authority area
 five live in residential special schools4, of whom 100% live out of the
authority area
area
 there are no unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the 12 months to 31 January 2015:
 there have been 41 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. Three were judged to be good
or outstanding, two were judged to be adequate and none rated as inadequate in
their most recent Ofsted inspection.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post permanently since September
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since April 2014.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Progress has been made to tackle identified deficits in services for children who need
help and protection, but services are not yet good.
An extensive range of early help services supports children and families. An increase
in the number of early help assessments means that more children have their needs
identified earlier. However, the impact of early help assessments and intervention
has not been systematically measured and not all children who need an assessment
receive one. This means that the local authority and partners do not know whether
all children who need early help receive it, or how much difference it makes.
Partner agencies understanding of thresholds for childrens social care are
inconsistent, and there are too many inappropriate contacts to the safeguarding hub.
Information sharing in the safeguarding hub is timely. Children and young people at
risk of immediate harm are swiftly identified. Strategy meetings take place promptly
to make decisions about investigations and agree actions required to protect
children.
The re-referral rate remains high. Practice in judging which cases can be stepped
down to early help is inconsistent. For some children this results in their needs not
being met at the right time or level and result in re-referral to the local authority.
Most child protection and child in need plans are reviewed regularly. Most child
protection conferences and core groups are well attended by a range of agencies.
Children on child protection plans are mostly well supported. Plans are not always
robustly reviewed to ensure that progress is made in the childs timescale. In a small
number of cases this has resulted in drift. Recent action by managers has ensured
that children in these cases are safe and their needs met.
Investment in additional social work capacity has reduced social work caseloads,
affording some social workers more time to engage in direct work. This helps them
understand the needs of children and is leading to positive outcomes.
Where child sexual exploitation is identified, the response from agencies is
appropriate. However, social workers and managers have not had formal training in
recognising child sexual exploitation. This means that the local authority cannot be
assured there is a consistent response to it or that risks are always recognised early
enough.
Not all children who go missing receive a return interview. The local authority has
only recently introduced a system to track that return interviews are completed.


representatives from the police, childrens social care, health and early help
advisers. This new arrangement is leading to improved signposting of families
to early help and reducing the number of referrals to childrens social care.
There were 443 early help assessments (EHAs) in 201314 and 706 in the last
six months following investment by the local authority, which is a significant
improvement and demonstrates that many more children are receiving an early
help assessment when needs are first identified.
available to support children and young people, including the introduction of
the early help directory to promote them. Services commissioned by the local
authority, that are offered to families through childrens centres and the
voluntary sector were noted by inspectors to be making a positive difference to
families.
early help assessments and useful training for staff. Many partners involved in
Team Around the Family (TAF) meetings also provide effective oversight and
monitoring of children and young peoples progress. However, a small number
of schools report that they do not undertake early help assessments because
they do not have the capacity to manage the lead role. Children do not always
have the continuing help they need when their case is closed to childrens social
care.
measured. This, together with the inconsistent approach to early help, means
the local authority cannot be confident that all children who need early help are
receiving it, nor know how much difference early help is making to children.
The local authority acknowledges that there is more work to do to improve the
early help offer to children and families in Cumbria.
safeguarding hub; this helps to ensure that decisions about next steps are
appropriate. Referrals progress to the district social work teams within 24 hours
or less, and are promptly allocated. For cases referred to child protection social
work teams, information gathered by the MASH is detailed and well recorded.
This includes a range of background information from agency checks and good
consideration of historical information, to inform decisions about actions to
keep children safe.
social care remain inconsistent, so there continue to be a number of
inappropriate contacts to the hub. This results in additional work for
professionals in this service.


established, and are resulting in more children receiving early help. Domestic
abuse notifications are effectively screened by the police and childrens social
care in the safeguarding hub and passed to the appropriate team to ensure that
the right service is provided.
attended by a range of partner agencies. In cases seen, they were well
recorded and appropriately detailed. They evidence the sharing and analysis of
relevant information, which informs decision-making about actions required to
ensure children are safe and their needs met. Outcomes from strategy
meetings are recorded and were appropriate in all cases seen by inspectors.
However, responsibility for actions, timescales and consideration of whether a
joint or single investigation should take place are not always recorded.
social workers. Children are consistently seen and spoken to. A wide range of
agency checks are undertaken and these are considered and recorded, so that
decisions about the outcome of the enquiry are well informed and appropriate
action is taken to safeguard children.
further increased since 201314 from a rate of 28.6% to an average of 33% for
there is a range of causes including some double counting. However, a key
finding from this inspection is the inconsistent practice in the arrangements for
step-down to early help, which is not yet robust in all cases and which
contributes to the high re-referral rate.
help are resulting in a significant reduction in the volume of work coming
through from the safeguarding hub to the district social work teams. Referral
rates are now in line with statistical neighbours and the national average. This,
together with a reduction of the number of children subject to child protection
plans, means that caseloads have significantly reduced for social workers in
some teams and are now manageable. This enables them to spend more time
working with children, getting to know them well, building positive relationships
with them and understanding their family relationships.
workers and thus informing the work undertaken. For example, in the children
with disabilities team there is evidence of very effective direct work with
children. Social workers and child and family workers utilise a range of
communication techniques to ensure that they understand childrens needs,
wishes and feelings.


life. Chronologies prepared within court work are mostly of a good standard.
concerns, evidence of children being seen and of their views, wishes and
feelings being sought in many cases. Most assessments effectively analyse risk
and protective factors; some are too lengthy and require a sharper focus on key
areas of concern. Not all assessments routinely involve fathers and significant
males. The timeliness of assessments seen was appropriate in all cases. All
single assessments have a locally agreed timescale; they are reviewed by
managers and only extended through line management agreement and with a
review of the childs needs. No cases were identified where this resulted in risk
to children or delay in their needs being met. Health professionals make timely
referrals when pre-birth assessments are required.
Better plans clearly set out the needs of children and the actions needed to
ensure that outcomes improve and are in a format that is accessible to parents,
carers and children. However, very few plans have clear timescales and most
do not prioritise risks. Some plans are too long, making it difficult for parents
and children to understand key areas of risk and how these will be addressed.
by 83%, to 595 by 31 March 2014. A local authority audit in the summer of
protection. At subsequent reviews during 201415 a significant number of child
protection plans ceased. An independent audit of the 285 children who had
come off plans between May and November 2014 found that risk had been
appropriately assessed, with suitable arrangements for ongoing support in place
for those children who need it. In cases sampled by inspectors, where child
protection plans had ceased in the last three months this was the appropriate
decision. A small number met the threshold as children in need. Despite this,
these cases had been stepped down prematurely to early help and closed to
childrens social care.
cases seen. Therefore, when cases close to childrens social care the rationale
for this is not always recorded. In addition, the continuing arrangements to
support the family by other professionals are regularly absent from recording.
The local authority put in place a range of measures to address this following
the audit findings in November 2014, but the impact of this was not evident on
all cases sampled, some of which were very recent.


protection conferences. Most of these are well attended by a range of agencies
so that information is shared. Children on plans have access to a variety of
services that support their different needs and those of individual family
members. The quality of recording of child protection core groups and
conferences is too variable, ranging from good to inadequate, with a small
number that do not focus on key risks and concerns. Core groups do not
routinely evidence that the plan has been robustly reviewed. Agencies are
challenged when actions in plans have not been completed, with more recent
evidence seen of effective, authoritative action in many cases when change is
not secured and risks to children remain or intensify. In a small minority of
cases, plans have drifted and independent reviewing officers have not provided
challenge within the conference to address the lack of progress. The quality of
social work reports to conference remains variable and parents do not routinely
receive them prior to conference. This means that they are not as well prepared
for these meetings as they should be.
seen during this inspection, some of which was as a result of changes of social
worker. Where this has happened, it has only very recently been adequately
identified and challenged by team managers and independent reviewing
officers. Children had experienced delay in becoming looked after, with some
children having been left in situations of unacceptable risk. However, in all
cases, appropriate action has been taken in the last few months, with evidence
of tighter management grip and oversight.
and sensitively with parents who have previously been reluctant to engage. In
these cases this has resulted in positive outcomes for the children.
communication with the daytime service was effective. The service is not
always able to access foster care provision for children out of hours. The local
authority has recently undertaken a review of the out-of-hours service and
plans are in place to develop an assertive outreach team to support its work
with children and families.


child sexual exploitation. Cases sampled and tracked during this inspection
show that when child sexual exploitation is identified, the response from
agencies is appropriate. In most cases the child sexual exploitation risk
assessment tool is used well to identify the level of risk and to review and
monitor progress. Timely multi-agency meetings are convened, including child
protection conferences, when risks meet this threshold. Young people are
provided with suitable help from a commissioned service, or are supported by
social workers to help them keep themselves safe and understand the risks of
being exploited. Actions taken are proportionate to risk and escalated where
risks increase. In all cases seen, supervision was effectively used to monitor
young people and remain alert to indicators of child sexual exploitation.
been identified at an early enough stage. Childrens services staff have not had
formal training on the recognition of child sexual exploitation, although briefings
have been provided. This means that the local authority cannot be assured that
there is a consistent response to child sexual exploitation, or that risk of child
sexual exploitation is always recognised at an early enough stage.
missing from home and care and known to the local authority are offered
return interviews by an independent provider, though this arrangement has
only been in place since January 2015. The return interview is not routinely
recorded on the childs file and the local authority has only recently introduced
a system to track that return interviews are completed. Currently, the local
authority reports that 85% of return interviews are completed, but only 25% of
these are completed within 72 hours.
starting to identify hot spots and inform disruption activity in relation to child
sexual exploitation. In cases sampled where children have been missing from
home and care, risks are identified and in most cases adequately addressed
through appropriate multi-agency plans. In a small number, these plans are
failing to reduce the number of missing episodes.
(CME), including those whose parents choose to educate them at home. At the
time of the inspection there were 126 children missing education and 280 being
educated at home. CME officers ensure that there is routine oversight of CME
and maintain regular contact with children. Information is exchanged well
between the CME officers, general advisers, inclusion officers, social care and
other authorities to ascertain the whereabouts of all children. CME officers have
good knowledge of the whereabouts of children without a school place and
their status.


officers are involved in the small number of cases where this is not the case
and the reasons for this are known. Good links between the CME officers and
the equality learning officer for Gypsy, Roma and Traveller children ensure that
children from these communities are well supported through regular drop-in
sessions at their site and their whereabouts are known.
home. Where it is judged that children are not receiving a suitable education,
they are appropriately returned to school.
missing education were mostly good. The intervention of staff successfully
improved outcomes for children in all but two cases seen, and children were
returned to school in a timely fashion. In two more complex cases, where
young people had a long history of non-attendance and non-engagement,
interventions were not effective in returning them to school or engaging them
in any alternative education.
voluntary agencies are available to children and adult victims of domestic
abuse. Childrens centres deliver 12-week programmes for survivors of domestic
abuse. These services are making a difference for children and their parents,
with some good examples of direct work available for children provided by local
authority child and family workers. There are no perpetrator programmes other
than through probation following conviction, with long waiting lists in some
parts of the authority. This results in some children and parents waiting too
long for help, including those subject to child in need and child protection
plans.
and this is a concern given the high volume of notifications and referrals. The
Multi Agency Risk Assessment Conference (MARAC) is established in each of the
three districts across the county, is well attended by a range of agencies and
results in appropriate sharing of information, assessment of risk and provision
of services.


need plans where domestic abuse, drug or alcohol use or mental health is a
feature.5 This information is not routinely used to inform service provision.
Evidence of effective work from domestic abuse and substance misuse services,
in many cases, shows that it is making a positive difference for children. In
contrast, there is very little evidence of multi-agency work between childrens
and adult services when parents are experiencing mental health difficulties.
This means that in these cases a holistic view of risk to children was not always
well informed by the concerns about adult mental health.
records show appropriate and timely responses to concerns, with appropriate
oversight by relevant agencies. In addition to investigative work, the LADOs are
also involved in offering advice and training to agencies through the LSCB.
Since the appointment of a new manager in September 2014, the role of the
LADO has become more high profile, resulting in better and more accurate
recording of referrals, information and the management of LADO.
legislation, but this is not yet rolled out across all areas of the county, so not all
young people receive a consistent service. In cases seen, assessments result in
support being provided, but do not always evidence consideration of the
benefits for young people of becoming looked after, nor do they always result
in robust children in need plans.
notifications remains low. Children are visited and assessments completed
within the timescales required under private fostering arrangements. Plans are
in place to ensure that childrens safety and needs are addressed. The views of
parents are not always clearly recorded and queries about financial
arrangements for carers have not always been dealt with in a timely manner in
all cases.


At 31 January 2015, 146 child protection plans and a further 340 child in need plans identify
domestic abuse as a feature; 69 child protection plans and 181 child in need plans identify parental
drug misuse; 67 child protection plans and 44 child in need plans identify parental alcohol misuse and


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Inadequate

Summary
The looked after children service has suffered because of ineffective practice by
some staff and managers. Too many looked after children experience drift and delay
in their care plans. This is exacerbated by too many changes in social worker and
insufficient management oversight and supervision of staff.
Too many looked after children continue to experience a disjointed and ineffective
service. Seven out of the 14 cases tracked by inspectors were inadequate.
Decisions for too many children are unclear. For some children, deficits in care
planning lead to delays in them being considered for adoption. When there are plans
for adoption, they are not progressed swiftly enough.
The IRO service has been insufficiently robust in championing childrens plans and
tackling poor practice. Reviews are not timely and poor performance has been longstanding.
The lack of up-to-date chronologies, care plans, and other recording on childrens
case files means that workers who take over responsibility for a looked after child
cannot be clear about what actions are required to support the child and drive
forward their plans.
Not all decisions are based on up-to-date risk assessments, nor are effective plans
always in place to progress permanency swiftly for children.
Currently, only 52% of looked after children have a health assessment within 28
days of becoming looked after. There are insufficient emotional and mental health
services for looked after children, with no fast track arrangements for children
whose behaviour or emotional well-being indicates that a prompt service would be
beneficial.
There are insufficient foster carers to meet demand and this means that too many
young people are placed outside the local authority area. Almost all looked after
children living outside of Cumbria are placed in good or better placements.
Very few children know about the local authoritys pledge for looked after children.
The attainment gap between looked after children and their peers is not consistently
reducing. It has widened for those in the Early Years Foundation Stage and at Key
Stage 4.
Care leavers wait too long to access suitable housing options and not enough is done
to prevent tenancy disruptions. They do not yet receive the recommended 2,000
setting up home grant.


Fourteen looked after children and young peoples cases were tracked for this
inspection (12 of which were audited by the local authority); of these, seven
are judged to be inadequate. This is an unacceptably high proportion of young
people who are not receiving a good enough service from their corporate
parent.
drift and delay in progressing plans for children; outstanding actions identified
from previous audits not being completed; poor case recording, with recent
significant and past events not being on the childs file; absent or poor
chronologies; absent or out-of-date risk assessments that do not consider new
information; and children and young peoples history not being taken into
account sufficiently well in planning for their futures. For some looked after
children and young people, a lack of proactive and sensitive planning has led to
a continuous cycle of instability which is not being sufficiently well addressed. A
lack of emphasis on permanency planning means that some children and young
people continue to experience unacceptable drift and delay.
led to the commissioning of a full audit of all looked after childrens cases. At
the present time, 30% of the 409 cases audited so far are judged to be
inadequate. Although this means that 70% are judged to be better, it remains
the case that the service received by 124 children has not met their needs or
promoted their welfare. Findings also confirm the marked differences between
teams across the local authority, ranging from 4% to 54% of cases judged as
inadequate. The poorest performing teams have the most looked after children.
in adoptive placements, there was drift and delay previously and adoption
should have been progressed sooner. The pattern of drift, delay, legal advice
and subsequent actions not being followed robustly, and reviews that do not
challenge sufficiently is seen in too many cases and has had a lasting negative
impact on permanency planning for some children.
lack accurate or up-to-date chronologies. Without a clear record of the childs
life, it is difficult for new social workers to understand the childs history and
take this into account in meeting their current and future needs. This
exacerbates the issues of drift and delay.
a social worker routinely and within timescales. This enables social workers to
help children to understand their circumstances.


the children, shortfalls remain due to a lack of resources such as CAMHS,
permanent long-term foster carers and insufficient resources to enable young
people to remain with independent foster carers.
to exist in the services for looked after children as early as December 2013. In
addition, the annual report of the IRO service in May 2014 noted that the
number of statutory looked after children reviews held in timescales had
reduced from 62% in 201213 to 59% in 201314. Performance for the
timeliness of reviews for looked after children is still only 60% as recently as 19
March 2015 and well below the local authority target of 85%. The management
action to respond to these shortfalls was not sufficiently timely or robust and
therefore has contributed to drift and delay for some children.
good enough service for looked after children. Their caseloads were too high,
often double the good practice guidance of 50 to 70 recommended in the IRO
handbook. This prevented them from building quality relationships with too
many looked after children. The local authority has recently responded by
increasing the number of IROs, which has reduced caseloads. At the time of the
inspection, the Principal Social Worker was managing the service in the absence
of a team manager, however a team manager appointment was made during
the inspection period.
childrens reviews. Delay between the review being held and the minutes being
uploaded to the childs record and distributed to all parties negatively impacts
on the quality of planning and review. IROs make some use of the dispute
resolution process (DRP), but they agree that there is too much variability in its
use by them and more consistency is needed if children are to benefit from this
process.
children and young people at their looked after reviews. At the end of quarter
three, this was 80% against a target of 85%.The figures for 20132014 show
reduced attendance by children and young people from 58% to 46% and
participation declining from 90% to 79% from 2012-2013.
their reviews, though inspectors did see that children and young peoples views
are routinely considered and they are supported to attend where appropriate.


well with looked after young people and has good support from participation
and engagement staff. The groups have relatively small numbers attending
regularly and the reach to all looked after children is under-developed. The
CICC has developed some good materials to encourage children to express
their views at reviews, but these are yet to be launched. Young people do not
know about the local authoritys Pledge (The Promise); staff agreed that this
was little known and needs to be refreshed and re-launched.
some it provides excellent opportunities for personal and social development,
while others felt that it is too focused on a younger age range. The recently
developed care leavers forum has the potential to better meet the needs of
older young people, but it is too early to see the impact of this as it has only
recently been set up. Young people spoken to were able to articulate well the
support they have with their education.
children, as there is a higher rate in Cumbria than in comparable authorities.
Inspectors did not see any children taken into care who did not meet the
threshold for becoming looked after and a number of children should have
become looked after earlier. Therefore, it is not clear how the ambitions of this
strategy will be realised.
from their home, with 19% living outside Cumbria which is much higher than
comparable authorities (26%). This is, in part, a reflection of the sparsely
populated nature of the area. However, almost all of these children are placed
in good or better placements. Often communication between these children and
their social workers is less frequent and social workers do not attend the range
of meetings they attend when children live closer to home. In addition, some
young people report they are not engaged with the work of the CICC. Many of
these children and young people placed outside Cumbria experience poorer
service than those placed in county.
placements. Within the fostering service, 25 households providing up to 36
placements have been approved in the first nine months of 201415. This is an
improvement from 12 approvals in the same period in 201314 and reflects the
recent success of the refreshed recruitment campaign and improved initial
screening of enquiries. There has been some improvement in retention of
carers, with fewer resignations and no terminations of approval. There has
been a positive reduction in the use of exemptions to place too many children
with the same foster carer from eight in 201314 to one in 201415.


after children remains positive at 7% and below comparable authorities (10%)
and the national average (11%) during 2013-14. This has continued unchanged
in 2014-15. At the time of the inspection, 27 children and young people
required a long-term placement and this had not yet been identified. As a
result, some children are waiting too long for permanent arrangements to be
secured. This causes increased pressure on short-term carers who continue to
care for children whose future is uncertain.
quality of practice. This is supported by regular meetings with service managers
and a suitably skilled and experienced panel chair.
aspects of regulations. Regular monthly supervision visits are well recorded
overall. Unannounced visits take place and more frequent visits are carried out
where there are concerns or additional support is required. All had annual
reviews on file which are well recorded and detailed, and provide evidence of
training attended.
from their Fostering Support Workers (FSWs), frequency of visits, access to
training, local support groups and annual reviews. Foster carers described high
variability in the quality of social workers assigned to the children they look
after. The greatest concern expressed was about too many changes of social
worker for children, which impacts negatively on the ability of the child to
benefit from a trusting relationship and slows down the progress of plans. High
numbers of approved foster carers, including family and friends carers, meet
the nationally set Training, Support and Development Standards
not sufficiently robust. The local authority acknowledges inconsistent practice in
the quality of viability assessments across the county. There have been delays
in the completion of Regulation 24 assessments, resulting in too many requests
for extensions, which leads to extended court timescales and delayed care
planning.
foster carers say they are reluctant to apply for SGOs for children they are
caring for because of the lack of clarity about future support, including financial
arrangements. National regulations determine the arrangements for financial
support, and the he local authority is currently exploring options to provide
clearer arrangements for their future support needs.


days and this is poor. There has been an improvement in the proportion of
looked after children with up-to-date review health assessments, which now
stands at 87% compared with 78% in March 2014. During 201314, 79% of
looked after children visited a dentist, which is below the national average of
immunisations, although this was achieved for 86% of those that required it.
have seen cases where children require rapid assessment and support from
CAMHS but have not received it. Overall there is a significant shortfall in
services at Tiers 2 and 3 that can respond sufficiently quickly to the emotional
and mental health needs of looked after children.
arrangements to support the Public Law Outline (PLO) process once it identified
that too much variance was leading to inconsistent decision-making. Legal
actions are agreed at the Legal and Gateway panel. However, some decisions
made at these meetings are not always followed and, in a small number of
cases, decisions were reversed without the panels knowledge. This contributed
to avoidable drift and delay. In addition, some children had been left in
neglectful situations too long before decisive action was taken.
quality of social workers reports to the court, although practice is not yet
consistent. Cafcass also reported improved relationships with the local
authority. However, concerns remain about some children not being brought
before the court at an early enough stage, with children who are now in care
having been left in neglectful situations for too long, although the picture is
slowly improving. Proceedings have taken too long to be finalised and the local
authoritys legal services acknowledge that they have contributed to this at
least in part, with insufficient administrative resources and poor locum
solicitors. The local authority has invested in the child care legal team, with the
recruitment of additional child care solicitors, legal assistants and bundling
clerks, and the creation of in-house advocate posts. An improvement plan has
also been implemented. In quarter four of 201213 the average length of care
proceedings was 46 weeks, with too many adjournments attributable to the
local authority. Timeliness is improving, although it remains outside the national
standard of 26 weeks. Performance at the end of quarter three 201415 is
reported as an average length of 30 weeks.


supported during their education by the virtual school team, designated
teachers and their schools. Children aged two and three are well supported to
take up their entitlement to free nursery provision and a good number do so.
Despite an increasing proportion of children under five years old achieving a
good level of development, not enough do so. The low starting points of many
children when they start school are reflected in the low proportion who achieve
well at Key Stage 1.
mathematics and grammar, punctuation and spelling has improved well over
the last two years. They achieve particularly well in mathematics where 82%
achieved level 4 in 2013/14. They make good progress from their low starting
points.
previous year to below the England average for all looked after children. This
decline is attributed to just a few young people missing a good grade in their
English and mathematics exams. Between the ages of 11 and 16 too few young
people make the expected level of progress in English and mathematics. Close
tracking and good support by the virtual school, leaving care team and partners
in year 11 ensure that nearly all looked after children make a successful
transition to year 12.
consistently reducing. At Key Stage 2, from 2012-2013 to 2013-14 the gap
narrowed to 9%. However, in the same period, the gap widened for those in
the Early Years Foundation Stage from 38% to 42.6%. Similarly at Key stage 4,
the gap between looked after children and their peers widened from 40% to
effective action is taken by schools and the virtual school team should
attendance fall. The virtual school is routinely informed of children at risk of
exclusion and of those where there are attendance concerns. Action plans are
put in place that help the vast majority of looked after children to attend school
regularly. In the last academic year the attendance of looked after children and
the proportion receiving a fixed term exclusion was better than their peers in
the county. No looked after child has been permanently excluded from school
since 2008.


more education and the majority attend well. The virtual school has excellent
knowledge of the whereabouts and progress of looked after children and is fully
involved in progressing plans for the two young people not currently accessing
educational provision. Those without a school place are supported to access
education quickly.
education plan (PEP). PEPs for young children are of particularly good quality.
Their views are well represented and the use of photographs and drawings by
them personalises their plans to good effect and ensures that their views are
recorded.
children in their academic studies and personal and social development. It is
closely monitored so that the virtual school is well placed to be able to judge its
impact over the academic year.
likelihood and need for young people to become looked after. The evaluation in
March 2014 showed its positive impact on young peoples outcomes and the
local authority has taken the decision to invest in edge of care and expand the
service. The progress of individual young people during their involvement with
the service is carefully measured and regularly reviewed. Risk assessments,
including assessments of young people at risk of child sexual exploitation, are
good and kept up to date. The cornerstone to the edge of care service success
is the support provided to families by a local authority childrens home which
has been rated as outstanding by Ofsted in its last inspection. Some examples
have been seen where young people have gone home with thoughtful
preparation including risk assessments, and this has enabled their return home
to succeed.
strategies are deployed to locate young people and return them to their
placements. Independent return interviews are conducted by the recently
commissioned provider, though not all staff are fully aware of these
arrangements, which contributes to delays in the young people being offered a
return interview. Missing episodes are considered by managers in the majority
of cases, although this does not always result in effective action to reduce their
incidence.


with looked after children and young people. For example, in cases featuring
child sexual exploitation inspectors found that all young peoples needs were
risk-assessed and regularly reviewed to monitor progress on a multi-agency
basis. Direct interventions were put in place to help young people understand
the risks and ways that they could be exploited. Case supervision on these
cases is good. Some examples have also been seen of good direct work with
children and young people to explore their feelings about key issues such as
traumatic events in their past, feelings about their families and preparation for
the future. Life story work is good, although some young people who should
have this do not. Good account is taken of childrens diverse needs in the
majority of cases seen.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
an early stage, in cases where children are unlikely to safely return to the care
of their parents or extended family, are inconsistent across the county and
result in delays for some children. This variability in practice means that the
local authority cannot be certain that adoption is always considered for all
children when it may be appropriate.
sufficiently compelling evidence about why adoption is the right plan. This adds
to drift and delay for some children, as care proceedings can then be extended
unnecessarily. The local authority has begun to use the learning from cases
where this has happened, but this is not yet fully embedded in practice.
the children waiting for adoption when this is identified as a potential plan.
Effective monthly monitoring of plans means that there is a comprehensive
picture of the progress to achieving permanence for children. For some children
plans are not progressed sufficiently swiftly and robust action has not been
taken to challenge this delay. The adoption service recognises the need to
escalate cases to managers more robustly when timescales are not met.
experiences, such as attachment difficulties and behavioural issues, is not
always available as looked after children are not prioritised by CAMHS. For
some children, this has delayed plans for them to be placed with adopters.


adopt placements. This is discussed with all applicants in order to extend this
option for children. Thirteen such placements have been approved so far in
become looked after and means that they do not experience a move when legal
orders are granted. To date, 11 children have benefited from such placements.
placed with adopters. These include a number of brothers and sisters (33)
where the plan is for them to be placed together, as well as older children and
children with complex needs.
children. It automatically includes consideration of adopters approved in-house,
voluntary agency contract arrangements, and through established links with
regional local authorities. The use of adoption activity days and exchange days
is particularly successful for sibling groups and older children. As a result, 46
children were adopted last year; this is nearly double the performance in 2013
placed with adopters, including six sibling groups. At the time of this inspection,
sisters together, with 18 matches likely to proceed to panel.
shows a downward trajectory. Children in Cumbria wait on average 525 days
between becoming looked after and being placed with their adoptive family,
which is inside the DfE target of 547 days. This is better than comparable
authorities and national averages. However, analysis of the data year-on-year
shows that it is taking longer each year to place children and this is not helpful
to children who are waiting to be adopted. The local authoritys own data for
average 164 days between placement order and matching which is outside the
DfE target of 152 days. This is better than comparable authorities and national
averages of 217 days.


articulate confidently the reasons for it. It has maintained a strong commitment
and persistence in achieving adoption for children despite the negative impact
that it knows some cases will have on the scorecard. It is able to evidence the
reasons why some children, in particular siblings and children with complex
health and other particular needs, took much longer to place; the authority is
successful in achieving adoption for these children. Social workers are reluctant
to give up on the search, but managers are clear about the importance of their
oversight and monitoring of progress of family finding. Realistic timescales are
set, regularly monitored and reviewed and appropriate decisions have been
taken to change the plan away from adoption for 15 children. In all of these
cases there was a contingency plan for them to have permanency with their
current foster carers.
including sibling groups, older children and children with complex needs and
backgrounds, effectively informs the local authoritys recruitment activity.
Additional contracting arrangements are in place with other providers. The local
authority has approved 22 adoptive households so far in 201415, which is
lower than the previous full year, when 41 adoptive households were approved.
Approvals reflect the priority given to finding adopters for sibling groups.
effectively forward planned and shared with a voluntary adoption agency.
Prospective adopters are able to attend preparation groups promptly. The
quality of assessments seen is satisfactory, with some being good. Although
there is some overall variability in the quality of assessments, effective
processes are in place to support development and improve practice through
the panel adviser.
recommended timescales. Since the appointment of a permanent team
manager in September 2014, more robust tracking of applications and
identification of barriers has been developed. This is beginning to have an
impact as delays are identified and minimised.
approval as adopters. Scrutiny by the adoption panel of matching proposals and
plans is effective and makes a positive contribution to minimising the likelihood
of disruption. A new matching process is beginning to improve quality and
consistency of work and ensures that all necessary work is complete prior to
panel. When matches do not proceed or placements disrupt, the authority is
quick to arrange disruption meetings in order to extract the learning to benefit
other children. Two adoption placements have disrupted during 201415.


agency decision maker (ADM). The ADM ensures that her consideration of the
panels recommendation is thorough and prompt so that there are no delays.
The quarterly meetings between the panel chair, the ADM and adoption and
fostering managers are effective in dealing with issues.
adopters following their approval, as support continues up to the adoption
order and post-adoption support. Adoption support plans are detailed and
individually tailored to the childs and adopters specific needs. The therapeutic
social worker attached to the adoption support team provides advice and direct
input to adopters pre- and post-placement. The local authority is aware that it
does not always respond promptly to the need for therapeutic support and has
made a bid for Adoption Reform Grant money to address this gap.
and intermediary work and there has been a significant reduction in the number
of people waiting for this. The affected by adoption service is working with 13
birth parents. The letterbox service facilitates indirect contact in approximately

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
ranging from good to unreliable. Most young people, from the age of 15 years,
receive long-term support into adulthood from a consistent worker who knows
them very well. The local authority is in contact with 228 of 232 care leavers.
For the remaining four young people, the service has an understanding of their
circumstances and the reasons why the young people refuse contact. Advisers
are creative in their attempts to continually monitor their well-being.
these are assessed and used to inform young peoples plans. Where
circumstances change, advisers routinely re-assess young peoples needs in
consultation with them and other agencies to update plans. Where risks
escalate, multi-agency meetings are convened to target support more
effectively.


the last three months, in response to concerns raised from the local authoritys
own auditing activity. Improvements are still required to ensure they are
consistently thorough and actions set are meaningful and measurable for care
leavers. Not all plans identify the progress young people are making towards
independence. In a few plans, young peoples educational needs were not
explicit.
between 13 and 14 years old depending on the young persons needs. Joint
working and communication is effective to support long-term planning towards
leaving care for these young people. For young people with complex needs,
and approaching 18 years old, timely referrals to adult services are considered
as part of forward planning.
suitably knowledgeable about their health histories. This does not prepare them
to understand and meet their own health needs independently. Care leavers
have access to a range of universal services to promote their health, and
advisers actively support them to arrange and attend appointments where this
is needed. Care leavers health needs are reflected in plans. Of the plans
sampled, all health needs were suitably identified and met. In the majority of
cases, care leavers are accessing health services independently. For older care
leavers in need of specific and targeted health interventions, adult services
were leading on these, with close liaison with the leaving care team to promote
care leavers wider needs.
support increasing independence, such as individual work with advisers and
youth workers, preparation in semi-independent lodgings and structured
programmes through housing providers. Young people receive training on how
to manage a tenancy agreement. To date, a 201215 lottery-funded initiative
has helped 200 care leavers to gain skills for their future adulthood.
through the family nurse partnership to enable them to care for their baby.
However, this is a limited resource and not available for all those who may
need it.
care leavers to the 2,000 expected within national guidance. The current offer
of 1,450 has resulted in those who left care after October 2014, when
guidance was issued, losing 550. There is no plan to address the inequity of
this. From April 2015 all new care leavers will receive the full 2,000. The
current leaving care guide does not inform care leavers about the setting up
home grant, making it very difficult for them to know what to expect or to
challenge what they receive.


disengage from education, training and employment (EET). Participation in
education is high for those aged 16, with 96% attending in year 12. However,
the proportion of young people who are in EET decreases for 16 to 18-year-olds
to 78%. Just 39% of 19 to 21-year-olds participated in EET during 2013/14
which is lower than comparable authorities (48%) and national averages
(45%).
those who drop-out of education, employment and training are not well
developed and action is not urgent or effective enough to successfully reengage them. Too few creative opportunities are provided for young people
who have exhausted existing pathways and who have not been able to sustain
a college or training place.
including six childrens rights apprenticeship places. There have been 30 care
leavers in local authority apprenticeships over the last three years and 10 new
apprenticeships this year. Types of apprenticeship include teaching assistants,
youth work, catering, childrens rights and business administration. A voluntary
sector partner, commissioned by the local authority, that supports care leavers
has provided an increasing number of young people with work experience
opportunities and some excellent opportunities to develop their career
aspirations and build their self-esteem and confidence. However, these
initiatives have been insufficient in helping enough care leavers move into
sustainable further education, training or employment opportunities.
financial support packages in place. Over the last three years, 21 care leavers
have attended university, studying a wide range of degree courses such as
economics, geographical oceanography, social work and midwifery. In contrast,
the financial incentives and entitlements for those wishing to undertake
vocational training are not sufficiently well developed.
This includes a range of accommodation types, for example supported
accommodation, specialist residential accommodation and university student
accommodation. The arrangements for these young people are carefully
monitored, risk assessed and are meeting their current needs. The use of bed
and breakfast (B&B) accommodation still occurs in emergencies but is not
common. There were no care leavers in B&B at the time of this inspection.


think carefully about their needs and what they are ready for. This is, however,
complex and time consuming, and the criteria young people need to meet do
not always sit realistically with the challenges that care leavers may experience
in the transition to adulthood. The local authority has recognised this, alongside
the need for more accommodation options, which are reflected in their action
plan for care leavers.
number of different providers. Almost all care leavers are reported as living in
suitable accommodation, which is checked individually by advisers or as part of
contractual arrangements. A very small number of young people are currently
detained in Youth Offending Institutions. The majority of care leavers live in
supported lodgings or in accommodation through packages with housing
providers. Care leavers spoken with said they felt safe where they are living.
particularly those with high levels of needs. The local authority is not tracking
the number of young people waiting, or the timescales they wait.
changes and disrupted tenancy agreements. This is reported as 11 young
people in 20132014. Too often responses to breakdowns are reactive and not
enough preventative strategies are used to avoid disruptions. For some young
people, it can take too long to be re-considered as a suitable tenant by
providers. The local authority is not proactive enough in these circumstances to
ensure a second chance is promptly provided to young people. The availability
of supported lodgings, from the Homestay scheme, has increased from seven
places to 23. Homestay providers support young people living in their own
accommodation or provide university holiday accommodation. Further increases
are identified in the local authoritys action plan for the care leaver service.
previous foster carers or family carers. This is a low number and is not
increasing year-on-year. An insufficient number of young people, including
those placed with foster carers in independent fostering agencies, are able to
access this as an option into adulthood.
Achievements for some care leavers are recognised through an annual event for
looked after children focusing on those who achieve academically. , The local
authority acknowledge that not enough focus is given to recognising the personal
and social achievements for the wider group of care leavers and is taking action to
tackle this.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Leaders have introduced a series of service developments that have led to
improvements in the experience of some children and young people in Cumbria.
However, the work undertaken to improve safeguarding has led management
attention to be insufficiently focused on services for looked after children, which are
judged to be inadequate. Looked after children experience too many delays and the
quality of support in a high number of cases is poor.
Services to help and protect children have improved from a low base, but inspectors
still saw some cases of poor practice and ineffective management oversight.
Leadership has not been effective in addressing the inconsistencies of practice across
Cumbria. The local authority has been slow to respond to findings from the looked
after children inspection in April 2012 and the poor management oversight currently
affecting looked after children. The self-assessment fails to give sufficient
consideration to the actual experience of looked after children.
The local authoritys political leadership has prioritised and invested in childrens
services at a time of financial austerity. The Lead Member for children has not been
strong enough in her scrutiny of services for looked after children.
There have been improvements in establishing much needed structures and
processes since the appointments of the new Chief Executive, the Corporate
Director, and Independent Chair of the LSCB. The new leadership has been effective
in developing a more transparent and open culture within the organisation and with
partners. Most recently there has been focused, multi-agency partnership work to
develop the safeguarding hub and early help services. The quality of practice is not
yet consistent. Leaders cannot be confident that all children in Cumbria are achieving
good outcomes.
The Safeguarding Improvement Board has not given sufficient focus to the poor
practice and management oversight of looked after childrens services.
The improvements undertaken in relation to workforce development, including the
authority-wide strengthening practice and leadership training, and the programme of
audits and performance management, have enabled the local authority to improve
help and protection services from a low baseline. Some good impact was seen, in
particular in the quality of direct work with children and their families. Senior leaders
have appropriately challenged poor performance in relation to safeguarding. The
appointment of a Principal Social Worker is having an impact on raising social work
standards.


need help and protection require improvement.
LSCB were both appointed in 2014. Since their appointments, there is evidence
of increased pace in tackling known service deficits. They have worked hard to
engage partners and there is now evidence of a change in culture within the
wider childrens services partnerships. They have welcomed external scrutiny
and this has included inviting peer reviews by the Local Government
Association. They have used the feedback from this scrutiny well to develop
further the improvement plans. The Safeguarding Improvement Board reports
that these key individuals have made a significant difference in a relatively
short period of time, albeit with more to be done to improve consistency of
practice.
services at a time of financial austerity. This has resulted in the creation of
additional social worker posts, the early help team, the extension of the
successful Edge of Care service model and the social work academy. Political
leaders have also ensured that performance in relation to childrens services is
reviewed by the local authority Cabinet and scrutinised through member
scrutiny arrangements.
insufficient and these were judged to be inadequate during this inspection.
Focused work by leaders in the local authority and partner organisations has
improved safeguarding arrangements, including early help services, in Cumbria.
The wider strategic partnerships including the Childrens Trust, LSCB and the
Safeguarding Improvement Board have been effective in driving forward these
improvements but have failed to tackle the lack of progress for looked after
children.
making improvements for looked after children. Performance information
known to the leadership in December 2013 identified serious issues with the
services for looked after children. However, it was not until November 2014,
almost a year later, that the local authority commissioned an audit of looked
after childrens cases. While it is to the authoritys credit that it did this, it had
known about the significant issues for some time. The audit identified that
there are some serious weaknesses in these services and that too many
children continue to receive an inadequate service. Too many looked after
children cases examined by inspectors were judged to be inadequate. The
findings of the commissioned audit have been mirrored by the findings of this
inspection.


self-assessment. This judged their looked after services to require
improvement. While recognising the structural and strategic improvements
made, this assessment failed to give sufficient weight to the actual experience
of looked after children in Cumbria. Too much weight was given to reported
improvements in the IRO service, which inspectors found continues to have
serious weaknesses. While the service does not have a team manager, an
appointment was made during the inspection period. The quality of its work has
been inconsistent and in many cases poor. The very recent appointment of the
Principal Social Worker has brought focus to the improvements required in this
service. In addition, the appointment of seven agency workers to provide some
additional capacity to the service and cover for sickness and absence within the
team is positive progress. However, it is too early to demonstrate the impact of
these changes for children.
across Cumbria. Inspectors findings and local authority performance
information evidence that the quality of services for looked after children in
some parts of the county is considerably weaker than in others. Several
employees told inspectors of instability in the looked after childrens service in
one area due to lack of management oversight, sickness rates and high
turnover of staff, including agency staff. The Local Authority recently increased
management capacity to improve looked after children services. It is too early
to see the impact of this.
performance, although this is not a consistent picture, with some teams doing
better than others across Cumbria. In particular at January 2015, recording in
case records of basic details has risen to 98% and the voice of the child is
evident in 78.4% of cases, an improvement from 68.2% from 2013-14. In the
same period, the timely allocation of cases has improved from 77.7% to 83.6%
but is not yet meeting the local authoritys own target of 93%.


deteriorated. For example, at January 2015, only 57.6% of plans meet the local
authoritys required standards, which is deterioration from 62.7% for 201314.
According to the local authoritys own figures the percentages of cases meeting
its own performance standards for case management and management
oversight have improved slightly from 2013-14 until January 2015 from 52.8%
to 57.6% and 61% to 69.3% respectively. However, considerable further
improvement is needed. In the same period, copies of social work reports for
initial child protection conferences are shared with parents two days in advance
in 64.9% of cases, which is a significant increase from 31.5% and exceeds the
milestone target set by the local authority of 55%. The local authority judges
this as good performance from a low base, though the target remains
unambitious overall. In reality, 35% of parents are still not sufficiently well
prepared and this requires improvement. Performance data do not provide
sufficient focus on the experiences of looked after children and the quality of
work done with them. For example, the quality of reports and updated
assessments prepared by social workers for looked after childrens reviews are
absent.
social work teams are re-referred within a year, which is significantly higher
than the national average. Inspectors found, and the local authoritys own
audits confirm, that some cases are closed prematurely, without packages of
support put in place to meet identified needs. The actions of senior leaders
have been insufficient to ensure that robust plans are in place to tackle this
known weakness in relation to early help and protection.
from inadequate to good. There is insufficient evidence of case direction or
reflective supervision. Senior managers have not checked the quality of staff
supervision, which is particularly concerning given a shortfall in management
capacity recently. In the poorest performing team, workers have not had
frequent enough supervision, though the quality and frequency of supervision
in other teams is better.
positively about working for Cumbria. They reported that supervision supports
them and they feel challenged by their managers. This was not always reflected
in their supervision folders or on childrens files.


Cumbria and has provided political leadership in the development of partnership
arrangements, and in service improvements such as Edge of Care and the
safeguarding hub. However, corporate parenting by elected members is underdeveloped. Elected members, including the Lead Member for children, are
committed and enthusiastic about promoting best outcomes for looked after
children and care leavers. However, their influence in terms of improving the
service for looked after children has been limited, despite providing scrutiny of
the performance of officers.
services for looked after children. While a number of plans are in place, an
overarching strategic plan for looked after children, which should exist to drive
improvements, monitor performance and the impact for children, is absent. This
means that there is poor coordination and analysis of services for looked after
children. This was identified as an area for improvement in the looked after
children inspection in April 2012.
relation to giving care leavers the full amount of the leaving care grant
indicated in statutory guidance. Arrangements are in place for this to be paid
from April 2015. The Corporate Director of Childrens Services is not meeting
his statutory obligation to authorise the placement of children out of the
county. Inspectors were assured that this would be immediately addressed by
the local authority.
is in the early stages of development and behind that of many other authorities.
The local authority contribution to driving forward the multi-agency action plan,
at pace, has been weak. The local authority, with its partners, is not yet
sufficiently focused on disruption activity and ensuring that all children
vulnerable to child sexual exploitation are identified early. When identified,
plans to reduce risk from sexual exploitation are in place and are having impact
for most young people.
priority for the local authority. This is a concern given the high number of
incidents of domestic abuse affecting children in the county.


Commissioning Strategy 20142018 makes good links to the local authority
priorities and service plans. A mixed economy of in-house provision and
commissioning takes into account the demographics of the area. Good support
is available to enable smaller providers to build up third sector infrastructure.
For example, a thorough consultation exercise over the last two years on
targeted early help led to the construction of an outcomes focused model. This
measures the success of commissioned services in meeting set objectives for
those most in need.
and does not yet provide collated and analysed information on the current
needs of children in the county.
complaints and compliments about Childrens Services in 201314. A log of
learning arising from complaints is routinely shared with senior managers.
Actions are tracked to their conclusion and inform wider service development.
There continue to be significant issues in responding to complaints within
national timescales. When complaints are made, young people are routinely
offered support from a commissioned advocacy service, with evidence of high
take-up. Clear decisions about whether or not the complaint is upheld are
recorded, along with any actions taken as a result.
its child protection and child in need services, through an established
programme of audits. As a result of these audits, work has been identified to
improve practice and this includes further training, coaching, one-to-one
sessions, workshops, promotion of research, the use of new templates and
enhancing supervision for individuals. The performance information used by
Childrens Services is accurate and the analysis of it detailed, although more
work should be undertaken to use the feedback from service users to improve
the quality of practice and to ensure greater focus on the outcomes for children
and young people. The same scrutiny for looked after childrens services has
been absent until November 2014. Performance information is not sufficiently
wide-ranging to have enabled the deterioration in services for looked after
children and care leavers to be identified at an early stage.


programme. Managers have also been supported and challenged through a
parallel Strengthening Leadership programme. Despite this investment, action is
not yet resulting in sufficient consistency on many aspects of practice or in
improved management oversight. Following decisive action to remove some
staff, not all incoming agency staff and newly appointed workers have received
this training, which is contributing to inconsistency of practice. Further
programmes are in place for 20152016. Social workers speak highly of this
programme and inspectors noted that it has had considerable impact on the
quality of direct work with children by social workers.
to receive an update on progress. This is underpinned by sub-groups, including
child poverty and emotional health and well-being. The emotional health and
wellbeing group is chaired by an Executive Head, has a budget and has
supported the piloting and roll out of the HeadStart initiative. This is a good
example of partnership work, with 28 HeadStart schools and a range of
commissioned projects set to launch in April 2015.
Health and Wellbeing Board and the Safer Cumbria Partnership. Despite these
arrangements, action has not resulted in improved timeliness of initial health
assessments when children become looked after. This necessitated an extraordinary meeting between senior leaders across the partnership in January
improvements of this longstanding issue.
local authority has set the budget and this has elements to continue to develop
services, and also to fund the significant overspend caused by the high cost of
the number of looked after children. The 201516 budget is focused on
improving early help services and reducing the number of looked after children
from 649 to 520 during the year. It has been a target for some years to reduce
the number of looked after children, yet this has repeatedly not been achieved.
Consequently, it is unclear how this ambitious target will be met and how the
identified budget reductions will be made.


permanent staff in childrens services. Since January 2014, there have been 27
new social workers recruited and a drop in agency staff from 14.2% to 9.5%,
although the distribution of temporary staff continues to affect teams unevenly
across the county. Some creative initiatives are helping to attract workers to
Cumbria and the grow your own initiative is a slow but important response to
a significant problem. Following investment by the local authority, the newly
developed Social Work Academy is due to commence in the autumn of 2015.
To further assist with turning around the considerable practice issues within
childrens services, the local authority funds 26 additional staff over the 235
posts funded in the base budget, and this is positive.
and improving professional practice within the authority. For example she was
instrumental in organising the Championing Social Work conference in 2014,
which had been initiated by the Lead Member and Corporate Director. This was
attended by over 100 social workers as well as the Chief Executive and the
Corporate Director of Childrens Services. Following this, both the Corporate
Director and the Principal Social Worker have held three roadshows in each of
the districts to hold conversations with groups of social workers and child and
family workers. These have focused on affirming the expected standards for
social work practice, including an emphasis on the childs voice and how it
needs to be driving planning and interventions.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.

Summary of findings
The LSCB requires improvement because:
Scrutiny, awareness and challenge
 A review of the Board has contributed to a better understanding of roles and
responsibilities of individual members to ensure that safeguarding is given priority
in Cumbria. As a result, significant improvements in how the Board is organised
and holds agencies to account are in place.
 The partnership has a shared understanding and ownership of early help;
thresholds have been reviewed and re-launched, but are not yet consistently
understood or applied by all agencies.
 Step down arrangements between the local authority and early help services are
not consistently established across the partnership, which leaves some childrens
needs unmet.
 Arrangements for the Board to monitor the number of children subject to an early
help assessment are in place, but do not include evaluation of the outcomes for
children that receive this support.
 The Board does not have sufficient strategic oversight, influence or challenge of
the partnership arrangements concerned with domestic abuse.
 The Board is not providing challenge to the lack of urgency afforded by key
partner agencies to respond to child sexual exploitation.
 The services for looked after children and the welfare of looked after children
have not received sufficient attention from the Board.
 Arrangements to consider serious case reviews have been appropriately refreshed
by the LSCB Chair, with improved decision-making processes now in place.

Training and practice development
 The training delivered to staff by the Board does not fully reflect the its current
priorities. It is not evaluated to measure its long-term impact on practice and on
outcomes for children.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Areas for improvement

Scrutiny, awareness and challenge
evaluate the effectiveness of services provided to children who live in
households where domestic abuse occurs.
self-assessment of child sexual exploitation. Develop robust measures to
improve the Boards oversight of children and young people who go missing
and who are vulnerable to child sexual exploitation.
including those who experience step-down arrangements when child protection
or child in need plans end.
after children.
of the performance and effectiveness of local services, identifies areas of
weakness and the causes of those weaknesses, and evaluates and where
necessary challenges the action being taken.

Training and practice development
priorities, including children who are missing and vulnerable to child sexual
exploitation, domestic abuse and early help practice. Evaluate the effectiveness
of this training, including through feedback and audit activity.
agencies, including the application of thresholds.


Inspection judgement about the LSCB
core functions of the Board and its statutory responsibilities. She has improved
the functioning of the Board so that members responsibilities and
accountability are clearer. The membership of the Board was robustly reviewed
by the Chair and effective changes were made. Although the membership has
reduced, the current Board has representation from all statutory partners. All
relevant agencies are represented by officers of appropriate seniority and
attendance is good. The Chair has conducted individual appraisal and
development sessions with Board members. As a result, the clarity for
individuals about their role and contribution to the Board has improved.
boards, including the childrens trust board, the Adult Safeguarding Board, the
Safer Cumbria Partnership (SCP) and the Health and Wellbeing Board, are
clearly set out in a jointly agreed memorandum of understanding. The LSCB
Chair also has regular, separate meetings with the local authoritys Chief
Executive, the Director of Childrens Services and the Chair of the Adults
Safeguarding Board. The local authority has provided additional funding to the
LSCB to contract a vice chair to provide extra capacity to the leadership of the
LSCB. This has increased the effectiveness and visibility of the LSCB and the
confidence of the partnership. LSCB members sit on each of the other boards,
and there is a standing agenda item for every meeting of the respective boards
where all members are updated about relevant issues from other boards, and
have an opportunity to raise items of mutual concern or interest or to challenge
each other. The different boards are therefore aware of and able to support
each others work.
Board. The chair of the Safeguarding Improvement Board confirmed their
confidence in the LSCB Chair and increasing confidence in the partnership to
effectively monitor and evaluate services to children. The Board has a range of
sub-groups, including one for missing children and child sexual exploitation.
Sub-group chairs represent a comprehensive range of partner agencies. Chairs
and sub-group membership have the expertise and influence to ensure that the
decisions and agreed priorities of the Board are progressed. The statutory and
regulatory responsibilities of the Board are suitably integrated into sub-group
arrangements.
chaired by the independent LSCB Chair and meets before each main LSCB
meeting. It is becoming an effective mechanism for ensuring that all of the subgroups are regularly held to account for progress against agreed plans.


of arrangements for missing children and those vulnerable to child sexual
exploitation. There is delay in obtaining the offender profile analysis from the
police, which is overdue. The Board has failed to put local performance
indicators in place to evaluate the effectiveness of the sexual exploitation
strategy. Specific multi-agency training is planned but will not be available to
staff until September 2015. Some examples of progress can be seen. For
example, information on the prevalence of child sexual exploitation is available;
a child sexual exploitation assessment tool has been developed; there are now
designated child sexual exploitation champions in social work teams, who are
soon to be trained; there has been significant awareness-raising activity in
schools including an event delivered to 7,000 young people; and since January
missing. Child sexual exploitation is identified as a priority for the Board for the
coming year and there is evidence of recent improvement. However, this is too
little progress and the Board has not given this issue the urgency it requires.
detailed knowledge are too recent and underdeveloped. Governance
arrangements within the partnership mean that domestic abuse is the
responsibility of the Safer Cumbria Partnership (SCP). Although the work of the
SCP is reported to the LSCB, this provides insufficient direct evaluation of an
issue which has a major impact on the safety and welfare of children in the
area. This means that the LSCBs knowledge about the prevalence, nature and
effects of domestic abuse is too limited to allow the Board to satisfy itself that
partners are working effectively to safeguard children from the effects of abuse,
and developing services to meet their needs. This is an identified priority for the
LSCB business plan in 201516.
mental health services has been on-going for a number of years as this has
been a significant issue for the partnership for some time. Serious care reviews
have repeatedly found a poor response to meeting childrens needs by CAMHS.
However, recent collaborative partnership working has seen the development of
the HeadStart initiative to improve the emotional wellbeing of young people. A
range of services has been commissioned and will be available from April 2015.
This is an area of concern, but has not been a priority for the Board until very
recently. The Board is not yet knowledgeable enough about the experiences of
looked after children and young people in Cumbria to challenge partners about
standards of practice and the welfare of this group of children.


Its challenge log records constructive challenge made to partners. Progress in
respect of these challenges is managed through the business group. This is an
effective system and partners report that the Board has experienced a
significant, albeit recent, culture change which allows such challenges to be
used as opportunities to develop and drive collaborative solutions. For example,
the LSCB was appropriately provided with outcomes from the local authoritycommissioned independent audit of children subject to child protection plans.
The audit and quality assurance exercise concluded that thresholds had not
been applied consistently and too many children were inappropriately subject to
child protection plans. Partners were consulted about the review of these cases
and, as a result, the numbers decreased rapidly. The Board and the Chair
exercised appropriate and detailed oversight of this process. This included the
Chair re-auditing cases to satisfy the Board that the local authoritys own
auditing and review of the cases had been safe and robust.
hub in recognition of past failures of triage arrangements to respond to
contacts and referrals. A multi-agency programme board reports to the
Safeguarding Improvement Board and the LSCB and has overseen the
introduction of a safeguarding hub within six months. The hub has been subject
to detailed monitoring, including external peer review, to support its
development. The LSCB is the strategic driver of this work and has been
instrumental in ensuring that significant and rapid improvements have been
made.
which is accessible and fit for purpose. This gives clear guidance on partners
responsibilities for helping families early when problems first emerge. The LSCB
is monitoring the application of the threshold through its evaluation of the
safeguarding hub, and recognises that thresholds are not understood
consistently across the partnership. The LSCB actively monitors the prevalence
and quality of early help assessments through audits and an external peer
review. However, practice once the early help assessment is completed is not
evaluated by the Board. It has not paid sufficient attention to the impact on
outcomes that early help is having for children and families. In particular, the
Boards awareness of the effectiveness of step-down arrangements between
the local authority and early help services is limited and requires further work.


in the Board are shared throughout the county. The education sub-group now
has a primary school head teacher as chair and a secondary head teacher as
vice chair, both of whom also have a specific responsibility to ensure that the
Boards decisions are shared with the locality and sector bodies for education
within the authority. They are also responsible for ensuring that Section 175
audits are completed to an acceptable standard. Similarly, the health group is
chaired by a general practitioner who links with the six locality groups for
general practitioners in the county. These changes represent an improvement
on the previous organisation, and provide a framework for addressing the
Boards challenging work programme and priorities. However, they are too
recent to show impact yet.
management framework to drive quality and improvement. The performance
management and quality assurance sub-group reports to the business group on
the outcomes and learning from audits, and this information helps to inform the
priorities and work plan of the Board. There has been significant audit activity,
including thematic and multi-agency audits which report on standards of
practice and have helped to inform the Boards training programme and partner
agencies service development.
guidance. The Board achieved a 100% completion rate of section 11 audits and
has used the findings to improve safeguarding practice and identify multiagency training and development needs for individuals and organisations. The
process was well managed, and included follow-up compliance visits to
agencies from Board members and the identification of areas for development
for the training and improvement sub-group.
process have improved significantly. In the period up to the appointment of the
current independent Chair, there were a number of serious case reviews which
were delayed in their completion. In addition, decisions not to initiate serious
case reviews in the last three years were also reviewed by the Chair. This
resulted in four additional case reviews being undertaken and one serious case
review being changed to a practice review. The Chairs reasoning in each of
these cases was discussed and agreed by the Board and Ofsted was notified. As
a result, the criteria for initiating serious case reviews and practice reviews are
now well understood and applied consistently by the sub-group and the Board.
The learning from these cases has been integrated into the business plan of the
Board and its sub-groups and action plans are monitored effectively by the
business group. All actions and recommendations from completed case reviews
have either been implemented, included in other parts of the Boards planning
or have realistic timescales for completion and are regularly reviewed.


reviews widely through its website, newsletter and training and practice forums.
Staff are aware of this activity and of the principle that learning from reviews
informs training. However, few staff were able to identify specific improvements
which were the result of local case reviews. This raises questions about the
impact and quality of this training and the extent to which it is reinforced in
practice, supervision and management oversight of cases.
The annual report was not completed on time. A new Chair was appointed for
the Child Death Overview Panel (CDOP) during the year, and the panel has now
produced a report as required by regulations, which provides relevant
information and analysis of the small number of deaths considered. The
improvements achieved during 201415 mean that the panel is in a position to
ensure that future reports meet the standard expected by the Board.
death of a child who was known to partners and the local authority. Appropriate
arrangements are progressing to inform decision-making about whether a
serious case review is required.
performance over private fostering. Too few children are identified and referred
to the local authority by partner agencies. The Board has increased its level of
oversight in this area since the 2012 Ofsted inspection, when it was identified
as an area of weakness. The local authority private fostering annual report to
the LSCB shows that notifications have increased from 15 in 201213 to 20 in
area since the annual report was considered in May 2014 and cannot be
assured that this continues to be a priority for partners.
Board does provide some appropriate training, the range of this is limited. The
Board does not have a dedicated training officer and there is a shortage of
trained volunteer trainers from across the partnership in recent months. A
number of courses have also been cancelled due to low take-up. The learning
and improvement sub-group does not systematically collect information to allow
it to evaluate the sustained impact of training on staff.


which have been refreshed through a commissioning arrangement. These are
now accessible to all partners via the internet. The procedures are clear and fit
for purpose and the Board has ensured that the commissioning arrangement
allows for the procedures to be reviewed and amended twice per year to reflect
changes in legislation, regulations and local policy. This process has been
overseen by the Boards policy and procedures sub-group, which will also
monitor and review its implementation. It is not yet possible to measure the
impact of these changes on practice as they have only just occurred.
analytical detail about the range of responsibilities the Board. It does not
provide a rigorous and transparent assessment of the effectiveness of local
services. This is acknowledged as an area for improvement by the Chair, who is
constrained by the fact that the reporting period was prior to her appointment.
report. The level of financial support is sufficient and includes additional
leadership capacity to support the improvement and development needs
identified by the Board during the current year.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted
and two additional inspectors (AI).
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Pauline Turner, HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Wendy Ghaffar, HMI
Team inspectors: Jon Bowman HMI, Sheena Doyle HMI, Ali Mekki HMI, Judith Nelson
AI, Fiona Parker AI, Neil Penswick HMI
Quality assurance manager: Christine Williams


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


