Darlington Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 23 June  16 July 2015
Report published: 1 September 2015
Childrens services in Darlington Borough Council are
inadequate
There are widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed
or at risk of harm.
It is Ofsteds expectation that all children and young people receive the level of help,
care and protection that will ensure their safety and help prepare them for adult life.

Inadequate

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Good


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
The local authority


Information about this local authority are


Executive summary


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates four childrens homes. Two were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection, and two were judged to be
adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
January 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for looked after children
was in January 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since 1 September 2014.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
Children living in this area
 Approximately 22,800 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Darlington. This is 22% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 21% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 19% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 17% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 6% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian and mixed.
 Darlington has higher numbers of Gypsy or Roma travellers than the wider UK
with approximately six times the national average  a substantial number are
domiciled only during the winter months.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 5% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 4% (the national average is 14%).


Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2015, 823 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from 897 at
 At 31 March 2015, 86 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 140 at 31 March 2014.
 As at March 31 2015, the numbers of children living in a privately arranged
fostering placement remain low at four. This is a small increase from three
privately arranged foster placements at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection, one serious incident notification has been submitted to
Ofsted and no serious case reviews have been completed or are ongoing at the
time of this inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2015, 200 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 88 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 190 (83 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014. Of this number:
authority area
 one lives in a residential special school2 that is out of the authority area
 two live with parents, of whom one lives out of the authority area
 none are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 13 adoptions
 seven children became subject of special guardianship orders
returned to be looked after
independent living
 seven children and young people ceased to be looked after and have
lived in houses of multiple occupation. There are currently three young
people living in this type of accommodation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Executive summary
The local authority has not made sufficient progress in all areas identified by the last
inspection in 2012. The standard of some social work services for children needing
help and protection and the quality of leadership, management and governance have
declined.
Managers at all levels of the organisation do not have sufficient grip or oversight of
front-line practice for children who need help and protection. As a result a significant
number wait too long for their needs to be assessed. This inspection identified a high
number of assessments (94) that were not completed within timescales agreed by
managers, with too many children left in situations of unassessed risk.
The local authority has failed to implement an effective system for monitoring and
managing the single assessment. Where the authoritys own performance reports
have shown the majority of current assessments to be out of timescale, management
action to respond and ensure children are safe and receiving timely services has
been inadequate. This is a significant failure by senior leaders to ensure that the
most vulnerable children receive a timely service from social workers that keeps
them safe. When children do receive an assessment, not all are comprehensive and
focused on all areas of risk. While some examples of good practice were seen, this is
not consistent, and in the four worst case examples, children were left at potential
risk. The highly variable quality of practice in Darlington is a critical area of concern.
Where poor practice has been identified, the impact for children is potentially
serious.
Leadership, management and governance are inadequate because of serious failures
by senior leaders to take effective oversight of, and accountability for, Darlingtons
services to children. Elected members and the councils Chief Executive have not
been sufficiently challenging towards childrens services managers to assure
themselves that children are safe. A reliance on inaccurate performance reports and
upward self-reporting by senior managers means they were unaware, until this
inspection, of the extent or impact of the services underperformance.
Criticism by the judiciary of legal planning within the council in February 2015,
including the inappropriate use of section 20 of the Children Act 1989, has not led to
swift or effective action to address all areas of concern.
Social workers in Darlington are committed to children and their families and many
know the children they work with well and ensure that they receive a good range of
support, including services from the family intervention team. These services are
resulting in good outcomes. However, not all social workers are adequately enabled
to provide a good service. Some work in teams that have a high number of newly
qualified social workers or high workloads and this leads to services that are
inconsistent. Where services are weak, deficits occur too often. For instance, too few
children are seen in accordance with their child protection plan, reports for child
protection conferences are not always timely, the quality of too many child


protection plans is poor, and core groups are not always recorded well. This means
that social workers cannot always be sure that children are making sufficient
progress against plans and that risks are reducing.
The independent reviewing service does not provide sufficient rigour when
overseeing the quality and progress of plans, or ensuring that when challenges are
made about poor practice improvements are made for children. In a small number of
cases, decisions about the need for permanence for looked after children have been
delayed as the childs needs and timescale are not afforded sufficient priority. In
these cases independent reviewing officers have not rigorously challenged that
delay.
There have been some areas of improvement since the last inspection in 2012. For
example, services to care leavers and the adoption service are now judged to be
good. Services for children looked after overall require improvement and some
recommendations from the last inspection have not been adequately addressed,
such as the quality of care plans and the practice of independent reviewing officers.
A range of early help services is available in Darlington and, through effective
monitoring of outcomes, the partnership is aware that some services are making a
positive difference for children and families. However, the lack of an action plan to
accompany the early help strategy and an overall lack of evaluation of services
means that the council cannot be assured that the right children are receiving help at
the right time.
The multi-agency response to child sexual exploitation is reducing risk for many
children and young people and front-line practice is mostly well coordinated. Data on
the completion of return interviews is not robust and information from return
interviews is not collated to gather local intelligence.
There are improving outcomes for children looked after, and they have access to
good quality therapeutic support and a wide range of recreational activities.
However, their outcomes could further improve if those who were eligible for an
independent visitor had one, initial health assessments were timely, and the quality
of personal educations plans (PEPs) improved. The Head of the Virtual School should
monitor childrens educational progress more effectively, and take action to narrow
the attainment gap.
When children have a plan for permanence away from their birth family it is
progressed robustly. Children who need adoption receive good quality planning and
support from the adoption service. Prospective adopters and special guardians are
assessed, trained and supported well and the quality of post-adoption and postspecial guardianship order support is a particular strength.
Not all 16- and 17-year-olds who are homeless have access to adequate housing
provision. For the majority of care leavers, outcomes are positive with a very high
proportion in touch with their personal advisors and currently in suitable
accommodation.


Recommendations

Ensure robust management oversight of the single assessment process at both
first tier and senior management level, so that children and families are seen
and risks evaluated within timescales that meet the childs need.


Drive improvement through the quality assurance of assessments that ensures
that all areas of risk to children are addressed, historical information is
considered and analysis is robust, so that childrens needs, including the need
for protection, are fully addressed.


Improve the quality and timeliness of social work reports prepared for child
protection conferences, ensure that initial child protection conferences are held
within timescales that accord with statutory guidance, and ensure core groups
are recorded effectively.


Review the current configuration of social work teams to ensure equity in
workload distribution and that the working environment is conducive to good
social work practice across the whole of the service.


Review processes and resources available for performance monitoring at all
levels of the organisation and ensure that robust arrangements are put in place
as a matter of urgency.


Ensure that elected members are rigorous in their understanding of childrens
services performance and are enabled to robustly challenge senior managers to
improve.


Complete a thorough review of all children subject to section 20
accommodation to ensure that its use is legitimate and appropriate in all cases.


Ensure that independent reviewing officers (IRO) demonstrate rigour when
overseeing both the quality and progress of plans, and the frequency of social
work visits to children who are the subject of child protection plans.


When IROs challenge poor practice, make sure this is clearly recorded and
monitored to ensure improvements are made and, where necessary, a lack of
progress can be formally escalated to senior leaders.

permanence are timely with robust oversight, including by IROs.
that the take-up of these interviews is monitored and information is used to
inform plans to keep children safe.


that families receive appropriate support when need is first identified, and the
quality of early help assessments is improved by robust quality assurance
arrangements.
breakfast accommodation.
necessary, and that the impact of advocacy is subject to evaluation and review.
action is taken to narrow the gap in attainment compared with all children in
Darlington.
that the pupil premium is effectively utilised to improve the educational
attainment and achievement of looked after children.
months so that elected members, senior leaders and other stakeholders receive
information about performance, standards, achievements and service
developments in line with national minimum standards.


Summary for children and young people
 Inspectors found that services in Darlington overall are inadequate, although
some parts of the service are good and others are improving. Managers do not
always make sure that children and families receive a good social work service or
receive the help they need quickly enough.
 Social workers and managers care about and are committed to helping children
and families, but not enough children have good assessments and plans. Too
many children and families wait too long to have their problems looked into.
Some assessments do not explain clearly what help children need and some plans
do not explain what will happen and when. We have asked the local authority to
learn from the best examples of assessments and plans so that all children
receive a good service.
 Childrens centres, schools, health services and other partners work well together
to support many children and their families when they first need help. The council
needs to do more to make sure that all children are getting the help they need
early enough. The family intervention team is helping lots of children and young
people get the help and support they need.
 The local authority needs to work harder to make sure that all childrens views
are listened to, understood and written down. The Darlo Crew (Children in Care
Council), are working hard to help the council understand what it is like to be a
looked after child and how to make services better.
 Most looked after children and young people live in good foster homes and good
childrens homes. They are usually able to live with their brothers and sisters in
homes that are not too far away from their families and friends. The local
authority supports young people to live with their foster carer after their 18th
birthday, and this is good. We have told the local authority that it is not
acceptable for 16- and 17-year-old young people to live in bed and breakfast
accommodation if they cannot live at home and are homeless.
 The local authority is working well with schools and colleges. Looked after
children attend school regularly but not all have good enough plans to make sure
they are getting enough of the right help. We have asked the council to improve
personal education plans and to look at developing its own apprenticeships.
 The local authority is in touch with most care leavers and we have seen that care
leavers are well supported and given lots of opportunities. We have asked the
local authority to write a handbook for care leavers so they fully understand their
entitlements.
 Children who have a plan of adoption do well and are placed quickly with their
new families.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
The service for children needing help and protection in Darlington is inadequate.
When children need an assessment, a significant number have to wait too long for
their need for help and protection to be assessed. This inspection identified a high
number of assessments (94) that were not completed within timescales agreed by
managers, and too many children were therefore left in situations of unassessed risk.
Where performance reports have shown the majority of current assessments to be
out of timescale, management action to respond and to ensure children are safe and
receiving timely services has been inadequate. When children do receive an
assessment they are not always comprehensive and focused on every area of risk.
While some examples of good practice were seen, in too many cases assessments
were of poor quality and in the worst cases children were left at potential risk.
Where immediate safeguarding concerns are dealt with by the multi-agency
safeguarding hub (MASH), the coordinated initial responses, including detailed multiagency strategy meetings, ensure action is taken to protect children. In a small
number of cases delays were seen in the completion of child protection enquiries due
to delays in progressing joint interviews with the police to secure best evidence.
Children do not always have their plans reviewed in time to make sure they are
making good progress. A high number of child protection conferences (98) have
been postponed in the last year in part because assessments and reports are not
ready on time. Some children are not seen in line with their plans, so workers cannot
always be sure that risks are reducing. A high number of challenges by child
protection chairs in the last 12 months due to poor practice has not been formally
recorded and collated, and there has been no formal escalation of concerns.
The multi-agency response to child sexual exploitation is reducing risk for many
children and young people and, in cases seen, front-line practice is well-coordinated
with effective work evidencing reduced risk. The work is linked with missing children
through the Missing and Exploited Group, which recognises that more needs to be
done to improve the quality and timeliness of return interviews, and to raise
awareness of the risk of child sexual exploitation in schools and the community.
The family intervention team (FIT) provides effective support to families and is the
key element of the authoritys response to troubled families. A range of early help
services is signposted to families by the Child Access Point (CAP). Some early help
services are resulting in positive outcomes for children, but services are not always
well-coordinated and targeted. Insufficient provision for 16- and 17-year-olds who
are homeless means that too many are placed in bed and breakfast accommodation.


Inspection findings
because when children need an assessment, a significant number have to wait
too long for their need for support and protection to be assessed. Inspectors
found 94 cases where there was delay in the completion of assessments. In too
many of these cases, children were left for too long in situations of unassessed
risk. This is a significant failure by senior leaders to ensure that the most
vulnerable children receive a timely social work service.
and managing the single assessment, which was introduced in Darlington in
September 2014. Where assessments are timely, this is as a result of individual
managers implementing their own systems to ensure that timescales are met,
rather than a coherent and systematic approach to making sure children are
receiving help and support in a timely way. Senior leaders were aware of the
high numbers of assessments that had not been completed within timescales
set by managers, but had not taken sufficient action to address this serious
problem.
social workers having unacceptably high caseloads. This, together with some
inexperienced social workers not receiving regular supervision and support, has
resulted in a failure to prioritise and progress work effectively, and has left
children waiting too long for the help they need. Inspectors referred 11 cases
back to the local authority for a formal response due to children being left at
immediate risk of harm or assessments being insufficiently robust to ensure
that children are protected. Other cases of concern raised by inspectors led to
further remedial action by the local authority to ensure that children were
effectively safeguarded and receiving appropriate services. It is concerning that
if inspectors had not identified these cases, children would have remained at
risk.
MASH and area teams shows that too many are out of time. At the time of the
inspection 49% of assessments (94) had missed the deadline set by the
manager for completion. The average number of working days by which the
deadline was missed was 38. Of the late assessments, 15 were over 70 days
past their deadline and the worst case was 139 days over. This is a serious
concern. In addition, 20 cases had no timescale set for the completion of the
assessment. When reviewed by inspectors, there were too many cases where
children had not been seen and risks not been assessed. During the inspection,
the council took action to address the backlog of assessments. When these
closed assessments were sampled by inspectors, there remained too many
examples where assessments had not been completed or were inadequate, and
further cases were referred back to the local authority.


some good assessments were seen, the majority require improvement and in
too many cases assessments are inadequate. Most assessments lack
chronologies, and historical information is not always considered to support an
incremental analysis of risk. This was a particular feature in cases of neglect,
meaning that some children are left too long in this situation. The childs needs
and timescales are not prioritised in all cases, so that parents are given too
many opportunities to start again and this delays decisions about the childs
need for stability and security. Significant male adults are not always involved
in assessments and this means that a holistic approach to risk and need is not
always taken. The rationale connecting the outcome of assessment to the
decisions made as a result is not always clear.
child, with timely interventions to meet need and effective analysis of risks and
protective factors. However, this level of practice was not consistent, and the
high variability in the quality and timeliness of assessments is a critical area of
concern. Where there is poor practice, the impact on the child is potentially
serious.
conference (ICPC) means that too many children experience delay in plans to
reduce risks to their safety and protect them. According to the councils own
figures, over the last 12 months, 98 child protection conferences (number of
children) had to be rearranged. The main reasons were as a result of no social
work report, cases being stood down as waiting to go to court, professionals
being unable to attend, and a change in social worker where they had no
contact with the family. Performance on the timely completion of initial child
protection conferences has deteriorated from 92% completed within 15 days of
the strategy meeting (201314), to 79% (201415). In-year performance to
July 2015 has further reduced to 73%.
with risks thoroughly explored, the effective participation of parents and
professionals, and a clear focus on the child. Childrens views were wellrepresented through the use of My Conference Pack, with good examples seen
of the childs view influencing the plan.
plan have one. Children subject to plans receive a range of support from
partner agencies to meet the distinctive needs of different family members. For
example, the FIT works with many children on plans, and its staff are persistent
and tenacious in building and maintaining effective working relationships. The
team provides a range of good quality support such as therapeutic and one-toone work, and this is making a positive difference to childrens lives. Some core
groups and review conferences are regular and well-attended, and this too
makes a positive difference for a minority of children, with timely and effective
multi-agency working leading to good outcomes. Minutes of core groups are


not always shared in good time with all core group members. This is an
outstanding recommendation from the last inspection.
of services is too variable. A very high number of challenges to agencies (157)
by child protection chairs in relation to a range of practice issues in the year to
March 2015 includes 57 to social workers. However, there is no formal system
to record and collate these concerns and the formal escalation policy has not
been used. Opportunities have therefore been missed to learn lessons and
improve services for children on plans. Senior leaders have not ensured that
effective systems are in place to keep them formally aware of the extent of
poor practice.
child protection plan. This means that they do not have the opportunity to build
meaningful relationships with social workers, their views are not always known,
and social workers cannot be sure that risks are reducing. According to the
councils own figures, which senior managers accept can be deficient, the
percentage of children who are seen in accordance with the timescale specified
in their plan was only 68% in June 2015 and in-year performance shows that
this has deteriorated further to 44% at the time of the inspection. This is well
below 201314 levels of 58% in England and 74% in comparable authorities.
about what needs to change by when and do not establish progress measures.
This means children and their families may not be clear about what needs to
improve and compromises the ability of professionals to monitor whether risk is
reducing. Nevertheless, some social workers in Darlington know children well
and complete thorough assessments that do lead to detailed plans. Where
plans for children were judged good, they were well focused on key issues of
concern for the child, with clarity on what needs to change and outcomes and
timescales integral to the plan. Parents spoken to in these cases understood the
plan and what needed to happen to secure positive change.
development plan to support the implementation of an early help offer. This
means that the local authority cannot be assured that sufficient progress is
being made to ensure children and families receive help that is appropriate to
their specified needs, or that they receive it early enough to prevent problems
escalating.
and targeted programmes across Darlington through childrens centres, schools
and the FIT. Childrens centres are appropriately located in communities where
the level of need is greatest. Surveys report 98% of centre users are happy or
very happy with the service they receive, and parents spoken to by inspectors
value the services provided such as the transitions group for pre-school
children, which they report is helping their children develop social skills and


settle into school more quickly. However, uptake and completion of parenting
programmes based in childrens centres is very low (the completion rate was
only 26% in 201415) and while the council is aware of this, action to provide
an alternative offer of parenting support through childrens centres has been
too slow.
through a single point of contact at the CAP. CAP workers effectively signpost
contacts to the appropriate early help service. However, this work is not
sufficiently coordinated across Darlington as there is no comprehensive system
for the quality assurance of assessments completed under the Common
Assessment Framework (CAFs). This means that managers are unable to target
improvement activities and provide training arising from quality assurance
arrangements. The quality of CAFs is too variable. Targets and timescales are
not always clear, so it is difficult for the lead professional to monitor the impact
of the CAF and the effectiveness of support arrangements.
helping to support lead professionals to undertake this work.
effectively as part of the Troubled Families programme. The local authority
reports that by May 2015 all 275 families have been turned around. There are
also many examples in evidence of very effective work with families delivered
through the FIT. Some cases seen show evidence of good support, for instance
in direct work to establish parental routines and in the management of
childrens behaviour, and this is making a positive difference to families lives.
social care. The quality of referrals seen was mostly good. In the majority of
cases referrers are informed about the outcome of their referral. Cases that do
not meet the threshold for childrens social care are passed to the Darlington
allocations meeting (DAM), where there is appropriate multi-agency
consideration of childrens needs and timely referral to other services. In the
vast majority of cases seen, thresholds were appropriately applied and
arrangements to step down services from statutory intervention were managed
well. When children need a social care intervention, referrals progress promptly
to the MASH.
the MASH is effective. This is also the case with the response of the children
with disabilities team. This means that children are seen, clear initial action is
taken to reduce risk, and the views of children are taken into account. Strategy
discussions are timely, well-attended by agencies and appropriately recorded.
Child protection (section 47) assessments are not all timely (only 69% progress
to initial child protection conferences on time) and the format for recording
these assessments does not support clear management oversight to ensure


work is completed within timescale. However, in cases examined by inspectors,
no children were identified as being left at potential risk at this stage of the
child protection process.
clear strategy. Police screening of all domestic abuse referrals to the MASH,
means that those children most at risk are effectively prioritised, and action to
address risk is timely. In all cases seen, the thresholds were appropriately
applied and service response from the MASH was timely. Multi-agency risk
assessment conferences (MARAC) are effective, with good information-sharing
resulting in timely plans to reduce risks to children. However, the progress of
plans is limited because there is an insufficient number of programmes for low
level perpetrators, victims or to support children who have witnessed domestic
abuse. The local authority does not routinely gather data on this area of
service, and this means that it cannot be assured that it has services in place to
meet need.
joint-working protocol that is compliant with case law, insufficient provision has
been made for these vulnerable young people. As a result, 12 young people
have been placed in bed and breakfast (B&B) accommodation since July 2014.
There were two young people in B&B accommodation at the time of this
inspection. The use of B&B accommodation is not monitored by the council and
senior managers cannot therefore be assured that vulnerable young people are
not exposed to risk of harm.
and/or at risk of child sexual exploitation is reducing risk in most cases seen.
The number of children assessed as vulnerable to child sexual exploitation has
remained stable over the last two years. There were 27 cases in 201314, 32 in
children at risk of child sexual exploitation. The local authority knows these
children and young people well.
exploitation is mostly well-coordinated through the Missing and Exploited Group
(MEG). Children at risk are tracked effectively and a dedicated child sexual
exploitation worker provides one-to-one support for children at high risk and
supports key workers for the other children. Direct work is focused on reducing
risk and practitioners effectively target young people who are hard to engage. A
thorough mapping exercise earlier this year has resulted in better intelligence,
leading to the earlier identification of potential victims who are now being
supported through direct work from the child sexual exploitation worker. This
work also identified specific high risk areas of the town, particularly public
parks, and these are now targeted for patrols by police community support
officers. Risks posed to children are assessed using a clear CSE matrix, which
is widely disseminated and used routinely by front-line professionals.


and care data. Partners from the secondary behaviour and attendance panel
also sit on the MEG so that information about the education of those known to
be at risk is shared. However, information about those frequently absent from
schools is not routinely considered. The number of children missing from home
has remained stable over the last two years, with 11 children reported missing
in 201415. Clear arrangements are in place to monitor associated risk factors,
such as substance misuse, with agencies working together effectively to provide
joined-up services. Data on the timeliness and completion of return home
interviews is not sufficiently detailed, so that agencies cannot be assured that
all children have been offered one. Together with the poor quality of recording
of many interviews, this means that information on return interviews is not
captured to inform plans for children, nor is information collated across the
local authority to inform local intelligence. The MEG is aware of this deficit and
an action plan to tackle it is in place.
missing education and promote their welfare. Bespoke support and intervention
packages are swiftly put into place to enable the child or young person to stay
in education. The most vulnerable children and young people in the authority
therefore benefit from all agencies being clear about the potential risks that
exist for them. As a result, over the last three years, using the governments
statutory definition of out of education for 20 days there have been no children
missing from education. In addition, no children have been permanently
excluded from school in the last three years. The authority knows the numbers
of children on fixed term exclusions, which have been on a declining trend over
the last three years, from 667 in 2011/12 to 500 in 2013/14.
Reasons for elective home education are assessed and any patterns or trends
are analysed. Of these 79 children, 67% are from the Gypsy or Roma traveller
communities. The EHE worker, traveller health worker and traveller education
service work in partnership to gain the trust of the Gypsy or Roma communities
and provide services such as education materials, and advice on programmes
as well as information about other educational opportunities. The local authority
tracks the children when out of area and monitors their return at key times in
the calendar. The authority recognises that their current tracking processes are
insufficiently robust with regard to planned returns to the area by travelling
families, and are amending their processes and checks to be more rigorous.
people who are accessing alternative education provision. It monitors the
quality of this through a partnership group including schools, which commission
the provision. The majority of alternative provision is provided through Rise
Carr College, a pupil referral unit that was graded good in its recent Ofsted
inspection. The local authority holds up-to-date records of all children who are
not receiving their entitlement to 25 hours of education. These detail the hours


each young person is accessing education, the locations of their education and
the reasons why they are not accessing 25 hours of education.
Ethnicity is not reliably recorded by childrens social care, so the attention given
to this important aspect of assessments and plans is limited. Cases sampled by
inspectors did not demonstrate a good understanding of different cultures and
consideration of culture and heritage was not routinely addressed in
assessments and plans.
response to risk to children from people in a position of trust is effectively
coordinated on a multi-agency basis. The designated officer is always available
and a swift response is made to referrals. There are good links to the
safeguarding unit and the MEG to share intelligence. Awareness-raising has
ensured agencies know and understand the role of the designated officer and
referrals are rising as a result, with 30 cases in 201213, 45 cases in 201314
and 56 cases in 201415. There were also 131 contacts seeking advice,
information and guidance. However, insufficient work has been done to raise
awareness of the designated officer across the diverse communities of
Darlington, such as the faith communities.
awareness-raising is supported by the distribution of suitable publications and
posters. Privately fostered children are allocated to a social worker and
assessment, review and statutory visits are all timely. This ensures that the
small number of children considered eligible are seen and their needs assessed
well.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Services for children looked after are not yet good. Independent reviewing officers
(IROs) oversight of plans, including the need to secure timely permanence plans, is
not sufficiently robust. When IROs do provide challenge, this is not recorded and
there is no system to track or monitor challenges and ensure improvements.
The local authority has yet to complete its review into the significant use of section
legitimacy of its application. In the vast majority of cases sampled by inspectors, the
use of section 20 was appropriate, although recent practice in a small minority of
cases still resulted in delays in decisions to secure legal permanence in childrens
care. Without a review of all cases, the local authority cannot be assured that all
section 20 arrangements are appropriate or necessary.
Care plans for most looked after children are regularly reviewed, but not all plans are
informed by up-to-date assessments to ensure they reflect the childs changing
needs. Personal education plans do not identify targets and outcomes and systems
for monitoring and tracking childrens progress are not robust. For some children,
this means that may not receive early enough the help they need to achieve their full
potential.
The quality of court reports is improving and timescales for completion of care
proceedings are good, averaging 21 weeks during 2014/15 and 25 in the first quarter
of 2015/16.
Children looked after know their social workers well and receive regular visits.
Parents and family members are appropriately consulted. Contact plans are carefully
considered and contact with family members is well organised, so that children are
able to maintain important relationships. Children looked after have access to good
quality therapeutic support and a wide range of recreational activities, and this
improves their emotional and physical well-being. The timeliness of initial health
assessments, although improving, is still well below the national average.
Most children looked after live in stable placements. When children have a plan for
permanence this is progressed robustly. Children who need adoption receive good
quality planning and support from the adoption service. Prospective adopters and
special guardians are assessed, trained and supported well and the quality of postadoption and post-special-guardianship-order support is a particular strength.
For the majority of care leavers, outcomes are positive and stable, with a high
proportion in touch with their personal advisors and currently in suitable
accommodation. 67% of care leavers are in education, employment and training,
well above the national rate in 201314 for all care leavers of 45%.


Inspection findings
authority which is a comparatively high figure. The stable and experienced
looked after and through care team provides a service for children looked after
once they have a plan for permanence, and this includes permanent fostering
and residential care arrangements.
not have done so, though a small number should have been accommodated
earlier. The decision that children should become looked after is made at an
appropriately senior level. The rate of children coming into care, at 83 per
reasons for this are not fully understood by the local authority. It believes that
the higher referral rate and increased placements with connected persons are
contributory factors, but this requires further analysis. At 31 March 2014, 54%
of children looked after were accommodated under section 20 of the Children
Act 1989, far in excess of comparable authorities (20%) and England (28%). At
still a high figure and a recent family court judgement criticising the local
authoritys use of section 20 has yet to lead to a comprehensive review despite
assurances to the LSCB that this would be completed by May 2015.
appropriate, although in a small minority of cases recent practice had still
resulted in children left subject to section 20 arrangements for too long. For
example, it led to delays in decisions to secure legal permanence, although
appropriate decisions have now been made in all such cases. The Child and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) had raised concerns about
delays in securing legal permanence prior to the judgement in February. A legal
gateway panel has now been established and partners including Cafcass report
that this is beginning to have a positive impact. However, without a review of
all cases, the local authority cannot be assured that all section 20 arrangements
are appropriate or necessary.
arrangement was seen during this inspection to be driving improvements in the
quality of reports presented to court. When care proceedings are issued,
timescales for completion are good, averaging 19 weeks during 201415 and
returning home do so with the benefit of an up-to-date assessment and support
plan. However, a very small minority (two) have returned home without an
updated assessment, although support from the FIT is in place. This does not
maximise the potential for successful rehabilitation. Numbers being readmitted
to care are low: in the last 12 months four children from two families came into
care for a second or subsequent time.


know them well. Social workers see them on their own and take time to make
sure they understand their wishes and feelings. Most children looked after know
their rights and entitlements and are advised on how to access an advocate.
The take-up from the commissioned service is increasing, but only one child
looked after has an independent visitor. Advocacy outcomes are not evaluated,
so the impact has yet to be evidenced. No complaints have been lodged by a
child looked after since 1 September 2014. The complaints information leaflet
has recently been revised by the Darlo Care Crew and will be reissued to all
children looked after to ensure that all understand and feel able to use the
process.
parents are well recorded. They are invited to reviews, and contact plans are of
good quality. Supervised contact is often undertaken by the same officer, which
makes it a more productive session for both child and parent. Other agencies
are appropriately consulted and most children looked after benefit from good
quality multi-agency engagement.
assessments. Reports for reviews do include current information about the
child, but these are not always sharply focused on progress against the care
plan. Too many care plans lack clear targets and timescales. In these cases it is
not clear how childrens needs will be met and when.
now resolving, have in a small number of cases impacted negatively on the
timeliness of reviews, with 93% completed within timescale as at 31 March
before their review. IROs oversight of plans, including the need to secure
timely permanence plans, is not always rigorous. When they do provide
challenge to the progress of care plans, it is not recorded and there is no formal
system to ensure that challenges are addressed by social workers and their
managers. This also means that informal challenges are not formally escalated
and IROs cannot be assured that they are driving improvement so that children
receive a timely and appropriate service.
placement. Nearly two thirds of children remain in the same placement for two
years or more in Darlington, which is just below comparable authorities and the
England average of 67% as at 31 March 2014. A slightly higher percentage of
children than the national average had three or more placement moves during
strategy, the local authority is taking appropriate steps to improve stability by
enhancing both placement choice and quality. It is taking a collaborative
approach to commissioning either through the NE Ten (a collaboration of 10
local authorities in North East England, or the Tees Valley Five (a collaboration
of the five local authorities in the Tees Valley). Through the former for instance,


a national service has been commissioned to provide advocacy. The latter has
commissioned independent fostering agency (IFA) placements. It is now
extending this approach to residential placements as although there is a surplus
of residential placements within the local authority boundary, thorough needs
analysis demonstrates that they do not meet some of the complex needs of the
young people requiring them.
activity and projected need. It addresses both internal and IFA recruitment
targets which are consistent with the local authoritys overall Looked After Child
Strategy 201517. This includes recruitment to ensure children are placed
together locally where possible and in accordance with their care plans. Of a
total of 148 foster placements, including IFA placements, 63% are within the
local authority boundary and 31% are located in neighbouring local authorities.
Of the seven foster placements at a distance, two are with connected persons.
There are also seven residential placements at a distance and these have been
commissioned to meet the specific needs of the children concerned. The health
and education co-ordinators ensure that children living out of borough access
an appropriate range of services to meet their needs.
increased the numbers of in-house foster placements to 98. The current targets
outlined in the strategy are well thought-through and realistic in meeting need,
and will be further revised when spare recruitment capacity is released from the
adoption service.
timely permanent placements for children looked after is a strength in this local
authority. Adoption and fostering work is allocated and managed within the
same team of social workers. This helps to reduce delay and ensures continuity
of foster carer support social worker when childrens plans and placements
change. The team is stable, well-managed and the standard of practice seen is
high. There is no annual report from the fostering service and this means that
the local authority and stakeholders do not receive information about
performance, standards, achievements and service developments.
they receive a good service from the local authority. Carers receive regular
supervision and training and they contribute well to childrens planning and
reviews. Where it is in childrens best interests to be fostered on a permanent
basis, their placements are formalised by the authoritys well-managed Family
Placement Panel. Where there are no in-house permanent fostering placements
Darlington Access to Resources Panel (DARP) approves the purchase of a
placement from the independent sector. Currently there are no children waiting
for long term fostering placements. Six long term placements have disrupted
over the past year and although this learning was used to inform future
matching for the children involved, it has not been used for wider practice and
service development.


more in the first quarter of 201516. Special guardians receive timely
assessments and good plans are put into place, supported by the specialist
post-order support worker. However, some children in stable long term foster
placements would benefit from a more systematic consideration of their foster
carers applying for an SGO to enable them to leave public care.
children looked after, which is reflected in improving outcomes. The percentage
of children looked after who are accessing the two-year-old offer for nursery
provision in good or better settings stands at 90% and is well above the
national average for all children (71%). The local authority reports that, in
after children nationally. Writing and mathematics were at 100%, compared
with 59% and 61% in England, although this represents only three children.
The gap between looked after pupils achievement and that of all children is
narrowing in writing and mathematics, though not in reading.
and mathematics, is improving but from a very low base. The low numbers of
looked after children eligible to sit examinations means that percentages can
fluctuate and comparison from year to year is difficult. In 2012/13 no young
people gained five or more GCSE grades at A* to C level including English and
mathematics. In 2013/14 this had risen to 20% (two children) compared with
rate of progress is not yet rapid enough to close the attainment gap, and
strategies to address this are not yet in place. The Head of the Virtual School
has not yet established adequate monitoring arrangements for tracking
childrens progress. He is allocated only one day a week for this role and this
limited capacity has limited the progress made.
coordinator have successfully ensured that all children, including those living
out of borough, are now in good or better schools. The Head is very proactive
in managing movement between schools for looked after children and, as a
result, schools report that children settle into new provision well. Data on
school exclusions shows no permanent exclusions over the last three years and
this is confirmed by local schools. Fixed term exclusions have been reducing
over the same period but in 2012/13, at 13%, were still higher than the
regional average for children looked after of 8% and the England average of
after was, at 2.6%, higher than the SN of 0.8% and the England average of
children who are out of education for 20 days.
to full time education for five children who are accessing alternative provision.
All are children looked after and all currently receive less than the minimum


requirement of 25 hours education per week. Two attend the pupil referral unit
at Rise Carr College and the local authority monitors the quality of this provision
through a partnership group of commissioning schools. This provider was
graded good by Ofsted in its recent inspection. The curriculum is varied and
challenging for young people, with high aspirations for them to achieve a range
of GCSEs at A* to C level. Young people also have access to a good range of
enrichment activities such as canoeing, rock climbing, archery, arts projects and
educational excursions. This helps to build confidence and widen their horizons.
are some examples of effective target setting with specific goals and
appropriate support in place to help children and young people reach their
potential. However, in most cases, targets and timescales are not clearly
recorded and this makes measuring progress difficult. While many plans contain
detailed information about the child or young person, this information is not
always used well to identify key issues and actions required to support
educational progress. The voice of the child is not routinely captured in PEPs
and not all PEPs identify how the pupil premium is used.
within timescales and this has increased to 61% in the last month. This is
improving, but performance is not yet good enough and the systems
requirement that parents have to sign two forms continues to hamper progress.
Performance regarding review health assessments, dental checks and
immunisations is good and all are above the England average. Up-to-date
immunisations are, at 94%, an improvement on 201314 when they were at
same as 201314 when the England average was also 93%. Completed annual
health assessments are at 94%, an improvement on 201314 when it was 93%
and the English average was 88%.
health assessments. However, the FIT has recently reviewed the emotional
health needs of all school age children looked after using SDQs. Where there
are concerns, the FIT therapy service consults with the childs social worker
about the need for therapy. There is good access to therapeutic services
located in FIT and in child and adolescent mental health services. Children
looked after have free and reduced rate access to local leisure activities through
the LIFE card and the Healthy Darlington offer.
those deemed to be at high risk, particularly of sexual exploitation or criminal
behaviour. Thirteen children had missing episodes between January and June
followed by foster carers and residential staff in reporting the looked after child
missing and seeking to locate them. Return interviews are undertaken by
independent persons, although they are not offered after every missing
episode. In most cases these are used to inform risk assessments and future


plans. Data on substance misuse by children looked after is not collected by the
local authority, although young people can and do access the substance misuse
services provided by an independent provider. A close working relationship
between youth offending services and the looked after and through care team
helps to ensure appropriate preventive work and support for young people
when remanded in care. In 201314 10% of children looked after were
convicted and cautioned compared with 7% in comparable authorities and the
English average of 6%. During 201415 this reduced to 8% which represents
seven young people.
have not had their needs arising from diversity assessed well or planned for,
indicating a lack of awareness among social workers of their distinctive needs.
Foster carers receive training on how to protect children from bullying,
homophobia and discrimination.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is that it is good.
strength in Darlington. A significant proportion of looked after children are
being adopted and increasing numbers of adopters are being recruited. The
quality of preparation of adopters is good, as is the quality of adoption support.
This means that security for children in the form of a stable permanent family is
achieved in good time in many cases.
service. The social workers in this team are allocated both fostering and
adoption cases. This means that children and carers are able to have continuity
of worker when childrens plans change from foster care to permanence
through adoption. It also helps to avoid delay in progressing childrens plans.
The team is well-managed, stable and experienced. The family placement and
looked after childrens teams are located in adjacent rooms and there is regular
formal and informal communication between the two services, which also helps
to progress childrens plans in a timely manner.
IROs and in care planning meetings. Workers use an effective matching tool to
assess childrens individual needs and identify the most suitable adoptive
carers. The progress of plans for children who may need an adoptive placement
is closely tracked and monitored. Cases within the family placement service are
regularly reviewed by the team and its managers, which means they are
familiar with the circumstances of all children who are waiting for permanent
placements. The progress of childrens contingency plans and the availability of
suitable carers for children are also considered in these meetings. The meetings
are recorded, so the progress of plans can be tracked and any potential delay is
addressed. Life story work is undertaken with children, and social workers and


carers are trained and encouraged to contribute to childrens information about
their past.
well and in the best interests of children. There are robust arrangements in
place for the management of letter-box contact. In cases reviewed by
inspectors, contact was well planned and discussed in detail at the childrens
reviews. Counselling support to birth parents is provided through a contract
with a small local charity and this is a well-used resource. All children who
required adoption placements with their brothers or sisters were placed
together last year.
children were adopted compared with 20 in 201314 and 10 in 201213. There
are 19 children awaiting adoption as at 31 March 2015 and four children whose
plan had been changed from adoption to an alternative plan in the previous 12
months. In all cases this decision was appropriate. In the previous three years
only 9% of childrens plans were changed from adoption, which demonstrates
that adoption is achieved in a very large majority of the cases where it is the
plan for the child.
average time between prospective adopters registering an interest and being
approved is six and a half months; two weeks longer than the national target.
Inspectors saw evidence of good quality recruitment and assessment practice,
which was confirmed by adopters who spoke positively about the standard of
communication, preparation, training and support from the family placement
service.
available to them, including fostering to adopt, use of the adoption register
and, more recently, Adoption Link. The authority has assessed one fostering to
adopt placement with a new carer. Discussions have taken place to develop
concurrent adoption and fostering placements collaboratively across the region,
although there are no current applicants being considered in Darlington.
Adopters are also helped to make decisions about the type of children they may
be able adopt and about the support available to them both before and after
approval. In particular, the post-adoption support and training available to
adopters both from within the local authority and through external trainers
were valued by adopters and seen to be making a positive difference for
children.
are of a good quality. Recruitment of adopters increased significantly from 10 in
adoption placements and the target for next year will be reduced, so that
adopters do not wait too long for placements and resources can be redirected


to the recruitment of more foster carers and to improve support to both foster
carers and adopters. Graduate interns with expertise in marketing and needs
analysis have been recruited to bring new ideas and extra capacity to the
recruitment of adopters, and the authority has successfully attracted applicants
from nearby communities who can meet the needs of Darlington children.
that recruitment, training and matching are organised collaboratively across the
local area. Darlington has traditionally assessed any applicants who live in the
local area, but because the town is small, most adoptive placements are made
in neighbouring local authority areas. A very small minority of children in the
area are from black and ethnic minority backgrounds and no children from
these communities are reported to be waiting for adoption. The authority has
taken no specific action to recruit carers from these communities.
years, the length of time between children becoming looked after and being
placed for adoption improved each year since 2011 and stood at 431 in 2013
reported performance against this measure has deteriorated in the past year
and, at 519 days, is below the central government target of 487 days but still
better than the last reported national average of 628 days for 2014. This is
reportedly due to the authority persevering to achieve adoption for a sibling
group of three older children where it was clear that it would take some time to
find a suitable placement. In this case, the local authoritys decision was in the
best interests of the individual children concerned and they have now been
adopted by their former foster carers.
receiving court authority to place a child for adoption, to matching them with
adopters. The three-year average for 2011 to 2014 was 111 days, which is very
good performance and much lower than comparable authorities three-year
average of 247, and the England average of 217 days. The authoritys
performance against this measure during the past year was reported as 238
days.
ranged from relatively simple requests, such as help with funding for a holiday,
to complex packages of therapy or support with contact and bereavement
counselling. A specialist post-order support worker works directly with children,
carers and social workers to produce assessments and post-order support plans
that are of a consistently high quality. The Darlington Access to Resources
Panel (DARP) approves post-adoption and SGO support resources and is a
source of advice, consultation and oversight of practice as well as the forum for
approval of resources. During 201314, there were seven requests for postadoption support and all of these received a service. In 201415 there were 10
requests, of which eight resulted in the provision of support. The FIT provides
initial therapeutic support to adopters and adopted children, but this service has


been introduced very recently so it is not yet possible to evaluate its
effectiveness.
was observed during the inspection and it has effective oversight of adoption
decisions and the approval of adopters. The authoritys medical adviser and
legal adviser attend regularly. The family placement team manager acts as
agency adviser, and carers and elected members are also represented on the
panel. The panel chair gives detailed feedback about the quality of the
applications to the agency decision maker (ADM) after each panel meeting, and
all panel members are subject to regular annual appraisals, which informs the
practice of the panel and identifies their training and development needs.
Feedback from adopters who have attended the panel has been positive. The
Director of Childrens Services acts as ADM, and adoption decisions and the
recommendations of the panel are managed and recorded in a timely way.
report by the adoption panel either. Although managers and elected members
receive regular information about the performance of the service, this is not in
a consistent format and is not collated to make it accessible. This is an omission
as it means that the local authority and stakeholders do not receive a coherent
overview of performance, standards of service and information about the
development of the service.
The graded judgment about the experiences and progress of care leavers
is that it is good.
care leaver service. Of these, 68 have left care already. The council is in touch
with all bar three of its care leavers. This is good performance. This contact is
meaningful and includes a persistent and prompt response by personal advisors
to need, for instance for accommodation. Young people value this continuity
highly, and it reflects the stability of staff and managers, who know young
people and their histories well. Care leavers therefore feel comfortable in
raising difficult personal issues with leaving care staff. The local authority is
highly responsive to cases where young people are in immediate financial need,
although the Darlington website contains insufficient information regarding care
leavers entitlements.
For instance, staying put arrangements are enabling 12 young people to
remain with their former foster carers after they reach 18, which is a high
proportion of the authoritys care leavers. Positive examples were seen of care
leavers in staying put arrangements who regard their former foster carers as
their families, manage their own family contact and have achieved well. These
young people are also confident that the local authority will continue to support


them after higher and further education. The possibility of staying put is almost
always raised with young people in a timely way. However, written information
for care leavers and their carers about it is limited.
before their 16th birthday. This process ensures that key areas such as
accommodation, employment, education and training are considered at an early
stage. Care leavers have suitable access to the important documents they
require. Plans include comments from care leavers and address contact with
their birth families. Young people interviewed like their pathway plans and feel
the process gives them a good opportunity to be fully involved in planning for
their future and voicing their wishes and views. However, action plans do not
always clearly specify the tasks that need to be undertaken to improve
outcomes and ensure young people have all the skills they need to be
independent.
summary of their current health needs. Care leavers are signed up for medical
and dental services in almost all cases, although the most recent dental and
health assessments are not routinely noted in pathway plans. Arrangements to
support care leavers who are experiencing drug and alcohol problems are in
place and provide a prompt service. However, pathway plans do not ensure
that young people are provided with health histories and do not consistently
address care leavers emotional well-being.
protect themselves from bullying, with a clear awareness of the risks of child
sexual exploitation and e-bullying. They are aware of bullying that occurs on
social media sites and on other interactive technologies, including their mobile
phones. One care leaver clearly articulated how her personal advisor intervened
positively when she was receiving unwelcome messages on social media. Care
leavers spoken to reported that they feel safe in their accommodation. There
are no care leavers identified as at risk of child sexual exploitation. Leaving care
workers are appropriately trained regarding child sexual exploitation and care
leavers receive advice through a suitable range of discussions and structured
interventions.
suitable accommodation. There are currently 36 care leavers in independent
living, 12 are staying put, three are in supported lodgings and four are in
houses in multi-occupation. This single unit for care leavers is a commissioned
service. One care leaver is currently in bed and breakfast accommodation under
emergency circumstances and there have also been two other care leavers in
bed and breakfast accommodation since April 2015. The local authority has not
sufficiently analysed the reasons for care leavers need for this type of
accommodation.


close to sources of support. These are used flexibly, for instance for young
people thinking of moving on to independent living who want to experience it
on a trial basis. While a taster placement is nominally for six months, it can lead
to a permanent tenancy in the same property if required. One care leaver
reported having had extensive choice and asked to be placed close to his
former foster carers, a wish that the local authority respected. Care leavers
were positive about accommodation, for instance its safety, dcor and
personalisation. The local authority is aware of the need to increase the range
of accommodation provided, for instance to include single flats.
are progressing well and only one has ended. Applicants undergo a thorough
assessment process, which includes references and checks via social care and
the Disclosure and Barring Service. Applicants are appropriately expected to
attend the full Skills to Foster training programme to develop their
understanding of the key issues for care leavers. Records of the assessment
process reviewed by inspectors evidenced thoroughness, and providers are
well-supported through placement agreements and formal support plans. A
lodgings provider commented on how well supported she felt by the personal
advisor and supported lodgings staff, especially the promptness of their
response when there is a need. All young people in supported lodgings continue
to have a high level of support from a personal advisor with regular visits and a
high level of availability.
significant improvement on last years figure of 45%, and much higher than the
national average of 45%. Personal advisors give good information, advice and
guidance to young people on possible careers. Currently five care leavers are
attending university and 26 are on further education programmes, which is
good performance. Drop-out rates from higher and further education are low.
Young people at university are well-supported both financially and with
accommodation at vacation times. Care leavers spoken to were enjoying their
A-level studies at colleges and valued highly the role of personal advisors in
helping them find the right course. The local authority has recently commenced
regular meetings to track those care leavers who are not in education,
employment or training and encourage them to re-engage, but although
personal advisors work diligently to support individual young people back into
education and training, it is as yet too early to assess the impact of this
exercise.
and were excited about the future. As a result, they are highly aspirational and
are encouraged in this by their personal advisors. Unfortunately, local
employability and study programmes have reduced, as some providers have left
the area and some care leavers expressed disappointment at the limited
support now available to them. The local authority has plans to meet this need.
Four care leavers are on apprenticeships and another care leaver spoken to was


excited about a forthcoming apprenticeship. However, the local authority does
not currently have any care leavers on apprenticeships within the council and
as a large employer and corporate parent this is a missed opportunity.
disabilities into adult services. Similar services are not always in place for those
care leavers who have mental health problems and are making the transition to
adulthood. This may result in care leavers needs not being met as adults. The
local authority is aware of this issue and care leaver staff advocate for a service
on behalf of care leavers.
are regularly involved in the training of foster carers. They were significantly
involved in developing the local authoritys statement of care leavers 10
entitlements and regularly meet the corporate parenting panel. This has been
effective, for instance in the raising of care leavers allowances to set up home.
There have been no recorded complaints from care leavers. The local authority
collects feedback sheets from care leavers regarding the services provided and
these are positive. However, the local authority does not specifically celebrate
the achievements of care leavers other than through the Vibe event, which
covers the achievements of all children in Darlington. Care leavers have free
access to the local authoritys Dolphin Centre and other leisure facilities.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Leadership, management and governance are inadequate because of a serious
failure by senior leaders to take oversight of, and accountability for, Darlingtons
services to vulnerable children. This omission leads to serious shortfalls in service
provision, and these have gone unchecked. Elected members and the councils Chief
Executive have not been sufficiently challenging towards childrens services
managers to assure themselves that children are safe.
A reliance on inaccurate performance reports combined with upward self-reporting
by senior managers in childrens services means that senior leaders were not aware,
until this inspection, of the extent or impact of the services underperformance. In
addition, insufficient progress has been made in many areas identified as needing
improvement in the last inspection. Performance monitoring lacks rigour as reports
are drawn from an electronic system that is recognised within the authority as
unreliable. No local targets are set and performance is reported against obsolete
national targets. The council accepts that performance clinics have been ineffective
in improving poor practice in some social work teams. Case audits are insufficiently
robust and do not support senior leaders to maintain an overview of all aspects of
social work practice. An extensive auditing process leads to generalised findings that
are not clearly recorded and are insufficiently focused on driving and sustaining
improvement across all areas of the service.
The effectiveness of services to children was judged to be adequate in 2012. Since
then there have been improvements in some areas but overall the standard of
practice for children needing help and protection has declined, as has the quality of
leadership and management.
Senior leaders are not creating an environment in which good social work can
flourish across all areas of the service. Workloads are distributed inequitably between
the social work teams and the high number of newly qualified social workers within
some teams means that more experienced workers have high caseloads, which is
limiting their ability to progress work.
Strong processes are used to plan the provision of training. Social workers are highly
aware and supportive of plans to give them the opportunity to share their skills. The
principal social worker is adding value to the learning environment. However, her
work is too focused on newly qualified social workers and could be widened to
support practice development across the service.
The Children in Care Council (Darlo Care Crew) is involved in a wide range of
participation and improvement activities, including regular attendance at the
corporate parenting panel and at regional, national and international events.


Inspection findings
protect children that lack consistency, with significant areas of poor practice
that leave some children at risk of harm. Senior managers report that they feel
they have insufficient capacity to undertake case audits in a meaningful way. A
lack of rigour in managers performance monitoring results in inconsistent
service quality across teams and some practice is unsafe. Senior leaders are
unable to demonstrate a shared awareness and understanding of the issues
and an agreed approach to dealing with them.
meetings between senior leaders, is not coordinated through an overarching set
of service outcomes that are shared and clearly understood by all senior
leaders. This situation has resulted in a general lack of clarity among senior
managers about the strategic and operational elements of their role. Confusion
over roles, combined with the absence of an agreed set of service outcomes,
means that knowledge of and accountability for shortfalls in the delivery of
front-line services is fragmented. Many of the deficits identified by this
inspection were known to senior managers within childrens services but they
have not been tackled swiftly or effectively.
performance monitoring has resulted in wide inconsistencies in the way that
services are delivered across the area, without a clear management action plan
to address this. Inaccurate performance reports are drawn without data
cleansing from an electronic record system that the council accepts is not fit for
purpose. Targets are based on national performance indicators that were
discontinued some time ago and no local targets are set. This inspection
revealed several inaccuracies in reports that were drawn from the electronic
record system and provided to inspectors. A consequent widespread mistrust in
management reports has led some middle managers to keep their own
separate spreadsheets of service activity. This is understandable but is poor
corporate practice, as the lack of connectivity means that without accurate
data, senior leaders cannot gain an overview of service provision and challenge
poor performance.
monitored for effectiveness, and this has led to the provision of services in
some areas that fall below an acceptable standard and leave children at
potential risk. Childrens services managers meet in a cycle of performance
clinics to discuss management information drawn from their quality assurance
activities. These meetings are poorly recorded, and specific and measurable
actions to improve poor performance are not clearly identified or monitored.
Scrutiny of the case audit conducted by the council for this inspection indicates
that the clinics are insufficiently rigorous and effective in identifying and
correcting performance deficits. All of these activities rely heavily on front-line
and middle managers self-reporting upwards to more senior managers, and are


therefore insufficiently robust in recognising and responding to serious
performance shortfalls and ensuring that children are protected. This inspection
identified a high number of concerns about children, and there were 11 cases
within which those concerns were deemed serious and referred back to the
council for immediate action.
improvement. Significant resources are allocated by the council to case
auditing. However, this extensive process that audits hundreds of cases each
year has not resulted in the adoption by social workers of a baseline standard
of practice, in accordance with the practice standards published in the local
authoritys performance handbook. Action points drawn from audited cases are
basic, such as instructions to assess families, see children or hold regular
supervision sessions, and this indicates a very low level of practice. Compliance
with audit findings is not tracked or monitored and senior managers cannot
therefore be assured that all deficits identified have been addressed. Good
practice is not routinely recognised and disseminated.
in the completion of assessments, senior managers have not responded quickly
enough to address them. Weaknesses in the individual performance of some
managers and social workers have been identified but not appropriately
addressed to ensure that services provide timely and appropriate responses to
childrens needs.
work can flourish across the service. The workforce is generally stable, but this
masks fluctuations between the teams. Services at the front door and in some
geographical areas find it more difficult to recruit and retain social workers. The
current configuration of teams is inequitable in terms of workload. In localities
identified as performing poorly in this inspection, services are more likely to be
provided by inexperienced social workers. Where teams have a higher number
of newly qualified social workers with protected caseloads, more established
social workers hold a higher number of cases than their counterparts in other
teams, and in some cases this means they are unable to prioritise and progress
work effectively.
recording system does not support effective social work practice and has been
supported by the council in the procurement of a replacement that is planned
to be operational by the end of this calendar year.
to a swift and coordinated effort to address the concerns identified in the
judgment. For example, an audit of the local authoritys use of section 20 of the
Children Act 1989, which was specifically censured, has to date reviewed only


unchanged. Senior managers of the council have not previously been
sufficiently challenged by their partners on the Family Justice Board to improve
their performance in proceedings.
challenging towards childrens services managers to assure themselves that
children are safe. A reliance on inaccurate performance reports, combined with
upward self-reporting by senior managers, means that they were not informed
until this inspection of the extent of the services underperformance, and they
were caught unawares by inspectors finding that children were being left at
potential risk.
member for children, members of the scrutiny committee and of the corporate
parenting panel can demonstrate a high degree of awareness of the barriers
affecting these childrens lives, and express a commitment to removing them.
The lead member has a high level of face-to-face contact with looked after
children, including regular meetings with the Darlo Care Crew. Senior scrutiny
committee members can evidence a number of successful thematic
improvements to services for looked after children, such as their dental health.
Thorough monitoring and coordination of scrutiny committee agendas to avoid
duplication means that improvements are particularly effective when they cut
across services for both children and adults, such as services for young carers.
However, a lack of rigorous scrutiny, analysis and planning means that elected
members activities are not always aligned with service priorities for children.
authority areas statutory boards. These operate to a written protocol and
currently communicate primarily through the LSCBs Prevention of Harm
subgroup due to overlapping priorities. The large number of governance boards
means that there is a very high level of formal and informal contact between all
senior leaders, including the chair of the LSCB.
including the Director of Childrens Services, were thus able to demonstrate a
keen understanding of the boroughs wider strengths and weaknesses. They
described a range of suitable examples where the board had made a difference
to childrens lives or was planning to, such as to young peoples mental health
and alcohol services. One weakness identified by the H&WB is the service
provided to children and young people from the Gypsy or Roma traveller
communities. This shortcoming was confirmed during the inspection as a
service gap that requires the boards urgent consideration. Numbers identified
as receiving a service from childrens social care are very small, when nationally
available data indicates that Darlington has the largest Gypsy or Roma subpopulation in England. Given the local prevalence, the council cannot be
assured that services to meet the needs of this group are suitable to their
needs.


Strong analytical processes ensure that commissioning activity meets local
need. A well-established methodology is in place for identifying specific needs,
together with a willingness to be collaborative, creative and innovative in
meeting them, as partners are operating within an environment of reduced
funding. Considerable expertise within Darlington of delivering sound
commissioning practice means that it is a key strength of the organisation. For
example, the effective procurement of suitable care placements for looked after
children in line with the published sufficiency strategy. Commissioning activities
are generally undertaken effectively but their monitoring and evaluation is not
always delivered well. This occurs particularly where a decision is reached to
provide the service in house using the council or the NHSs own services. For
instance, the therapeutic social work service has begun providing services as
part of the FIT without the establishment of service outcomes, and this has not
happened for services that had been procured externally.
commissioned provision. Internal training is provided by dedicated training
officers and other staff with specific expertise; partnership training is sourced
from partner organisations to avoid duplication; and commissioned training is
sourced externally. Social workers spoken to during the inspection reported
very high levels of availability of training and could provide evidence of this
through extensive training profiles. The principal social worker is adding value
to the learning environment by actively promoting the development of social
work skills within the workforce, but her time is too focused on newly qualified
social workers and it could be expanded to take a wider role.
groups of children looked after. One for older young people has approximately
members. The achievements of these groups are numerous and include:
enhancing communication with children looked after through both social media
and a quarterly newsletter; participating in the recruitment of social workers
and IROs; delivering training to elected members and foster carers; attending
regular meetings with councillors and officers, who they say listen to them and
act on what they say; reviewing the information pack given to newly
accommodated children; and attending regional, national and international
events.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement.
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.

Executive summary
Darlington Safeguarding Children Board meets its statutory requirements. The
commitment of partner agencies to improve safeguarding is sound, as evidenced by
their attendance at the board and its subgroups, and also by their financial
contribution.
The board has strong governance arrangements in place and it has published an
effective document on agreed multi-agency thresholds for intervention. Evaluation of
child deaths where there are no concerns about parental misconduct is strong, as is
the boards comprehensive training programme.
The newly appointed independent chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board
(LSCB), the joint business unit with the Adult Safeguarding Board, the involvement of
lay members, and the development of a childrens group all have the potential to
further improve the work of the board.
LSCB learning and improvement, auditing and performance management frameworks
are in place but have not been joined up to deliver a suitably thorough and detailed
knowledge of gaps in the quality of services provided to the most vulnerable children
in Darlington. The board was not therefore fully aware until this inspection of serious
deficiencies in the delivery of assessments by childrens services.
An audit to identify whether agencies are meeting their safeguarding requirements
under section 11 of the Children Act 2004 is ongoing but its completion has been
delayed due to lack of capacity. In the interim, issues are identified for individual
agencies at performance clinics but action planning to address deficiencies has been
insufficiently swift. Dissemination of learning from processes such as case reviews
has been limited across the childrens workforce and the wider community and there
are no specific and measurable plans in place to address any identified deficits.
Intelligence drawn from a board audit has significantly improved the partnerships
response to sexual exploitation.
Inspectors saw some evidence of an appropriate culture of challenge. However,
there is no single mechanism in place to record what has been done to address the


boards concerns about professional safeguarding practice and challenges at a board
leadership level are not routinely documented.
Campaigns to raise awareness among communities in Darlington about the risks of
child sexual exploitation have been appropriately initiated. Targeted plans are firmly
in place to ensure those working in licenced premises, hotels and as taxi drivers are
aware of the warning signs, as potential risks to young people are not yet being fully
recognised and responded to in the night-time economy.
Early help has been prioritised by the board. However, there is no designated
subgroup for the governance of early help, and oversight of the effectiveness of
early help services is therefore limited.

Recommendations
plans that are specific and measurable, with actions and timescales clearly set
out.
obligations are fulfilled across all agencies in accordance with section 11 of the
Children Act 2004.
all partner agencies, and that data supplied by childrens services includes all
stages of the childs journey from early help to being looked after. To include
consideration of how lessons learnt from audits and case reviews are
understood and disseminated across agencies.
concerns raised on individual cases, and indicates what has happened to
resolve any challenge.
exploitation faced by children and young people in Darlington, including what to
do if they have concerns.
requirements of Working Together to Safeguard Children 2015.


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
has notable areas for improvement. Some aspects of the boards operations are
strong, including its training programme and its approach to analysing child
deaths. Several positive developments, such as the recent appointment of an
experienced independent chair, demonstrate the potential for further
improvement. However, there is more to do to ensure that the boards systems
for performance monitoring are sufficiently robust, and that it can demonstrate
that it is operating within a culture of appropriate challenge.
strategic boards include board members attending and presenting the
messages from the Annual Report to the Darlington Partnership; the Childrens
Collective (former Childrens Trust); the Health and Wellbeing Board; the Police
and Crime Commissioner and the local Family Justice Board. The independent
chair also has regular meetings with the Chief Executive and Director of
Childrens Services but the recording of these meetings needs to demonstrate
how the chair is held to account and actions agreed.
accordance with its statutory requirements. The document is of good quality
and readily accessible to all agencies. Good use is made of it to inform decisionmaking on thresholds across the partnership, and this was observed by
inspectors throughout the inspection.
meeting of the board to date. He has brought with him significant experience
from chairing other LSCBs. He views the commitment of agencies across
Darlington as a strength, and is looking to improve the work of the board based
on the foundations already in place. He had identified deficiencies in the
operation of the board that were also identified by inspectors during this
review. However, his appointment is too recent and planned changes to
address these deficits have yet to be implemented.
agencies at board meetings and active participation in its subgroups. All
relevant agencies contribute to the budget, which is sufficient to deliver the
boards programme of activity. A joint business unit with the Adults
Safeguarding Board includes shared administrative support and two
development officers. The benefits include the coordinated provision of training
across both childrens and adults services to encourage a focus by
professionals who work with individual adults or children to take a whole
family approach to providing help.
nine members of the public to participate as lay members on both the childrens
and adults boards. At the time of the inspection, three people had begun to sit


on the childrens board and they described their involvement as being in its
early days. A Childrens Group has also very recently started and met twice.
This group has the potential to improve the boards ability to listen to the childs
voice, but attendance so far is low and its priorities have yet to be determined.
neighbouring authority, is completed to a high standard. Annual reports
produced by this group are clear in their analysis of trends and patterns. A
recent analysis of child deaths in Darlington over the past seven years has not
identified any deficiencies in agencies response.
Training subgroup. It is evaluated highly by participants and has an extensive
reach, with 1,779 people participating in the programme in 201314.
Innovative work is being undertaken in partnership with a private company to
ensure that a full evaluation informs the development of future training. The
boards training manager has carried out a gap analysis and introduced new
training sessions to meet identified need. Social workers interviewed by
inspectors spoke very positively about the quality and availability of LSCB
training.
self-harm and suicide among young people. Awareness-raising has been
undertaken with staff at Darlington College about the risks of self-harm, and
this, together with a new improved pathway for referral to services, aims to
improve the timeliness of agencies response to young people at risk. Significant
further development covering the work of all other agencies is planned for this
year.
board due to the takeover of the private company that was previously carrying
out this task on a national basis. The Procedures subgroup ensures that
procedures are updated to reflect national requirements and locally identified
good practice. They are working effectively to ensure that they incorporate the
recently updated national guidance on Working Together to Safeguard Children
to child sexual exploitation. Inspectors identified good front-line work across
the partnership to address child sexual exploitation. Awareness-raising of the
risks associated with child sexual exploitation across the broad population of
Darlington has begun but is not yet being delivered as part of a coherent
communication strategy. Although schools are delivering awareness-raising of
exploitation as part of the curriculum, this is not yet sufficiently coordinated,
monitored and evaluated by the MEG. Further targeted awareness-raising is
planned within the night-time economy, including for licenced premises, hotels
and taxi drivers, on the warning signs of child sexual exploitation and routes for
referral to raise any concerns.


community. Annual private fostering and LADO reports are considered by the
LSCB as part of an annual reporting cycle. However, the report lacks
consideration of what auditing has identified; the effectiveness of front-line
work to protect children; and an analysis of published data. For example, there
is no examination of the significant changes in the child protection population,
which had risen exponentially in-year (201314) from 60 to 141, nor of the
looked after children population, which had reduced from 210 to 189 in the
same year. A draft version of the boards Annual Report 201415 was made
available to inspectors and was more detailed than the previous report,
although the sections considering data have yet to be written. A prospective
delay of six months in publication leaves an inappropriate gap in evaluating last
years work and planning this years work streams.
this leads to an overall lack of awareness by board members of serious deficits
in front-line practice. Gaps across the boards performance management, audit
and learning improvement frameworks mean that, where concerns are
recognised, action plans are not always put in place to address them. Even
when they are, they are not always specific and measurable, with clear
outcomes for improvement identified. There is also an insufficient focus on how
to disseminate learning from the boards performance monitoring processes
across the workforce.
practice. Some evidence was seen by inspectors of the board impacting
positively on the effectiveness of front-line multi-agency safeguarding
arrangements. For example, the board monitored contacts and referrals into
the MASH. They then ensured that there was regular review and discussion
among partners so that they were aware of patterns and trends. Together with
learning from case audits, this exercise contributed to the review of front door
arrangements by childrens services and the subsequent development of the
Childrens Access Point. However, in the main, the subgroups focus is on
childrens social care, and not on other agencies. There is as yet no coherent
multi-agency performance framework in place that would enable the board to
evaluate safeguarding practice across all partner agencies. In addition, gaps in
performance information lead to deficits in the knowledge of board members.
Childrens social care data is limited and does not facilitate an understanding of
the quality of help provided at all stages of the childs journey. During this
inspection, inspectors reviewing assessments identified widespread delay,
variable quality and children being left at risk of further significant harm, and
board members were insufficiently aware of these circumstances.
members to childrens services to improve its performance. For instance,
following criticism from the judiciary, the former independent chair wrote to key
agencies highlighting concerns about legal issues raised by the courts.


However, the board has no formal system for recording challenge in which it
can formally note concerns that arise between partners, or issues about
individual cases and what has been done to resolve them. The new
independent chair has recognised that this is an area for development. The
board has challenged childrens services and partners agencies over a long
period of time in relation to the absence of chronologies on case records from
which to assess historical factors, and on the timeliness of initial health
assessments (IHA) for looked after children. These challenges have been
partially effective. However, there has been some improvement in the
timeliness of IHAs, with 55% being completed in the last quarter within the
timescale identified by national standards, a significant increase from 7% in
December 2014, although this is not yet a satisfactory level.
positive impact. Inspectors found much-improved practice in relation to child
sexual exploitation, compared with that described in an audit carried out in
January 2015. Case audits also contributed positively to the development of the
Childrens Access Point. Others do not clearly identify strengths and weaknesses
in services, and their recommendations are also insufficiently clear. On
occasion, sample numbers are disproportionately small and do not assist in an
understanding of how widespread a particular issue may be.
multi-agency framework that meets the requirements of Working Together to
Safeguard Children 2015 by focusing on serious case reviews (SCRs). However,
there has not been an SCR in Darlington since 2011 and the group has no
programme of additional activity to identify and disseminate learning from a
range of other reviews and audits across the partnership. In 201415 only one
case was looked at in depth by this group and this exercise did not identify any
issues that would improve the quality of front-line practice. In the last two
months, two further cases have been looked at in depth and good practice has
begun to be considered. This is a positive development. Review by inspectors of
the LIGs minutes shows that criticism of childrens services in court and a
management review of an individual case identified other current issues in
relation to the quality of child protection plans. However, apart from being
discussed, it is unclear how these deficits have been taken forward by the
group.
delivering their safeguarding responsibilities to meet national standards. It was
agreed that an audit of partners obligations under section 11 of the Children
Act 2004 would occur every two years and only for statutory agencies.
Following completion of agency audits, challenge clinics occurred for some
agencies but, due to staff vacancies, not all of these have yet taken place.
Where they have occurred, there is no documentation on what is going to be
done immediately in relation to the gaps identified, as some partners are
inappropriately waiting until the audit is collated as a whole before taking
action.


themes are chosen annually, but these fit uneasily into the boards structures.
For instance, this years themes are child sexual exploitation, self-harm, neglect
and early help. However, neglect and early help do not have a subgroup or a
task-centred group charged with driving them forward. Consideration is being
given by the board to their priorities being cross-cutting themes across each of
its subgroups. However, at the time of inspection it was already four months
into the business year, and plans for ensuring that activity relating to the
priority themes was reported to the board were not yet in place.
their knowledge of board activity to be mostly focused on training, which they
reported as good. Workers expressed limited knowledge of the boards other
activities, and only a very small number reported that they had seen e-bulletins
which reportedly were available to all staff to raise awareness of key
safeguarding issues.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Wendy Ghaffar
Deputy lead inspector: Dick OBrien
Team inspectors: Gary Lamb, Carolyn Spray, Jenny Turnross, Ali Mekki, Ian Young,
June Cramman, Neil Penswick
Senior data analyst: Peter McLaughlin
Quality assurance manager: Paul Armitage SHMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


