Doncaster Metropolitan Borough
Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 14 September  8 October 2015
Report published: 27 November 2015

Childrens services in Doncaster are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
At the time of this inspection, services to children in Doncaster are inadequate
because services for children who need help and protection remain inadequate.
Other areas of service, however, have demonstrated improvement since 2012, when
all services inspected at that time were judged inadequate. In this inspection, there
is evidence of the progress made with services for children looked after and care
leavers that are judged as requires improvement. Adoption is good. Overall, this is a
reflection of the progress leaders and managers are beginning to make in improving
outcomes through better services for children in Doncaster.
In response to the findings of the 2012 inspection and the long-standing concerns
about the safety of children in Doncaster, the government commissioned a review
into how services for children and young people should be delivered. In August
established. The trust went live on 30 September 2014. The trust is responsible for
the delivery of childrens services in Doncaster, with the exception of services for
disabled children, the virtual school for children in care and the early help service, for
which the council has retained responsibility. The council has entered into a contract
with the trust to deliver services on its behalf. The contract sets out clear
performance directions: that trust services should be judged good by October 2017
and outstanding by October 2019. Senior leaders do not underestimate the
challenges that remain and are realistic in terms of actions that are needed in order
to continue to improve services and outcomes for children by 2017. However, they
are not there yet and there is still some way to go before services can be judged to
be good.
The early help partnership offer, which is coordinated and led by the council, is
fragmented and too many children and young people whose needs could be met at a
lower level are referred for statutory services. In a small number of cases, inspectors
saw serious weaknesses, including delay in holding strategy discussions, potentially
leaving some children at risk of harm. The quality of assessments is not consistently
good and for some children plans are not clear enough about the areas of concern or
what actions are needed to be undertaken to reduce risk. Managerial oversight and
supervision is not always sufficiently robust enough to address the variability of
social work practice seen during this inspection. The circumstances of some children
and young people do not improve quickly enough once risk is identified, and they are
left in neglectful or risky circumstances for too long. Partnership working with the
police needs to be better coordinated to ensure that child protection investigations
are timely and robust and consider all areas of risk.
There is more evidence of progress in the children in care teams. These teams are
increasingly stable and social workers have manageable caseloads, which enables
more children in care to benefit from positive relationships with their social workers.
Plans are regularly reviewed, but are not always informed by an up-to-date holistic
assessment of childrens needs. Placement stability is improving and children and
young people, who need support for their mental or emotional health, have good


access to the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS).Children in care
have good attendance at school, but not all of them are making sufficient progress.
Personal education plans (PEPs) need to be improved. The virtual school needs to
improve the support given to children placed in schools outside the borough. The
council recognises that these remain areas for improvement and is taking steps to
address them.
Children whose plan is for adoption receive a good service. Plans move forward in a
timely way and children are matched with appropriate families. Life story work is
good. Support for adopters is strong. Statutory visits to children placed with their
adoptive families are not always completed by their own social worker.
Since the trust was established, services for care leavers have been reconfigured and
more care leavers now have the support of personal advisers to enable them to
make progress; an improved position from the previous inspection in 2012.
The restructure of the assessment and child protection service (ACPS) teams is
underway with the planning and consultation stage completed prior to this
inspection. The new structure is set to be launched at the end of October. A rolling
modular management training programme has already begun and improved
performance management systems are under development. All of these activities are
designed to address the known deficits in the current services.
Workforce stability has increased while reliance on agency workers and staff sickness
has decreased. All children and young people are allocated to a qualified social
worker. Social workers speak positively of working in Doncaster.
On election in 2013, the Mayor of Doncaster confirmed that improving childrens
services would be her top priority. Collaboration between the council, trust, Local
Safeguarding Childrens Board (LSCB) and partners has led to the recent
development of new thresholds guidance; an early help strategy was issued. An
Early Help Hub was launched during this inspection.
Training has improved for elected members, who are now displaying a greater
willingness to undertake their role as corporate parents. Improvements made to the
corporate parenting board are too recent to show impact.
Relationships between the council and the trust are maturing. There is evidence of
joint working to improve services for children and young people, for example in the
investment of the council in refurbishing residential childrens homes operated by the
trust. Formal systems for the council to monitor and challenge performance by the
trust exceed the requirements set out in the contract between the organisations.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The trust operates four childrens homes. Three were judged good or outstanding
in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The trust operates an independent fostering agency and voluntary adoption
agency. Both were judged good at the most recent Ofsted inspection, which was
completed in August 2015.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements /
arrangements for the protection of children was in November 2012. The local
authority was judged inadequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for looked after children
was in May 2011. The local authority was judged adequate.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since August 2015.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since January 2014.
 The Chief Executive of the trust has been in post since July 2014.
 The functions that the local authority has delegated to a third-party provider are:
all services for children in need, in need of protection, children in care and care
leavers with the exception of children with a disability, the virtual school and the
early help service. Doncaster Childrens Services Trust is also registered as an
independent fostering and a voluntary adoption agency.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 65,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Doncaster. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 24% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 17.3% (the national average is 16%)
 in secondary schools is 14.9% (the national average is 14%)
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 7% of all
children living in the area compared with 22% in the country as a whole.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
White Eastern European and Pakistani.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 9% (the national average is 19%).
 in secondary schools is 7% (the national average is 15%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 August 2015, 2,495 children were identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from 2,239
at 31 March 2014.


At 31 August 2015, 312 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 331 at 31 March 2014.

 At 31 August 2015, nine children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from 10 at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection (November 2012), eight serious incident notifications
have been submitted to Ofsted and one serious case review was ongoing at the
time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 August 2015, 498 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 75.8 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 500 (77 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014.
 Of this number:
authority area
 five children live in residential special schools, of whom 40% live out of
the authority area
 Four children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 26 adoptions
returned to be looked after


independent living
 three children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

The trust should ensure that qualified social workers, in line with statutory
guidance, undertake assessments in the response and referral team
(paragraph 26).


The trust should ensure that joint child protection work with South Yorkshire
Police and other partner agencies is robust, timely, coordinated and
compliant with the requirements of Working Together to Safeguard Children,


The trust should ensure that all children and young people assessed as in
need have a child in need plan (paragraph 37).


The trust should ensure that assessments for children in need of help and
protection, children in care and care leavers are of a consistently good
quality, are holistic, include relevant history, identify risk and reflect
childrens individual needs, wishes and feelings (paragraph 36).


The council and the trust should ensure that services to disabled children
are equitable and robust and that expertise is available at the point of
contact with childrens social care to identify early indicators of risk and need
(paragraph 40).


The trust should ensure that children are seen and seen alone during
statutory visits and that this is consistently recorded on their case file so that
the visiting frequency is subject to regular case audit (paragraph 45).


The council and the trust should ensure that all plans for any child or young
person receiving a service focus on reducing risk identify the needs of all
children in the family and are easily understood by parents and young
people. They should ensure that plans are SMART (specific, measurable,
assignable, realistic, time-bound) and reviewed regularly (paragraphs


The trust should ensure there is robust management oversight of the use of
Public Law Outline (PLO) at the pre-proceedings stage to ensure that
decisions are made in a timely way and that progress is monitored by senior
managers (paragraph 39).


The council and the trust should ensure that there is rigorous management
oversight of childrens plans, including appropriate challenge to reduce drift
and delay, and that there is a clear focus on securing timely permanent
placements for children and young people (paragraph 61).


The council and the trust should ensure that practitioners across all services
receive regular reflective supervision in line with the council and the trusts
supervision policies (paragraphs 26,116,135).


The council and the trust should monitor the offer and take-up of return
interviews when children are missing from care or home. They should
ensure analysis of these interviews informs individual and strategic planning
to keep children safe (paragraph 60).



The trust should undertake an analysis of the needs of the cohort of older
young people who have complex needs and are subject to frequent moves
to ensure that appropriate care plans are in place to meet their needs
(paragraph 67).


The council should ensure that the virtual school has the capacity to support
children and young people, including those living out of the borough, to
reach their potential through effective monitoring of their progress and to
provide additional support where required (paragraphs 83,85).


The trust should ensure that there is sufficient capacity in the independent
visitor service so that all children who need an independent visitor have one
(paragraph 64).


The trust should ensure that the childs social worker undertakes statutory
visits to children placed for adoption (paragraph 107).


The trust should ensure that all care leavers are suitably prepared for
independent living and that accommodation is tailored to their specific
assessed and changing needs (paragraphs 110,111).


The trust should improve the identification of risk for all care leavers who go
missing or who are at risk of sexual exploitation (paragraphs 118,119).


Where 16- and 17-year-olds are assessed as a result of becoming homeless,
the trust should ensure that they are made fully aware of their legal
entitlements and the range of support options available to them. The trust
should ensure that all care leavers have access to clear written information
about their entitlements (paragraphs 57,115).


The trust should ensure that care leavers as well as young people in care
have the opportunity to participate in the design and delivery of services and
that the new arrangements for the corporate parenting board are effective
(paragraphs 121,143).


Ensure that there are robust processes in place that enable the trust and the
council to be assured that new arrangements to improve services are
working well, for example the establishment of the early help service, and
the restructure of the ACPS teams (paragraphs 134,136,137).


Summary for children and young people
 In 2012, Ofsted found that services for children and young people in Doncaster
were inadequate. The government decided the best way to make things better
was for an independent organisation to run childrens social work services. This
organisation is called Doncaster Childrens Services Trust (the trust) and has
been in place since October 2014.
 The trust works very closely with the council and other agencies. They all want to
make sure services for children and young people get better. Inspectors found
that improvements have been made already, but because services have been
poor for a long time, there is still a great deal to do and, overall, services are still
judged to be inadequate.
 There have been too many changes of social worker for some children and young
people who need help or protection. This makes it difficult for children to get to
know and trust their social worker and for social workers to understand what the
young person wants and how best to help them. The trust is working hard to
employ and keep staff for much longer.
 There are a lot of services to help children and families in Doncaster, but these
services are not always being provided at the time families need them. The trust
and the council know this and have made plans that will help make sure that in
future children and families get the right help at the right time.
 Some children who are at risk have not been helped or made safe quickly
enough. People need to work better together to make sure action is taken
quickly. Managers need to make sure they help social workers make the right
decisions at the right time to keep children and young people safe.
 Professionals are working well to help children and young people who are missing
or at risk of sexual exploitation stay safe. More work is needed to make sure that
care leavers are not at risk through going missing or of sexual exploitation.
 Children in care mostly know their social worker well. The Children in Care council
has only just been set up but they have lots of good ideas to make things better
for children and young people. Councillors need to do more to understand how to
do the best they can for children in care.
 The adoption service is good. Children who need to live with an adoptive family
are helped to live with the right family and to stay with their brothers or sisters
where that is the right for them.
 Support to care leavers has got better. More care leavers now stay with their
foster carers after they reach 18 or live in other suitable places. More are in touch
with their personal advisers than before and they get good help to look after their
health.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
Services for children in need of help and protection continue to be inadequate.
Inspectors saw examples of serious weaknesses in a small number of cases during
this inspection. Where children are considered to be at risk of immediate harm,
strategy discussions do not always take place promptly. When they do, they are
sometimes poorly recorded. In some cases seen, the response provided was
insufficiently coordinated. For some children, this means they have been left in
vulnerable situations for longer than necessary.
The quality of assessment and management decision making is inconsistent.
Assessments and plans do not sufficiently focus on risk. They are not routinely
updated and often lack consideration of all children in the household. Planning is
weak. Not all children and young people assessed as in need have plans and when
plans exist, they are not reviewed regularly. Some children remain in neglectful
situations longer than they should because authoritative action is not taken in all
cases where childrens circumstances do not improve.
The council has been too slow to deliver its early help service. Early help and
intervention services are not consistently available or well coordinated. Too many
children and young people are assessed for statutory services when their needs
could be met at a lower level
Although the trust has reduced the turnover of social workers and managers,
changes in some teams continue. These have contributed to drift and delay that
leave some children at potential risk of harm. Too many cases seen by inspectors
lacked the appropriate level of involvement of children, young people and their
parents and carers. Most case records fail to demonstrate that children and young
peoples voices are heard and that their experiences are being fully taken into
account and acted on.
All children and young people are allocated to a suitably qualified and experienced
social worker. Significant improvement has been made in the timescales for initial
child protection conferences. Arrangements to respond to concerns where children
are at risk of, or are suffering, child sexual exploitation are much improved. Recent
changes to address concerns about children who are missing from home or care
prioritise those children most at risk. Information from return home interviews needs
to inform individual and strategic planning more effectively.


Inspection findings

When children, young people and their families are in need of early help and
support, despite a wide range of services on offer, the coordination of the
early help available is poor. This limits the potential to improve outcomes for
children and families and prevent problems escalating.


Thresholds for access to childrens social care (CSC) are not well understood
across the partnership. This results in children and their families not always
getting the help they need in a timely way. Too many referrals are made to
statutory services when lower level interventions are more appropriate.


Partners are insufficiently engaged in the provision of early help. In the six
months prior to this inspection, 504 early help assessments (EHAs) were
completed. Over half have been completed by the Intensive Family Support
Service (IFSS) in this period. Only two EHAs have been completed by health
professionals and 11 by childrens centre staff. The lead professional role is
mainly undertaken by education staff or the IFSS. When cases step down to
early help from childrens social care, there are delays in allocating a lead
professional. During the inspection, Doncaster Metropolitan Borough Council
launched its early help service the early help strategy and revised threshold
guidance document were still in draft form. The council acknowledges that
the pace of developing their early help offer has been too slow.


Some effective early help services are available. Children and their families
benefit from an effective Stronger Families service, which delivers the
national Troubled Families programme. Project 3, provided by RDash, gives
young people advice and support in relation to alcohol and substance misuse
and links with adults services to deliver a whole family approach to
substance misuse. RDash is also commissioned to deliver CAMHS. All
children and young people who have an urgent need such as self-harm are
seen within 24 hours of the referral. There is good performance for those
children and young people with non-urgent needs, with 95% seen within
agreed timescales. In 201415, 109 young people were admitted to acute
wards due to self-harm and 12 children and young people were admitted for
attempted suicide. An extensive training programme is now underway
focusing on early intervention in schools to help staff support children who
are experiencing health and well-being issues.


The underdevelopment of coordinated early help services has led to
inappropriate demand for statutory services. Very few contacts to childrens
social care are supported by an EHA. In the past six months, 51% of
contacts have led to a referral, with 38% closed immediately following
assessment. This leads to children undergoing unnecessary statutory
assessment and puts unnecessary pressure on the ACPS teams.


Although the referral and response team provides a prompt and safe
screening of contacts, including out of hours, there is a reliance on
unqualified workers to undertake detailed enquiries involving elements of
assessment and analysis. Robust management ensures that decisions


reached are safe but the process is cumbersome. This impacts on managers
ability to undertake other managerial duties, including providing supervision.
Of five supervision files seen by inspectors, all were inadequate in terms of
frequency and quality.

The trust has been effective in reducing re-referral rates from 37% in 2013
England at 23%. However, inspectors saw a number of re-referrals where
children had been exposed to further risk or harm where cases have closed
prematurely without risk being sufficiently assessed.


Of 2,351 contacts in the past three months, 784 were from the police, of
which 541 were domestic abuse notifications. Not all notifications are
supported with enough information to enable staff to assess the level of risk.
Forty-three per cent of these do not progress beyond contact. This creates
additional work for the referral and response team and reduces its
efficiency.


Domestic abuse is a significant feature for children and young people in over
is a wide range of effective services for families affected by domestic abuse.
In addition, the trust has recently been successful in securing central
government innovation funding for its Growing Futures Domestic Abuse
Programme. At the time of inspection, the project had been operational for
just eight weeks. While it is too early to see impact, inspectors have seen
early evidence of children who have been exposed to domestic abuse
receiving support.


Multi-Agency Risk Assessments Conferences (MARAC) are well attended and
information is appropriately shared by childrens social care. However, the
re-referral rate for MARAC cases is 40%, which is over twice the regional
average. This suggests that risk is not always being successfully addressed
or reduced. The council and trust had recognised the high re-referral rate as
an issue of significant concern. The need to tackle it informed the trusts
successful bid for funding for the Growing Futures Project, which has a
specific target of reducing MARAC re-referrals by 25%.


A multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH), set up in June 2015, is at an early
stage of development. At the time of inspection, arrangements were not
sufficiently well-coordinated and did not involve a full range of partners. The
trust, council and police accepted inspectors observations and took steps to
revise the MASH model and develop a strengthened approach.


Current safeguarding practice does not consistently ensure that the most
vulnerable children in Doncaster are safe. Strategy discussions do not always
involve relevant agencies such as police and health representatives. This
does not comply with statutory requirements set out in Working Together to
Safeguard Children 2015 and means decisions made may not be fully
informed by all relevant information. In a number of cases seen by
inspectors, police and social care did not work together in a coordinated way
to safeguard children. Not all strategies are recorded or reflect the level of


discussion with police and partners. The outcome of section 47 enquiries is
not routinely recorded, which makes it difficult for professionals to
understand the actions taken.

Cases transfer quickly from the referral and response team to ACPS teams
and are allocated to a qualified social worker. Not all social workers,
however, have had recent child protection or joint investigation training. In
one team, inspectors found some agency workers who were unaware of
procedures to record strategy meetings and investigation outcomes.


Social workers in the ACPS teams undertake a broad range of work, taking
cases from referral, through assessment to permanence. This impacts on
their ability to be sufficiently knowledgeable and experienced in all areas of
work they are expected to undertake. Caseloads vary across ACPS teams
and in some cases are too high, with some social workers holding up to 30
cases.


While inspectors have seen good assessments in some teams, this is
inconsistent across the service. This level of inconsistency means
safeguarding practice is not yet good enough. During this inspection, 14
children and young people were referred to the trust where inspectors had
concerns for their safety. Immediate safeguarding action was required in
respect of one young person; an urgent strategy discussion was convened
on this case. In three other cases, further action was needed to assess
potential risk. In four cases, the trust accepted that childrens plans had not
been actioned sufficiently robustly leading to drift and delay. Additional
information provided by the trust reassured inspectors about the safety of
the remaining six. In addition, inspectors saw a small number of cases
where there had been delay in instigating child protection procedures or
where not all elements of risk had been identified. Plans that were in place
at the time of the inspection ensured that these children were safe.


It is positive that the timeliness of assessments improved from 75% in
of assessment; not all assessments consider the needs of all children in the
household. There is limited evidence of assessment tools used to support
risk analysis, particularly in relation to the identification of neglect.
Chronologies are not used effectively to inform assessments. It is difficult to
see the childs story from some records, as many childrens summaries are
not up to date. Not all assessments and plans consider the voice of the child
and their wishes and feelings. In the six months prior to this inspection, the
trusts data indicate, of 1,660 assessments completed, 252 did not record
that children were seen during their assessment. Of these, 33 were unborn
babies and 13 were assessments closed on the same day with no further
action required. The trust reports that the remainder of children were seen
as part of their assessment but this was not recorded. Such inaccurate data
mean managers cannot be sure if all children are being seen as part of their
assessment.



Not all children in need have a plan in place, which means that interventions
are not always supported by a structured approach with clear objectives.
The trusts performance data show that at the end of August 2015 over one
third of children in need did not have a plan. The trust reports that this is, in
part, explained by plans not being signed off on the case recording system.
However, inspectors sampled a number of cases where children had not
been seen for several months and where child in need reviews had not been
held. This means managers cannot be assured children in need are receiving
the right level of service or indeed in some cases if they are safe.


There are 323 children currently subject to a child protection plan, with 56%
of children subject to a plan for neglect, the highest category of concern.
This reflects the local challenges around deprivation, along with some
historic legacy of children and young people not receiving help at an early
enough stage. This leaves some children in vulnerable situations for too
long. For some children, changes in social worker have contributed to this
position. While improvement is evident for some children, overall the pace is
too slow


The Public Law Outline (PLO) is not used effectively in all cases when
concerns escalate and change is not being achieved. In some cases seen by
inspectors, decisions to move to pre-proceedings had been made, but were
not progressed. Senior managers do not have a system to identify when this
happens. There are currently only small numbers of children at the preproceedings stage of the PLO process.


The council and the trust acknowledge that children with disabilities are
under-represented in child protection work with only ten children, (3%),
subject to a child protection plan. At the point of contact and referral, there
are too few skilled practitioners with knowledge of safeguarding disabled
children to identify indicators of risk.


The timeliness of convening an initial child protection conference (ICPC) has
improved from 46% in 2014 to 93% as at September 2015. Police do not
routinely attend ICPCs and do not always provide reports in a timely way,
which means conference members determine risk and need without valuable
police information. Inspectors saw a small number of cases where
conference reports were not shared with parents in time to enable them to
participate fully in the meeting. In one case, documents were not translated
into the parents language. This inhibits parents understanding of the risks
to their children and how they should be working to reduce them.


Child protection chairs are an emerging strength demonstrating increasing
challenge and escalation of concerns to senior managers. This is not yet
consistently leading to an improvement in childrens circumstances or social
work practice. Child protection chairs visit children following child protection
case conferences to help children understand the process and their plans.


There is increasing evidence that advocacy is being offered to children who
become subject to child protection conferences. A newly commissioned


service has already received 82 requests since it began in August 2015. It is
too soon to measure any impact of this service.

Most core groups are held regularly but the links between the actions of the
core group and the reduction of risk to children are not always clear or
sufficiently effective. Inspectors saw evidence of child protection plans
drifting without challenge by core groups and a lack of challenge to agency
partners who do not provide updated information in a timely way. This
means that social workers are making decisions in some cases in the
absence of all relevant information to enable them to monitor progress or
assess risk.


Visits by social workers to children subject to child protection plans are
mainly regular at 97% but not all records confirm whether children are seen
alone by their social workers. The trust reports that this is a recording issue.
However, inaccurate recording means managers cannot be sure all children
are seen alone when it is appropriate to do so. The trust recognises this and
has amended the case recording system so that social workers are prompted
to record whether they have seen children alone. Most social workers are
able to articulate their understanding of childrens needs and circumstances
better than is reflected in their recording.


The quality of social work for disabled children has improved in recent
months and co-working arrangements between the council and the trust
have improved. The current agency manager for the children with a
disability service is having a positive impact on reducing the isolation of this
service from mainstream safeguarding services as the role currently sits
outside the trust within the council.


The council recognises that transition planning for young people with a
disability, that supports them to move successfully into adult services is
underdeveloped. The council recognises short break services while wellcoordinated, have not provided children and their families with good enough
quality or choice of provision. Consultation has been undertaken with
parents and children to inform the re-commissioning of services for this
group of children and young people.


Arrangements to respond to concerns where children are at risk of or
suffering child sexual exploitation are much improved. The child sexual
exploitation team has been strengthened over the last 18 months with
additional social work and police officer resources. Section 47 investigations
in the main are robust, well recorded and lead to multi-agency protective
actions. Despite this, inspectors saw four children out of 25 cases sampled
where risk has not been identified soon enough. This has delayed protective
action being taken.


The child sexual exploitation team is working proactively with the voluntary
and community sector, hoteliers and taxi drivers. This has resulted in
enhanced intelligence gathering and greater reporting of potential indicators
of exploitation by these professions. There have been a number of
successful police-led operations, convictions and 23 abduction notices served


since March 2015. Effective joint working has taken place between the child
sexual exploitation team and the UK Border Agency at Robin Hood Airport to
raise awareness of child trafficking and child sexual exploitation.

There has been improvement in arrangements between police, social care
and other agencies to address concerns about children going missing and in
prioritising those children most at risk. Police undertake safe and well checks
to all children when they return. The trust has taken action in response to
poor performance by the service commissioned to complete return home
interviews. A new service commissioned in September 2015 from the
councils early help service. This is showing early signs of improvement with
an increase in children being visited. However, not all children are seen and
so far there is limited evidence of intelligence gathered being used to inform
individual safety plans for children and young people. Information is not yet
being extrapolated and analysed to identify patterns and trends to inform
wider safety planning.


The newly formed Children Missing Operational Group (CMOG) meets
monthly to share intelligence and discuss those children and young people
most at risk. The group has only been operational for three months and is
yet to secure full multi-agency attendance. Inspectors have, however, seen
some positive evidence of children being discussed resulting in protective
actions being taken, although these actions were without timescales, which
makes it difficult to hold agencies or professionals to account for and
prevent drift.


South Yorkshire Police have recently appointed two specialist officers to
support force awareness and recognition of female genital mutilation and
honour-based violence. There are no reported cases of female genital
mutilation in Doncaster. The trust has recently developed a female genital
mutilation task group that does not yet have representation from schools or
midwifery  critical partners if the group is to be effective.


The council is aware of its duties in relation to the Prevent strategy and
training has been provided to schools. In a small number of cases, concerns
have been identified by teachers and appropriately referred to agencies,
including the police. To date, this has not led to any young person being
identified as at risk of radicalisation.


Allegations against professionals who work with children are robustly
investigated. The role and function of the Designated Officer are well
understood across the partnership. Cases referred receive a timely and
robust response that ensures that children and young people are protected.


Private fostering is well publicised and targeted work to raise awareness has
been undertaken with schools, GPs and faith and community groups. In
arrangements, with five young people known to be in privately fostered at
the time of this inspection. On identification of private fostering
arrangements, the trust discharges its responsibilities in line with statutory


requirements, ensuring that children who are privately fostered are safe and
that their welfare is promoted.


When 16- and 17-year-old young people become homeless, they receive
effective support. Assessments undertaken by childrens social care are not,
however, compliant with case law, as the young people are not always fully
informed of their legal entitlements and support options.

The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
At the time of this inspection, there were 498 children in care in Doncaster. For some
children, including recent examples seen by inspectors, there has been drift and
delay in decision-making resulting in them not coming into care early enough. No
children were seen who should not be in care.
Targeted work has been undertaken to increase the use of Public Law Outline (PLO)
process and this is having some impact with significantly improved timeliness of care
proceedings. The use of pre proceedings PLO is not yet embedded and for a small
number of children early planning to identify and assess alternative carers is not
undertaken soon enough. The new edge of care service has been effective in
preventing some children from needing to become looked after.
Managers are not always sufficiently focused on progressing plans to secure
permanency for children and where children have exited care to be placed with
extended family members, plans for support and reviewing of progress have not
always been robust.
Increasing stability in the children in care teams means that most children know their
social workers well and they receive regular visits. For some other children, frequent
changes of worker continue to impact on their ability to develop effective
relationships with professionals.
Care plans are not routinely informed by updated assessments, and plans do not
always clearly represent the childs views, their current needs and how these will be
met. Childrens plans are reviewed regularly and within timescale. Independent
reviewing officers (IROs) monitor childrens progress and challenge poor practice
appropriately. Educational attainment for children in care is too variable and the gap
between them and their peers is not consistent. The Children in Care council has
only been effectively working in the last few months.
Children whose plan is for adoption receive a good service. Adopters receive good
support.
Services for care leavers have significantly improved. More work is needed to
improve the quality of Pathway planning, preparation for independence and the
quality of management oversight and to embed good practices that have recently
been put in place.


Inspection findings

The number of children in care in Doncaster is higher than that of statistical
neighbours but is reducing slowly. The relatively high number is in part due
to more effective work by the trust and partners in identifying children left in
abusive situations for too long. Some children are not receiving help soon
enough to prevent them from becoming looked after.


No children were in care who should not have been. In cases sampled
where children had recently become looked after, decisions made were
appropriate. Decisions are made at a suitably senior level and the rationale
for the decision is recorded. In a small number of cases, including recent
cases, there has been drift and delay in decision making and children should
have become looked after sooner.


The newly established Cromwell Drive edge of care service provides a
range of support to children and their families and these are making a
positive difference. Since February 2015, the team has worked with 23
children, preventing 18 of them from becoming looked after. The trust
acknowledges that more work is needed to further develop edge of care
services to support all children who can remain living with their family.


At the time of the inspection, there were only four cases in the preproceedings stage of PLO. In a small number of cases seen, decisions to
progress to PLO either were delayed or did not happen, meaning that for
some children early planning to identify and access alternative carers was
delayed. The trust has undertaken focused work to promote understanding
and use of the PLO process. Further work is needed, however, to ensure
that all cases that meet the threshold for PLO are benefiting from this
process. A tracker to monitor the progress of cases in PLO and proceedings
has only just been introduced and a case manager appointed to oversee this
work but this is too recent to evidence impact.


Appropriate measures have been taken to improve the quality of evidence
provided to the court. Further work is required to ensure a consistently high
standard in the quality of all court reports. The average duration of care
proceedings has reduced from 37 weeks in the quarter ending 31 March
inspection, the figure for cases in proceedings is better, at 22 weeks. This
represents significant improvement in reducing delay for children.
Relationships between social workers and childrens guardians have
improved, resulting in guardians attending key meetings where appropriate
and regular liaison when cases are in proceedings.


In the majority of cases seen where children return home to the care of a
parent, social workers undertake clear assessments and work to ensure that
the children are safe and their needs are met. There is focused and
coordinated support, underpinned by regular reviews, that ensures that
children experience stability and do not have further unplanned episodes of
care. Where children have exited care to be placed with extended family


members, children were appropriately placed but plans for support and
reviewing of progress are not always robust. This includes cases where
children were subject to supervision orders.

Plans for permanence are made at the second review but are not always
progressed as quickly as they should be. Decisions for adoption generally
progress well, but in other cases permanency planning is weak and is not
tracked or monitored by senior managers to ensure progress. The
independent reviewing service is effectively challenging delay and drift, but
a more robust system of management oversight would reduce the need for
such challenge from IROs and ensure permanent arrangements for children
were secured quickly.


Numbers of children being made subject of special guardianship orders
(SGOs) have significantly reduced, from 44 in 201314 to 30 in 201415 and
just five from 1 April to September. The trusts view is that this is explained
by an unusual peak in activity by the council in the previous two years to
address previous shortfalls in actively pursuing permanence for children.


Historically, children in Doncaster have experienced frequent changes of
social worker. This is still an issue for some children and has had a
significant impact on their ability to build effective relationships with
professionals. Increased stability in most teams means that this is
improving. Social workers see children regularly in the vast majority of
cases, meaning that they know the children they work with well. Some
impressive examples were seen of social workers working purposefully to
develop positive relationships with children and their families, which was
improving outcomes for these children. Social workers are committed to
understanding childrens experiences and supporting them to manage
complex needs, often through effective multi-agency packages of support.


The Independent Visitor Service is well established, with one coordinator
and 37 volunteers, all of whom are trained for the role. Children in care are
aware of the service. Currently, 30 children have an independent visitor,
three of whom are out of borough. There is a waiting list of nine children,
which indicates there is not sufficient capacity to meet demand.


The trust has a clear and well-targeted recruitment strategy in order to
enhance its in house fostering provision to meet current needs, but at the
time of inspection, there were insufficient foster placement s for children in
need of an emergency placement or for teenagers or sibling groups. The
findings of a recent Department for Education research project that involved
the trust working in partnership with seven Doncaster-based independent
fostering agencies inform the strategy. The trust is well on its way to
achieving its target of recruiting 20 additional foster carers this year. The
service is also aspirational and has workers seconded into two Department
for Education-funded projects aimed at providing 35 foster homes for young
people vulnerable to child sexual exploitation across South Yorkshire and to
promote placement stability by enhancing support to foster placements.


These are both in early stages of development and so cannot yet evidence
impact.

It is positive the trust has committed financial support in order to restructure
in-house residential services to provide places for children with complex
needs. The trust aims to reduce demand for residential places from 66 to
potential weakness.


A small cohort of older children who have very complex needs are subject to
frequent placement moves. Many of these young people have suffered longterm neglect and in a small number of cases, decisions about placement
moves were reactive rather than planned. Sometimes, this involved out of
authority placements that resulted in children continuing to go missing and
placing themselves at risk.


The recent fostering inspection provides a solid evidence base for the good
work of the fostering service in recruiting, assessing, supporting, reviewing
and retaining foster carers. It is an efficient well-managed service. Those
spoken to during this inspection were very positive about the high standard
of support they receive.


Family finding is informed by the assessed need of young people. Social
workers, fostering workers and the placement service work collaboratively to
match children to both short term and permanent carers. They are able to
consider all options including commissioned services and those managed by
the trust to ensure that childrens needs are met. Children with a
permanence plan for long-term fostering or adoption are subject to a similar
process, with matching forums making appropriate decisions about suitable
matches. The fostering or the adoption panel makes a considered
recommendation, which the Agency Decision Maker then uses to inform
their decision.


Children are placed with siblings where appropriate and comprehensive
together or apart assessments were evident as part of the permanence
planning process. Placement stability is improving and this is due to
improved quality of in-house foster carer provision and the standards
demanded of independent providers. Performance in relation to three moves
in a year has significantly improved reducing from 12% to 8% in 201415
standing at 5% in August 2015.


There is improving performance in the percentage of children who have
been in the same placement for two years. During 201314, 54% of children
had been looked after in the same placement for two years. This increased
to 56% during 201415 and to 67% in August 2015.


At the time of the inspection, 16% of children were placed more than 20
miles from home. This is a reduction from 19% in 201314 and in line with
the England average of 16%. Where it is in the childs or young persons
best interest, the trust has been working towards returning children where
possible to live within the borough.



Foster carers maintain memory books for foster children and the action plan
arising for the Annual Fostering Report 201415 addresses the need to
improve the quality of life story work for children in permanent foster
placements.


Childrens health needs are not assessed quickly enough when they enter
care. In 201415, only 28% of initial health assessments were undertaken
within 20 days of admission to care, and performance for quarter 1 of 2015
community paediatricians have contributed to poor performance. The trust is
aware of the problem and is taking steps to ensure that social workers in the
ACPS teams complete the consent forms in a timely way. The proportion of
children having review medical and dental assessments and immunisations is
above or in line with national averages. Health assessments of looked after
children are robust and leading to referrals to appropriate agencies when
needed. Inspectors saw some good examples where the nurse with
responsibility for children in care had developed very effective relationships
with young people and this is helping to ensure that their health needs are
met.


Children in care have good access to CAMHS. Where children do not meet
the threshold for CAMHS, therapeutic support is accessed through the trust
resource panel. Rotherham, Doncaster and South Humberside NHS
Foundation Trust (RDash) funds therapy for those children placed out of
borough who need it. In many cases, bespoke packages of therapeutic
intervention and CAMHS interventions were seen to be making a positive
difference for children.


Project 3 provides good quality health services for young people needing
help with sexual health, substance misuse and smoking. This service is
easily accessible for children looked after and children receive a speedy
response when needed.


The youth offending team (YOT) maintains effective working relationships
with children looked after with whom they work, including those out of area.
Custody rates for children looked after have reduced from a high rate in
compared with 0.52 per 1,000 nationally for the 1017 population. The trust
and YOT acknowledge that there is a need to further develop restorative
justice processes and reduce the criminalisation of children and young
people looked after and have appropriate plans in place to undertake this
work.


When children in care go missing from care, and for those at risk of child
sexual exploitation, strategy meetings are held in a timely and proportionate
way and result in coordinated multi-agency responses. Police are very
effective in terms of looking for children and in the use of abduction notices.
A dedicated children in care liaison officer, funded by the police and the
trust, focuses on building relationships with children who have been missing
from care to understand why and, and where they go and to ensure that


plans can be put in place to keep them safe. Care plans are not routinely
updated to reflect increasing risk; while most placements ensure robust risk
assessments are completed, this aspect of safety planning is not routinely
integral to the childs care plans.

The proportion of children looked after who attend a school that is good or
better is too low at 63%. The proportion of children in care who attend good
schools mirrors the position for all children in Doncaster, where 35% of
mainstream schools require improvement or are inadequate. In many cases,
children in care become looked after during their time at school and there is
effective liaison to ensure that childrens needs are met. They remain in their
existing school where their assessment supports this.


The quality of personal education plans (PEPs) is too variable and too many
lack the detail and clarity necessary to help drive the progress of children
and young people. Weaker PEPs do not adequately record an assessment of
the childs needs, capture their views or set sufficiently detailed and
measurable targets. PEPs are quality assured by the virtual school and
recommendations for improvement made. This has not yet had a significant
impact on improving their quality. The assessment of childrens needs
through PEPs has led to some additional support through the use of pupil
premium in the form of 1:1 tuition in English and mathematics and support
for teachers in managing attachment difficulties. The additional tuition has
had mixed success but schools report that the attachment training has
helped them to make improvements to childrens behaviour and learning.


Educational attainment for children in care is too variable and the gap
between these children and their peers is not consistently reducing year on
year. At age five, 41.7% make good progress compared with 65.3% of all
children in Doncaster. By the end of Key Stage 1, these children perform
less well than their peers do nationally, especially in reading and writing.
Attainment at the end of Key Stage 2 has improved and the proportions that
leave primary school with a good level of skills in reading, writing and
mathematics is better than for children looked after nationally.


The attainment of children in care at Key Stage 4 is too low and is not
improving well enough. The proportion of children in care gaining five GCSEs
at grades A* to C in 201314, including English and mathematics, was 15%,
above the national average for children in care of 12%. The unvalidated
results for 201415 indicate a drop to 8.75%, well below the unvalidated
national figure of 52.8% for all children. The virtual school recognises that
more focused work is needed to support children in care at secondary
school. In response, the council has appointed a senior raising achievement
officer with appropriate expertise to ensure earlier and targeted intervention
to support children with their secondary education.


The virtual school monitors closely the school attendance of children in care.
As a result, most children have good attendance. They miss fewer school
days than children in Doncaster as a whole do and fewer children in care are
persistently absent. There have been no permanent exclusions of children in


care during 201415, but the number of days lost due to exclusion has
increased in 201415. The virtual school recognises that work conducted in
primary schools to support children to settle to learn needs to be replicated
in secondary schools. Children for whom attendance at school is difficult
have access to appropriate alternative provision. The local authority has
robust processes in place to quality assure providers of alternative
programmes. Children who are temporarily unable to access 25 hours of
education per week have appropriate plans in place to help them move
towards a full-time programme. Five young people were receiving less than
programmes that met their needs. While the progress of these children is
monitored, record keeping is not clear and it is difficult to assess their
progress.

The council holds detailed records of those children receiving alternative
education and for those missing from education. There are currently 41
children missing from education. The council has clear and detailed
processes in place for establishing their whereabouts culminating in referral
to the police. Education representatives attend the newly formed Children
Missing Operational Group (CMOG) and effectively share information on
those missing from school.


The council has sound processes for managing transitions when children
move out of the local area. The quality of schools and the needs of young
people are considered carefully before a school is selected. However, the
virtual school lacks the resources to be proactively involved in close
monitoring of out of area children once they are settled and only become
involved if the receiving school alerts them to a problem.


All children and young people in care receive a book of discount vouchers
for local shops and amenities several times a year. Children in care receive
some additional support to help them access social and recreational
activities for example, gym membership paid for or support to complete the
Duke of Edinburgh award. This is not well-coordinated nor overseen or
supported by corporate parents.


The fostering and adoption service has developed groups and youth clubs
for children in care and adopted children to attend which they enjoy. Foster
carers are provided with clear written guidance about delegated authority
and are routinely encouraged by their supervising social worker to raise any
questions they may have about this issue. Some children spoken to felt that
delegated authority should be managed better.


Care plans are not routinely informed by up-to-date assessments. Social
work reports written for statutory reviews are seen as the mechanism for
updating assessments, but these reports do not provide a holistic
assessment of need. A small number of children with complex needs had
experienced multiple placement moves without a thorough assessment of
their needs being completed. Training to improve the quality of assessment
work has taken place and is seen to be having an impact in some cases, but


the quality of assessments remains too variable ranging from inadequate to
good.

Actions and updates from reviews are not always translated into plans. This
means that plans are not always presented in a way that makes it clear
what the childs needs are, how these will be met and who is doing what
and by when. Most plans seen are very detailed with regard to the childs
background, health, and education. Plans are not easily accessible for
children and young people and they are not routinely engaged in the
development of their care plans. The trust has recognised this and work is
underway to develop a new template for care plans, and to develop an app
to support engagement with planning. This was not in place at the time of
the inspection. Plans seen that are good, are timely and updated to include
changing needs.


Contact arrangements are set out in care plans and there is effective
consideration of childrens contact with family at reviews and in planning.
This ensures that children have contact with those who are important to
them. Care plans could more clearly address the intended outcomes of
contact to ensure that plans are demonstrating how contact is meeting
childrens needs.


Looked after reviews are held regularly and within timescale. There has
been a steady increase in the timeliness of children in care reviews rising
from 79.1% in 201314 to 98.4% in 201516. In 201415, 62% of children
aged over four years attended their review, an increase from 19% in 2013
young peoples views were represented in 95% of reviews. Parents were
seen to be appropriately involved in reviews and there are some good
examples of childrens wishes informing planning for reviews, for example in
deciding who will be invited to attend, and one young person using a Power
Point presentation to chair the review.


Independent reviewing officers (IROs) caseloads are manageable and
stability in this team provides children and young people with a consistent
IRO. IROs monitor the progress of plans at reviews and are able to track
childrens progress between reviews. They are increasingly challenging poor
practice particularly in relation to drift and delay of childrens plans. A new
dispute resolution policy is now in place but concerns and issues raised
through informal and formal processes are only just beginning to be
analysed. As a result, themes emerging have not been collated to inform
improvements in practice.


Recording on childrens files is up to date and in most cases seen, records
are very detailed, including when children are seen alone. Childrens views,
wishes and feelings, however, are not consistently well represented on their
record. Case recording does not routinely relate to the care plan nor always
address its progress. Chronologies are not always completed and do not
always contain a clear and coherent record of the key events in a childs life.



The Children in Care council has only been running for four months and
there has not been sufficient time for it to have had a demonstrable impact
on services for children in care. The group is dynamic and articulate and has
clear plans on how they want to develop the group to ensure maximum
impact. The newly appointed participation officer supports the group well.


Cases were seen where there had been good responses to childrens needs
arising from diversity, including ensuring that childrens cultural and religious
needs are met and their views taken into account in planning placements. A
small number of examples were seen where issues of identity, specific needs
in relation to learning disability and the needs of children with autism have
not been addressed well.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

On 1 October 2014, the Doncaster adoption service became a voluntary
adoption agency (VAA). The agency was judged as providing a good service
in an inspection conducted by Ofsted in August 2015.


There is a dedicated adoption team staffed by a stable and experienced
workforce, with a good level of management oversight and a knowledgeable
team manager who tracks and monitors performance. This helps to ensure
that adoption processes are timely and of good quality.


When children are unable to return to the care of their birth family, they are
considered for adoption and where this would meet their assessed needs it
is pursued for them. There is an improving trend in the timeliness of children
placed for adoption. In the three-year period from 20112013, the average
time between entering care and placement was 632 days. Although this did
not meet the national threshold of 547 days, it is in line with the average
figure achieved nationally of 628 days. The latest 201415 in-year figure
reported by the trust is 522 days. For the most recent period, April to
September 2015, a further reported fall to 491 days provides further
evidence that the trend is one of improvement.


Performance with regard to the average time between placement order and
matching was 264 days in 201415. The latest 201516 information, for
April to September 2015, shows slight improvement reducing to 250 days.
This compares with the latest England data for 201415 of 234 days, which
is nearly double the national threshold of 121 days. The trust is clear that
this performance relates to their commitment to placing sibling groups and
children with complex needs for adoption. Nine sibling groups were placed
during 201415 and a further three sibling groups have been placed since
the 1 April 2015. Of the 24 children currently awaiting a match, 12 are part
of a sibling group and four have complex needs.


As part of the transfer arrangements from the local authority to the trust
and the VAA, an audit was undertaken of all children subject to a placement


order. With the agreement of the childrens IRO, revocation orders were
applied for relating to 11 children. Alternative plans of long-term fostering
are agreed for these children. The progress of plans for children who need
an adoptive placement is now closely tracked and monitored.

Once the Agency Decision Maker has agreed the adoption plan, all possible
preparatory work is undertaken so that when the placement order is
granted, family finding for an appropriate match can commence quickly.
Where an in-house match is unavailable, children are immediately referred
to the local consortium and to Adoption Link and the Adoption Register.


The number of adoptions has been increasing in Doncaster: 27 children
were adopted in 201213; this figure rose to 36 in 201415. The increase is
likely to continue as 15 adoption orders have already been granted at the
time of this inspection and a further 37 children are currently placed for
adoption. Doncaster now compares favourably with the national level of
adoptions with 21% of the children who ceased being in care in 201415
being adopted in Doncaster compared with 17% nationally. Concurrent
planning is well established in the trust and currently there are three
children placed in fostering to adopt placements, with two other children
adopted since 1 April 2015.


The recent VAA inspection report, published in August 2015, provides a solid
evidence base for the good work of the adoption service in recruiting and
assessing prospective adopters and of the adoption panel in approving
adopters and matching children. The VAA has a number of adopters
approved for up to two years and they have made a deliberate decision to
only progress applicants who are willing to adopt children who are: three
years or older; part of a sibling group; have complex needs; or live outside
Doncaster. This has significantly reduced the numbers of applicants
progressing from stage one. Since 1 April 2015, 13 adopters have been
approved and currently eight of the 13 are at stage one and only one at
stage two. Managers acknowledge that a key issue in approving adopters in
timescale during stage one is the delay in securing medical reports from
some applicants GPs and then in securing the medical advisers report. A
different commissioning arrangement is now under consideration. The
average time from stage two to approval is 127 days, which is line with
nationally set thresholds.


Two qualified social workers trained in Theraplay contribute to the delivery
of a good range of adoption support. Two social work assistants with an
intensive family support background also provide support. Currently, there
are 32 families, involving 37 children, who are receiving some form of
adoption support. No adopters are waiting for support. There are three
adoption support groups to support adopters and children of different ages.
Therapeutic support, if not available through CAMHS, is commissioned from
specialist agencies; nine applications have been made to the Adoption
Support Fund. Adopters spoken to were all positive about the support they
had received. The service routinely consults with adopters and adopted


children about the nature and quality of services and this has led to changes
in how these services are delivered.

Where permanence is agreed, social workers plan and support contact well
and in the best interests of children. There are robust arrangements in place
for the management of the current 534 letterbox contacts. This can involve
advice and support to birth parents to ensure that the exchanges are of
good quality. Adopted adults and birth parents receive support from a
commissioned adoption support agency.


Life story work with children is of good quality and is completed by trained
social work assistants. Life story books seen were written in child-friendly
language and contained many significant memory prompts, including a
range of photographs.


The trust currently has a policy that, once a child is placed for adoption, the
adopters social worker and the childs social workers alternate statutory
visits to the child. This confuses the roles of the respective practitioners and
does not ensure that such visits are undertaken in line with statutory
guidance.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that they require improvement

In December 2014, following consultation with care leavers, the trust
changed the teams remit to an 18 plus service. The team moved premises
to the centre of Doncaster, co-located with the youth offending service. This
has increased access for young adults to the service, but not all young
people are positive about its location with the youth offending service. The
redesign of the service provided an enhanced focus on the needs of older
care leavers. Although there has been a determined drive by the trust to
improve outcomes, the previous systemic failures and the scale of work
required to achieve this across the service means that there is more to do to
ensure that good services for all young people leaving care are available.


At the time of the inspection, there were 190 care leavers aged between 18
and 25 years. All young people in care are encouraged by their social
workers to stay in their placement after they reach 18 years of age. The
recent implementation of a staying put policy has resulted in 22 young
people remaining with their carers post-18. Young people report that if their
first attempt at independence is unsuccessful the trust will support them to
find suitable supported accommodation. A legacy of poor practice in placing
some young people in unsuitable accommodation before they were ready for
independence has resulted in a number of young people losing their
tenancies.


Increasingly, care leavers have access to a range of appropriate
accommodation: 89% live in suitable accommodation, which is a higher


proportion than statistical neighbours and the national average. The majority
live either independently, with parents and relatives or in supported
lodgings. The trust has a policy not to place young people in bed and
breakfast accommodation. At the time of the inspection, no young people
were in bed and breakfast accommodation. Five care leavers in custody
receive support and regular visits by their personal advisers (PAs). More
work is required to improve the quality of care leavers needs assessments
and preparation for independence at an earlier stage. The trust has
accepted that this work is vital in ensuring that care leavers receive
accommodation that meets their specific requirements to prevent future
homelessness.

Many young people now receive flexible and tailored support to help them
achieve independence. For example, regional consortium commissioning
arrangements are effective in increasing and procuring bespoke
accommodation to meet the needs of young people with mental health
difficulties or those at risk of sexual exploitation. Inspectors saw examples of
care leavers with additional needs continuing to receive floating support,
enabling them to live independently. Care leavers spoken to report that
while they felt safe in their accommodation, previous options were limited,
resulting in accommodation in hard to let areas in the borough. Most of
them reported satisfaction with the quality of accommodation and the level
of support provided by their PAs.


Concerted efforts by the trust have significantly increased the number of
care leavers the trust is in touch with. In 2014, the council had no
information about the whereabouts of 31% of care leavers. This has now
been reduced to three young people with whom the trust has no direct
contact: a 19-year-old missing asylum seeker and two 20-year-olds who
have left the area. Tracking young people who are in touch via a third party
is effective. Inspectors saw examples of persistent attempts, by committed
PAs, to engage young people.


Care leavers benefit from a personalised dedicated health service specifically
for young people up to the age of 19. This supports transition into adulthood
and promotes independence in accessing heath care. Each young person
has an allocated key practitioner providing access to a wide range of helpful
advice. This includes support for their health needs, including their sexual
and emotional health, and help to reduce risk-taking behaviours such as
substance misuse. Contact varies depending on the level of need, nurses
from the looked after service will track and visit young people at home.


Health staff can access reports on the Doncaster Childrens Services Trusts
(DCST) electronic system to inform their health plans for individuals.
Children in care health champions, along with the child sexual exploitation
nurse specialists, meet bi-monthly and focus on improving practice.
Nineteen of 20 young people eligible to receive their leaving care health
summary between February 2015 and the end of July 2015 did so.



Financial support for setting up home is available and additional funding is
obtainable via the resource panel if required. Care leavers spoken to
confirmed that they have access to their health histories and most are
provided with key documents such as passports, national insurance numbers
and birth certificates. The trust pays for 10 driving lessons and full drivers
licences, which has increased job prospects for some young people. Care
leavers report that this is unattainable for many, as they cannot afford to
purchase the provisional licence. Young people told inspectors they are
aware of their entitlements but information is not available in writing.


Management oversight of systems to monitor the quality of services is weak.
Managers do not have a strong grip on the quality of individual work or the
quality of the care leavers experiences. They do not routinely undertake
case audits of the work within the team. Supervision in all cases sampled
has been infrequent. Actions have not been clearly recorded or sufficiently
reviewed. Newly appointed managers are beginning to utilise performance
information to drive up practice. This is a considerable improvement, as
previously the local authority did not have information on the actual
numbers of care leavers they were responsible for.


At the time of inspection, 98% of care leavers had a current pathway plan,
but the quality of the plans seen is too variable. Most pathway plans seen do
not focus sufficiently on reducing risk and many lacked analysis and did not
focus on outcomes. For example, the educational component of pathway
plans does not focus realistically on educational next steps or on gaining
purposeful employment. The voice of the young person is not evident and
plans are not sufficiently specific or measurable. Few plans make any
meaningful comment on the culture and identity of care leavers.


A legacy of poor practice has resulted in some young people leaving school
without the skills required to engage in further education and training or to
enter the job market. Seven of the eight young people who met with
inspectors are currently not in education, employment or training (NEET).
The most recent data show that 56% of care leavers are in education,
employment or training, an improvement from 28% in 20134. This
improvement may be in part the result of the trust now being in touch with
significantly more care leavers than the council was previously. Insufficient
effort is made to monitor and support children in care and care leavers post16. There are currently 14 young people in higher education. Four young
people are following a traineeship programme in the council with the aim of
preparing them to take up an apprenticeship. There are 15 young people
accessing apprenticeships, eight of which are with the council. Three young
people have moved from apprenticeships into employment.


The Children Missing Operational Group (CMOG) considers young adults at
risk of sexual exploitation and those who are missing. The monthly missing
persons report provided by South Yorkshire Police includes young adults
reported as being missing including those placed with the semi-supported
living providers. In order to ensure that vulnerable care leavers at risk are
properly supported, an experienced, qualified social worker in care leavers


team provides additional support for PAs in co-working more complex cases,
focusing on young people at risk of sexual exploitation, those with mental
health problems and young parents.

In April 2015, a formal event to celebrate the achievements of children in
care and care leavers was held. Local dignitaries and celebrities from
Doncaster Rovers Football Club Team, a Paralympic sports medal winner and
a former care leaver attended to present prizes.


A young peoples participation forum was launched June 2014. The Hear by
Rights action plan is being implemented and reviewed. A children in care
and care leavers interview panel has been established and three care leavers
identified to be young person advisers to the Chief Executive of DCST. While
these are positive developments to involve young people in service
development, it is too soon to evaluate impact.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Services for children and young people in Doncaster are improving. For many years,
they have been characterised by extensive and persistent failures. There is a legacy
of children and young people not receiving the right help at the right time or being
left in risky or neglectful circumstances for too long. Since the establishment of
DCST, improvement is evident across a range of services. Senior leaders understand
the service and improvement plans focus on the right areas to build sustainable
improvement. Political will to improve services for children and young people is
evident and the current Mayor and the council have made this a priority.
Social work vacancies have reduced, as has reliance on agency staff. Improving
performance is evident in relation to the timeliness of initial child protection case
conferences, visits to children in care, services for children and young people at risk
of sexual exploitation or who are missing, the number of care leavers the trust is in
touch with and an increasing number of children are placed for adoption. All children
and young people have an allocated social worker. Staff morale has improved with
social workers speaking positively about working in Doncaster.
The establishment of Team Doncaster, the strategic partnership of statutory, private
and voluntary organisations, has strengthened partnership working and has
increased the focus on improving services for children and young people. However,
there have been delays in the development and implementation of key strategies
such as the early help strategy.
Improvements are not yet embedded across all operational teams. Quality of practice
is not consistently good for all children and young people and some childrens
circumstances do not improve quickly enough. Some social workers caseloads are
too high. Performance management systems are underdeveloped and do not support
managers in properly understanding where performance is weaker. Management
oversight through supervision is inconsistent and sometimes weak.
Delay in developing the councils early help service has led to some children not
getting help soon enough. The council has not been a sufficiently informed or
tenacious corporate parent for the children and young people it cares for. Historically
elected members have been insufficiently involved in the corporate parenting panel.
Inspection findings

Following the inadequate judgement of the Ofsted inspection of Doncasters
child protection services in 2012, Doncaster Council commissioned an
improvement partner to work with them to improve services for children and
young people. Although the council considered progress was being made,


the Department for Education and the Department for Local Communities
jointly commissioned a review into how childrens services should be
delivered. The review, conducted by Professor Julian Le Grande, described a
context of serious, extensive and persistent failures in the delivery of
services to children and families in Doncaster extending over many years.
Professor Le Grandes report described a culture of failure and
disillusionment and considered that this culture contributed to staff absence,
sickness and discouraged the retention of good staff.

In response to Professor Le Grandes report, the then Secretary of State for
Education made a Direction in August 2013 that an independent trust should
be established. In November 2013, the Secretary of State and the cabinet of
Doncaster Council agreed a memorandum of understanding. In February
operational on 30 September 2014.


The trust is responsible for delivering services for children and young people
who are in need of help and protection or who are looked after, with the
exception of services for disabled children, the virtual school for children
looked after and early help, which have remained the responsibility of
Doncaster Metropolitan Council. DCST is also a registered independent
fostering agency and VAA. The trust inherited over 500 staff from the
council.


The Mayor and her senior leadership team acknowledge the historical failure
of services for children and the need for their improvement. On her election
in May 2013, the Mayor made improving outcomes for children her top
priority. During this inspection, inspectors have seen considerable crossparty political desire and commitment to deliver better outcomes for children
and families. Scrutiny arrangements reflect cross party membership to
ensure robust oversight and challenge.


The Mayor and the chief executive of the council have engaged with
government, officers and partners to review and improve services. Following
the direction made in August 2013, elected members and officers of the
council made concerted efforts to develop the trust, meeting the deadline
set by government, resulting in the trust going live on 30 September 2014.
The Mayor, lead member and elected members spoken to during this
inspection were all able to describe well the successes and challenges faced
by the trust and council. The chair of the scrutiny committee summed up the
position of the council: everyone appreciates the gravity of the situation and
that there isnt another chance to get this right.


The trust is accountable to the Secretary of State for Education. The Chair of
the Trust Board provides a six monthly report to the Department for
Education. The Trust Board and the sub-committees that sit below it  in
particular, the Workforce and Professional Standards committee and the
Children, Young People and Families committee  undertake internal
monitoring of trust performance. Reports completed by the Trust Chair to


the Secretary of State, in January and July 2015, reviewed by inspectors,
demonstrate a realistic reflection of practice and progress made. The reports
note that thresholds are not understood by partners, social work practice is
variable and although case audits show some improvement, the number of
cases judged good remain low. Inspectors would concur with this view.

The government Direction notice determines the services commissioned
from the trust by the council. Lines of governance are set out in the contract
that has been drafted in response to that Direction. The contract sets out
clear expectations for improvement, requiring inspection judgements to
reach requires improvement by April 2016, good by October 2017 and
outstanding by October 2019. A range of formal reporting mechanisms
between the trust and council are evident with monthly and quarterly
performance meetings that monitor progress against the contractual
requirements. Meeting minutes show appropriate attendance at a senior
level with the chief executives of the council and trust, the director for
childrens services and lead member all in attendance, as well as senior
officers. Meeting minutes show evidence of scrutiny of performance and
appropriate challenge. In addition, the contract is reviewed annually. The
first review was scheduled for early November.


While monitoring arrangements are dictated by the contract, there is
evidence of maturing relationships and a growing trust between elected
members, council officers and senior leaders of the trust. This was
demonstrated during this inspection with keep in touch meetings with the
lead inspector attended by both the director for childrens services and
senior managers of the trust. A decision by the council to invest 500,000,
at the request of the trust, to refurbish Doncasters childrens homes is
evidence of positive relationships and a shared ambition to improve services
for children and young people. A further example is the consideration by the
council of corporate support they might offer to the trust in its effort to
recruit foster carers.


Strategic planning in Doncaster has been strengthened through the
establishment of Team Doncaster. The four key partnerships are the
Children and Families Board, Enterprising Doncaster Board, Health and
Wellbeing Board and Safer and Stronger Doncaster Board. Clear links have
been established across the key partnerships and this is demonstrated
through improved collaboration in developing strategic plans, including, for
example, the recent Joint Strategic Partnership Commissioning Plan for
Children.


The strategic arrangements for commissioning in Doncaster are relatively
new. The arrangements are appropriate and are likely to streamline and
simplify commissioning. The new Joint Strategic Partnership Commissioning
Plan for Children 20152016 was due to be finalised on 7 October 2015.
Commissioning arrangements will also include third sector providers through
a reference group coordinated by a newly appointed market development
officer. Quality assurance of commissioned services is already well
established with robust arrangements through a framework, which works


across local authorities within Yorkshire, developing the service provision
and decommissioning where necessary. This commissioning framework looks
at Independent Fostering Agency provision, 16+ services and services for
children and young people with special educational needs. Where necessary
and appropriate, services have been decommissioned, including a project for
sexualised behaviour and a service for children missing.

While work has taken place to review the Children and Young Peoples
Partnership Boards responsibilities, function and interface with other bodies,
such as the Health and Wellbeing Board, there is still more to be done. The
lack of coordinated strategic drive has led to developments, such as the
early help strategy, being delayed. This results in children not always getting
the service they need at the right time and too many assessed by childrens
social care who do not meet the threshold for a statutory service.


The annual Children and Young Peoples Needs Assessment (CYPNA) is key
to informing the Team Doncaster partnership. While the CYPNA provides the
strategic assessment, it is acknowledged that more specific assessments are
also needed. Links are in place between the Local Safeguarding Children
Board (LSCB) and the Health and Wellbeing Board, which receives the LSCB
annual report. Minutes of the Health and Wellbeing Board meetings show
attention to children and young peoples issues. An example of this is the
redesign of the integrated substance misuse service, which included the
commissioning of a service for children and young people affected by
parental substance misuse. Initial evaluation shows positive impact for
children and their parents and a second cohort has just begun the
programme.


The trust has been successful in attracting funding for four key innovative
projects: Growing Futures; the Empower and Protect scheme; the Mocking
Bird scheme; and Pause. Each scheme is designed to tackle a key priority
area for Doncaster such as domestic abuse, child sexual exploitation and
mothers who have multiple children removed from their care. Although in
their early stages of development, there is already some evidence of early
impact.


Management oversight of practice through supervision is inconsistent and
often weak. The trust is aware that consistently good quality work is still to
be achieved. In a small number of cases where practice is poor, inspectors
saw uncoordinated work between the police and social care to plan section
children were left in situations where risk was not assessed or insufficient
progress had been to reduce risk.


Similar issues in relation to the consistency of social work practice are seen
in the children with disabilities team run by the council. An improvement
plan is in place. The council and trust recognise closer alignment between
the children with disabilities team, the response and referral team and ACPS
teams is required to improve recognition and responses to disabled children
who may be at risk.



The trust and council understand their services and recognise where
progress has been slower and practice needs to strengthen. Steps have
been taken to ensure that the foundations for improvement have been put
in place, stabilising the workforce, investing in the signs of safety model,
setting up a training programme for managers and designing a new locality
based structure that promises to address some of the capacity issues in the
ACPS teams identified during this inspection. Morale is mainly positive. Most
social workers who spoke to inspectors reflected very positively about their
experience of working in Doncaster and consider they feel more valued and
supported.


Children and young people have told the trust and inspectors of the impact
frequent changes of social worker has made on their ability to develop
relationships with them and that it has contributed to the drift and delay
experienced by some children and young people seen during this inspection.
The trust has rightly focused on stabilising the social work workforce. The
picture is improving, with vacancies now standing at just below 5%
compared with slightly over 30% at the point of transfer to the trust.
Reliance on agency staff has reduced from 13% in October 2014 to 9.5% in
September 2015, which is lower than the national rate of 15% in September
workers while recruitment to vacancies is completed. In recognition of this,
agency workers were included in the assessment centre held in January.
There is an indication of growing confidence within the trust workforce
evidenced by 12 agency workers transferring their employment to the trust.


Performance information systems and reporting arrangements inherited by
the trust from the council were not fit for purpose. These are now
developing and provide team managers, service managers and the senior
leadership team with a range of basic management/performance reports.
The trust recognises that this is an area of development. There is a clear
action plan established to both improve the suite of reports provided to
managers, and to develop managers understanding and ability to use the
information they receive to improve their services.


Effective relationships exist between the trust, Cafcass and the courts. The
local Family District Judge sees senior managers as responsive and reports
an improvement in the quality of social work in care proceedings and a
noticeable improvement in the stability of the workforce. The trust has been
effective in reducing the timescales of court proceedings, which now stand
at 22 weeks, reducing delay in achieving permanence for children.


A quality assurance and learning framework is now in place. The trust has
invested in training a group of auditors to improve the quality and
consistency of judgement in case file auditing. Audits of case files conducted
by senior managers for this inspection were in the main secure, identified
strengths and shortfalls and largely accorded with the views of inspectors.


The trust, council and wider partners have a number of vehicles for
collecting feedback from young people to inform service design and delivery.


Young peoples views are included in the training and development strategy
as to what makes a good social worker. Children and young people have
been involved in the design of the new CAMHS and influenced the mental
health and Wellbeing strategy. Similarly, meetings with parents and children,
as well as the use of Survey Monkey to review the autism pathway, have
resulted in improved family support and more timely assessments for
children with complex needs. Four Young Advisors, who have experience of
using social care services, meet with the chief executive of the trust
regularly and the Big Summer Survey received 50 responses from children
and young people who had receive services from the trust. Their feedback
will inform practice and act as a benchmark for future surveys. Elected
members and staff attend Total Respect training and 14 young people are
trained to participate in staff interviews.

Previously, corporate parenting arrangements within the council have been
ineffective. Historically, there has been reluctance on the part of elected
members to take on this role underpinned by difficult relationships with
childrens social care. The council recognises this and has recently revised
the terms of reference of the corporate parenting board and appointed a
new chair. Elected members awareness in respect of their role and
responsibilities as corporate parents is improving, with 12 elected members
involved in the board. They have been supported by mandatory training.
Twenty-seven elected members have attended specific corporate parenting
training. While these changes are positive, they are too recent to evidence
any impact.


The trust recognises its own role as corporate parents to the children who
they care for. Recent trust board meetings have included a video of children
in foster care talking about their experiences, a meeting with foster carers
and younger children and a presentation by a birth child of a fostering
family.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement

Executive summary
Summary
Doncaster Safeguarding Children Board (DSCB) has made progress from the low
base found at the last inspection in 2012. There have been improvements made in
most areas but some aspects of the work remain weak. Many of the
recommendations from the 2012 inspection are complete but not all. The Board
recognises where deficits remain and are actively addressing these areas in order to
ensure the Board is fully effective.
The new, experienced DSCB Chair has brought a high degree of challenge to the
Board. There is now more engagement from partner agencies and a culture of
challenge is evident. Examples of some better work has led to improvements in the
coordination of multi-agency work in relation to child sexual exploitation, tackling the
serious deficiencies in multi-agency early help work; and reviewing safeguarding
arrangements in local schools. The quality of multi-agency training has improved
leading to increased take up by agencies. The section 11 audit currently underway is
following a more robust process than previously. Much of this work is very recent
and although positive, the influence of the Board in contributing to changes in
safeguarding practice in Doncaster is limited at this time.
Audit and performance information reports are not sufficiently detailed or analytical
to be helpful in confirming progress, identifying trends or highlighting concerns that
enable the Board to develop further or to challenge partners where this is required.
Understanding the needs of those children suffering neglect and those young people
admitted to hospital because of self-harm and suicide attempts remain areas for
more work. The Board also recognises that to further improve, the experience of the
child must remain at the centre of activities; improvement in the representation in
Board activities by the voluntary sector and a clear communications strategy needs
to be developed to publicise the work of the Board.

Recommendations

Monitor partner agencies contribution to early help through robust audit and
tracking of the number of early help assessments completed and lead
professional roles undertaken.



Monitor partner agencies understanding and application of thresholds for
referral to childrens social care by case audit and the scrutiny of
performance data.


Ensure that high quality performance data is available and robust analysis
occurs to enable the Board to have a good understanding of child protection
and safeguarding activities across Doncaster.


Ensure there is a programme of audits, and re-audits, to identify the
strengths in multi-agency practice and where weaknesses are identified
these are addressed promptly.


Ensure the challenge log is effective in evidencing areas of concern that
have been raised, addressed and show what improvements have been made
as a result.


Undertake a review of those children and young people admitted to hospital
for self-harm and attempted suicide to determine reasons that will inform
suitable preventative work.


Improve the measurement of the impact of the DSCB work, including
ensuring the experience of the child is at the centre of partnership working
and monitoring of activities


Implement a system to evaluate the effectiveness of training delivered and
monitor the impact on practitioners work.


Develop a communication strategy for the Board to ensure that the work of
the Board is well publicised and that the learning identified through the
Boards scrutiny and review functions is disseminated across the childrens
services workforce and the communities in Doncaster.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Serious failures were identified in the functioning of the Doncaster
Safeguarding Children Board (DSCB) at the time of the last Ofsted inspection
of childrens services in 2012. Agency cooperation and joint planning
continued to deteriorate following the inspection; recommendations made
were not responded to in full, nor within the timescale, set by Ofsted. At the
time of this inspection, most of those recommendations are now
implemented. For instance, the annual business plan now includes all the
key priorities of the Board and the subgroups have realistic plans, which are
being monitored. Other recommendations are still to be fully addressed.
Performance data is not yet comprehensive with only limited analysis
provided for consideration by the Board. This hampers the Boards ability to
influence, change or challenge poor performance. Compliance by all
agencies with multi-agency thresholds has been subject to a one off
evaluation but has not been regularly monitored which means the Board
cannot be certain of compliance being sustained.


The DSCB Chair took up his post in January 2014. He quickly developed a
plan to improve the participation of all agencies in strategic planning and
provided clarity in respect of individual responsibility and accountability.
Members of the Board confirmed that this change in expectation of
individuals and partner agencies is now making a difference to the way the
Board is operating. Initially, there was delay in improving the work of the
DSCB, in major part, due to changes at a strategic level in childrens services
at that time. Since the launch of the Doncaster Childrens Trust in October
particular, around child sexual exploitation during this inspection. Some key
aspects of the DSCBs work remain under-developed with more needing to
be achieved to demonstrate a positive and sustainable influence on the
safety of children and young people in Doncaster.


An effective protocol is in place detailing the responsibilities of the DSCB,
Health and Wellbeing Board, Children and Families Strategic Partnership
Board, and the School, Children and Young People Overview and Scrutiny
Panel. The protocol requires that appropriate communication and
discussions occur across the strategic bodies. There is also developing
partnership working between the DSCB and other partnership groups,
including the Adult Safeguarding Board, the Health and Wellbeing Board,
and Safer and Stronger Communities. The agreement of a set of shared
priorities between these strategic groups has resulted in initiatives on
hidden harm and health improvement campaigns on safe sleeping and
smoking in pregnancy being developed. DSCB has also worked with Safer
Doncaster to respond to specific local issues that have arisen in Doncaster.
This includes some innovative work to tackle domestic abuse and awareness
of road safety issues.


The Chair has regular meetings with key individuals including the chief
executive and lead member of Doncaster Metropolitan Council, the director
of childrens services and the chief executive of the Childrens Trust. All of
these individuals report that these meetings are challenging. However, they
are not minuted to evidence the actions agreed.


There are five DSCB subgroups focusing on: child sexual exploitation;
workforce development, including training; faith and culture; learning and
improvement; and the child death overview panel (CDOP). There is also a
Chairs subgroup that coordinates the work of the Board and it does this
well. All of the subgroups have terms of reference and action plans to
implement the priorities of the Board. Inspectors saw that minutes of all of
the subgroups are detailed and clearly identify and agree actions.
Membership of all of the subgroups and the main board is broadly
representative of the statutory agencies, though the voluntary sector is
significantly under-represented on the Board. Inspectors spoke to lay
members on the Board who are experienced in wider childrens work. They
were able to confirm that more recently, they have seen a change in the
way the Board operates describing it as an active board and this is an
improvement.



The main partner agencies contribute appropriately to the Boards budget.
This includes financially supporting five members of staff from the DSCB
budget, which enables the Board to discharge its duties effectively.


The Board has four main priorities, but these are too general and do not
sufficiently identify the most important areas of multi-agency safeguarding,
which require improvement locally. For instance, although neglect is a
significant feature in many child protection plans, there is not a neglect
strategy to coordinate the contribution of the partner agencies. There are
also a significant number of children and young people admitted to hospital
for self-harm and attempted suicide, and this is not on the Boards agenda.


A private company is commissioned to produce the multi-agency Child
Protection Procedures and these are completed to a good standard. The
DSCB also commissions task and finish groups to ensure that the procedures
are updated to reflect local need: for instance, groups met recently to
update the missing children and female genital mutilation procedures. The
Chair of the Board has also considered the procedures and confirms that
while they are not always localised they are fit for purpose.


Under the new national guidance for local safeguarding boards, published
earlier this year, DSCBs have the responsibility of having an overview of
early help services. In response to these new responsibilities, the Chair and
the DSCB significantly challenged all of the partner agencies over the poor
early help services in Doncaster and the lack of significant progress in
tackling the serious and systemic weaknesses. The DSCB commissioned an
external review of early help services. The subsequent report identified
inadequate cases and highlighted significant concerns about early help work
across the agencies, including the poor understanding of thresholds.
Subsequent work by the Board has acted as an excellent catalyst to launch
the new early help framework and operational arrangements across the
partner agencies.


The faith and culture subgroup, which was introduced this year, has begun
to engage with faith and ethnic minority communities. A set of safeguarding
standards and an audit tool have been developed, but it is too early to
determine any impact. Similarly, a conference with representatives from the
minority ethnic communities of Doncaster is planned to be delivered two
weeks after this inspection is completed. While it is positive that the Board
through the Faith and Culture subgroup has undertaken some promising
work it is too early to determine the impact of this work in Doncaster.


The learning and improvement subgroup appropriately looks at a wide range
of material including serious case reviews (SCRs), audits and performance
data. The case review subcommittee reports to this subgroup and focuses
on cases where there may be multi-agency safeguarding themes that do not
meet the threshold for a SCR. In the main, the scrutiny is carried out to a
satisfactory standard. However, further work is needed to ensure that the
experience of the child is at the centre of the process and that the learning
is disseminated across the childrens workforce.



Senior managers report that, two years ago, take-up of the multi-agency
training programme was limited across the partnership because the quality
and organisation of some courses was poor. In the last 18 months, training
has become well organised and is delivered by a committed group of regular
trainers. Take-up of training has improved, with 2,000 participants involved
in recent training sessions. This includes twice-yearly high-profile
conferences, the online common room for the childrens workforce, and
lunchtime seminars with a good range of topics including female genital
mutilation, self-harm and fuel poverty. The workforce subgroup and the new
training manager have focused on ensuring level three training is in place
for childcare practitioners. The focus on monitoring the impact of training
though is under-developed. The Board cannot be certain that training
delivered is having the desired impact on improving the skills and knowledge
of the childrens workforce in Doncaster.


Although the Board can evidence progress across a number of areas of
activity, many of the improvements are measured within the context of a
low starting point from the Ofsted inspection in 2012. There remain some
significant areas where the DSCB work needs further improvement. The
DSCB had produced a learning and improvement framework that describes
a culture of continuous improvement. However, this focuses on the
gathering of information from child death reviews, audits, performance data,
and complaints and pays insufficient attention to the dissemination of that
learning across the wider workforce. The DSCB does not have a
communications strategy, to raise awareness of its work with the
communities of Doncaster and within the childrens workforce, which limits
its effectiveness. Social workers and managers met during this inspection
reported a limited understanding of the work of the Board.


This year performance data available to the Board have improved. However,
some data continue to be unavailable and analysis is limited. The data do
not enable a sufficient understanding of local issues about the delivery of
child protection work and the wider safeguarding services.


Only two audits were conducted in 201415, with two more conducted so
far this year. These focused on section 47 work, child sexual exploitation
and neglect. The quality of those audits was poor, looked at a small number
of cases and lacked sufficient analysis or detailed recommendations based
on the learning identified from the cases examined. The involvement of
children and young people in the work of the Board is poor, although an
action plan, drawn up as part of the annual business plan for 201516, has
identified that this issue needs to be addressed.


The DSCB Chair and others met as part of this review had a good awareness
of the issues in relation to child protection services. They described well the
variability, poor quality, and drift and delay for some children and young
people. The DSCB maintains a challenge log of issues that have been raised
about multi-agency working. However, this does not focus sufficiently on
individual cases and escalation of issues. The log also does not record the
challenges made to the South Yorkshire Police on the presentation of the


Her Majestys Inspectorate of Constabulary (HMIC) report, which highlighted
shortfalls in child protection procedures, and the review of the actions taken
by the police to address these.

There has been good coordination by agencies in order to tackle child sexual
exploitation in Doncaster. Following publication of the Independent Inquiry
into Child Sexual Exploitation in Rotherham (1997  2013) by Alexis Jay, the
DSCB Chair provided an assurance report for Doncaster councillors on the
strengths and areas needing further partnership working. The Board also
challenged the South Yorkshire Police following publication of the critical
HMIC inspection reports in 2014 and 2015. The Chair met with the local
Borough Commander and drew up an action plan to tackle a number of
issues including around missing children; as a result, the numbers of young
people missing from care have declined significantly.


A child sexual exploitation subgroup and work stream chaired by a Police
Superintendent coordinates well the operational partnership working. There
are also good links with businesses in Doncaster and, as a result of the work
of the subgroup, all local hotels and bed and breakfasts have been visited
and made aware of indicators of child sexual exploitation. All taxi drivers
now have mandatory training in this area before being issued with their
licence.


The DSCB carried out a section 11 review of the quality of the response to
safeguarding issues by all partner agencies in 2013. The Board has
recognised that this audit was poor and lacked evidence of challenge. At the
time of this inspection, a further section 11 review was already taking place
and this included a more detailed self-assessment and a rigorous set of
challenge meetings. The work had yet to be completed and so no
improvements in the impact on children, young people and families is
evident. Parallel to this process, 100% of all schools in Doncaster completed
section 175 safeguarding assessments, which is positive.


The child death overview panel (CDOP) work is satisfactory. There were 26
child deaths in Doncaster in 2013/14. The majority of these were of children
with life limiting conditions. No concerns were identified about abuse,
neglect or failures by childrens services. There was, though, a lack of
understanding of how best to identify modifiable factors that impact on the
deaths. The chair of the panel is undertaking work with other child death
overview panels to improve understanding.


The council and trust appropriately notify Ofsted of serious incidents when
they occur. This includes some of the high profile sexual exploitation cases
under investigation by the South Yorkshire Police and Childrens Trust staff.
One serious case review has been commissioned and one learning lessons
review commenced. All of the notifications have been considered
appropriately and the decision making to undertake the reviews has been
ratified by the National SCR Panel.


The Annual Report 20142015, in draft during this inspection, describes the
functioning of the DSCB well. The evaluation of the quality of safeguarding


practice and what is done to address the issues is weaker, limiting the
effectiveness of the report in improving safeguarding across Doncaster. The
report does confirm that the Board has a good understanding of the local
child protection services, mirroring the findings of this Ofsted inspection, and
concludes appropriately that there are still many areas which require further
development and some which require urgent attention.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 8 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Janet Fraser
Deputy lead inspector: Neil Penswick
Team inspectors: Tracey Metcalfe, Wendy Ghaffar, Carolyn Spray, Graham Reiter,
Russ Henry, Brenda Mclaughlin
Senior data analyst: Pete Mclaughlin
Quality assurance manager: Christine Williams


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


