Dudley Metropolitan Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 January to 8 February 2016
Report published: 5 April 2016

Childrens services in Dudley Metropolitan Borough Council are
inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Inadequate


Inadequate


Requires improvement


Inadequate

Executive summary
There are serious and widespread failures in the services provided to children and
young people who are in need of help and protection and who are looked after in
Dudley. The local authority has been aware of the deficits for some time, but has not
taken sufficiently swift or robust remedial action to ensure that the most vulnerable
children and young people are protected. This means that senior leaders and elected
members cannot be assured that children and young people are safe or being
effectively protected. Further, the long period of inaction means that many services
have deteriorated since the last inspection of safeguarding and children and young


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


people looked after in 2012. The majority of areas that were found to require
improvement at that inspection have not been progressed.
Inspectors referred 21 cases about which there were serious concerns back to the
local authority and some about which the local authority needed to take immediate
action. These included children and young people not receiving adequate levels of
support and protection, children and young people not seen by social workers for
unacceptably long periods, poor planning for children and young people looked after
returning home and delays in securing permanence.
The current senior leadership team, which was established in April 2015, identified
serious and widespread weaknesses in services for children and young people in May
tackle a legacy of deteriorating services. However, the local authority is working from
an extremely low base and required improvements will take a significant time to
result in real and sustained change in the experiences of children and young people.
An improvement board has recently been established by the director of childrens
services (DCS) to oversee the delivery of an improvement plan. However, too many
children and young people have experienced drift, delay and further risk because the
local authority has been too slow to decide what needs to change in a family if it is
going to be safe for children and young people to remain. Weak management
oversight, supervision and quality assurance processes mean that poor practice has
gone unchallenged and childrens and young peoples needs have not been met.
Additionally, elected member scrutiny is significantly underdeveloped and does not
yet offer robust challenge to the local authority about the effectiveness of services
for the most vulnerable children and young people in Dudley.
Assessment of the needs of children, young people and families takes too long. In
too many cases, children and young people wait unacceptably long periods to be
seen by a social worker. Recording of work is often of poor quality or absent.
Children and young people assessed as needing statutory support often do not have
a child in need plan. When children and young people are deemed to be at risk or
have been subject to abuse, multi-agency core groups do not meet within
appropriate timescales and do not consistently progress plans or take agreed actions
to minimise risk. Neglect is a significant feature in Dudley, but there is no
partnership-wide strategy to address this. Opportunities to identify neglect at an
early stage and to take action are missed, and the unacceptably poor quality of
chronologies contributes to this.
Planning for children and young people in care is poor. In many cases, it is not clear
how their needs will be met, by whom and when. Dudley Council does not find
permanent homes quickly enough for children and young people looked after. This
means that many children and young people wait too long to be adopted, and some
children and young people remain in care even when it is safe for them to return
home.
Aspirations for children and young people looked after are too low and are not
sufficiently challenging. Their achievements are not celebrated, and the corporate


parenting role is poorly developed. Educational outcomes for children and young
people looked after are poor, and the educational attainment gap for children and
young people in the care of Dudley has widened considerably despite a recent small
improvement on that achieved by children and young people in England. Children
and young people in the care of the local authority are not given enough help to
attain their potential, and outcomes for these children and young people are likely to
be poorer as a result.
The emotional health needs of children and young people looked after and care
leavers are not being identified quickly enough, nor are prioritised by child and
adolescent mental health services (CAMHS).
Poor infrastructure means that the gathering and analysis of reliable performance
information remains a significant challenge to the local authority, and some key
information remains inaccurate. This means that leaders and managers cannot be
assured that they are effectively measuring and tracking progress.
Arrangements to manage and offer support to those children and young people at
risk of being sexually exploited are improving. These include the creation of a multiagency child sexual exploitation team to identify and monitor children and young
people identified as being at risk. However, children and young people looked after
who are identified as being at risk of child sexual exploitation do not have effective
safety plans in place.
The recent implementation of a single point of access to accept and manage all
contacts and referrals is a positive and welcome development. It has resulted in
improved timeliness of appropriate initial decision making.
A good range of services supports children, young people and parents experiencing
domestic abuse. Arrangements for identifying those at risk involve an appropriate
range of partner agencies.
The majority of care leavers are in education, employment or training and almost all
are in suitable accommodation. Support is available for young people to move to
independence but needs to be more robust in content and delivery. Transition
planning to adult services needs to begin earlier to ensure that the right services are
in place at the right time.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. Four were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
November 2011. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children and young
people looked after was in November 2011. The local authority was judged to be
good.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services (Strategic Director for People) (DCS) has been
in post since 31 March 2015.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult social care, education and health and wellbeing.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since June 2013.
Children and young people living in this area
 Approximately 67,900 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in the Dudley borough. This is 22% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 22% of the local authoritys children and young people are living in
poverty.
 The proportion of children and young people entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 16.3% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 15.3% (the national average is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 17.3% of all
children living in the area compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Pakistani, White and Black Caribbean, and Indian.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 13.4% (the national average is 19.4%)


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 in secondary schools is 7.8% (the national average is 15%).
Child protection in this area
 At the time of inspection, 1,313 children and young people have been identified
through assessment as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service.
This is an increase from 1,126 at 31 March 2014.
 At the time of inspection, 339 children and young people are the subject of a
child protection plan. This is an increase from 305 at 31 March 2014.
 At the time of inspection, 15 children and young people live in a privately
arranged fostering placement. This is an increase from six at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection, five serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted, and one serious case review was ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children and young people looked after in this area
 At the time of inspection, 708 children and young people are being looked after
by the local authority (a rate of 104.7 per 10,000 children and young people).
This is a reduction from 755 (111.6 per 10,000 children and young people) at
authority area
 none live in residential special schools
 one child is an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 39 adoptions
orders
subsequently returned to be looked after
 six young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to independent
living
 no young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in houses
of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Urgently implement quality assurance processes so that senior leaders can be
assured of the quality and effectiveness of the services that children and young
people receive, including feedback from children, young people and their
families (Page 33, paragraph 126).


Ensure that all children and young people assessed as in need have a child in
need plan. Improve the quality and consistency of record keeping (Page 14,
paragraph 42).


Improve the quality of assessments and plans to ensure that they are of
consistently good quality, with a clear focus on the needs, risks and strengths
of the children and young people, and that outcomes, timescales and
accountabilities for actions are clear (Page 13, paragraphs 33, 34).


Establish reliable IT systems and infrastructure to ensure support of social work
practice and effective collation of performance information (Page 33, paragraph


Ensure that initial child protection conferences and core groups are timely and
used to drive child protection plans to improve outcomes for children and young
people (Page 14, paragraphs 39, 40).


Ensure that strategy discussions and decisions are informed by the involvement
of all relevant professionals, and clearly record the rationale for the decisions
and agreed timescales for actions (Page 13, paragraphs 37, 38).


Develop suitable arrangements to share and analyse information gathered from
return interviews to reduce future missing episodes for individual children and
young people, and to inform partnership prevention and disruption activity
(Page 15, paragraphs 45, 47, 49. Page 22, paragraph 79).


Ensure that social work visits to children and young people are regular and
purposeful, that children and young people are seen and seen alone, and that
records of visits are consistently recorded on case files (Page 12, paragraph 32.
Page 19, paragraph 64).


Ensure that there is sufficient capacity in the emergency duty service to meet
the needs of children and young people (Page 12, paragraph 30).

looked after, and ensure that permanence is achieved in a timely way. (Page
education planning to ensure that children and young people looked after
achieve their potential (Page 21, paragraphs 72, 73. Page 22, paragraph 76).


outline (PLO) processes where children and young people are at risk and timely
progress in minimising risk is not being made (Page 19, paragraphs 60,62).
plans are progressed without delay (Page 19, paragraph 63. Page 20,
paragraph 66).
services are reviewed to ensure timely assessments of needs and of how the
young peoples needs will be met at the point of adulthood (Page 29, paragraph
after is given priority by securing a range of services that will meet their
psychological and mental health needs as soon as they are needed (Page 22,
paragraph 78).
young people are heard and that the council understands and acts on their
views and concerns (Page 23, paragraph 82).
responsibilities and scrutiny functions (Page 23, paragraph 81).
benefit from it and that sustainable processes are in place to reduce timescales
and delay for children and young people (Page 23, paragraphs 84, 85. Page 24,
paragraphs 88, 89).
birth parents and adopters (Page 26, paragraph 100).
leavers charter is reviewed so that it is unique to Dudley and created and
shared with Dudley care leavers (Page 29, paragraphs 115, 116).
complaints to ensure that learning is not lost and that children and young
people have a range of methods available to them to make complaints when
they need to (Page 34, paragraph 131).


Summary for children and young people
 New leaders started to work with the council in 2015 and quickly recognised that
they needed to make a lot of changes so that children and young people in
Dudley are safe and well supported.
 These leaders have started to make some of those changes, but because there is
still a great deal to do, Ofsted has judged the services to children and young
people as still not good enough and needing to improve as soon as possible.
 The services to help children, young people and families in Dudley are not always
working well together, and are not always being provided at the time when
families need them. The council knows this and plans to make sure that, in
future, children, young people and families get the right help at the right time.
 Some children and young people who are at risk are not helped or made safe
quickly enough. Professionals need to work better together to make sure that
action is taken quickly. Social work managers need to make sure that they help
social workers make the right decisions at the right time to keep children and
young people safe.
 When children and young people come into care, the plans for their future are
not always clear. This means that some children and young people who should
live with a family do not get to become part of a permanent family quickly
enough. Social work managers have started to make improvements by making
sure that there are clear plans for children and young people before they come
into care, and that children and young people are supported to live with the right
family for them as quickly as possible.
 Children and young people in care do not always do as well as they could at
school. Teachers and social workers need to work more closely together to make
sure that children and young people do as well as they can.
 People who work with children and young people do not always ask or listen to
their views. They need to make sure that the views of children and young people
are heard when they are making plans and talking to them about the future.
Managers also need to make sure that the views of children and young people
help to make services better.
 Care leavers are not always properly helped to get ready for adulthood and to live
on their own. Most care leavers live in places that are right for them. Most but
not all care leavers are in education, training or have a job, but more could be
done to make sure that young people get a better start as they leave care. The
vast majority of care leavers are supported by their personal advisers, but
sometimes that support could be better, particularly by making sure that other
services provide help when it is needed.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
The experiences and progress of children and young people who need help and
protection are inadequate. Serious and widespread failings across the main social
work teams leave children and young people at risk of harm.
The local authority knows what it needs to improve and is working to ensure that
structures and procedures are in place for that. However, fundamental basic social
work practice remains poor in too many cases. Management oversight and
supervision of staff is weak and leaves poor practice unchallenged.
At the time of the inspection, 33 children and young people did not have an allocated
social worker. Some had been waiting for as long as 17, 25 or 29 days and up to
three months, so were without purposeful statutory involvement to assess and meet
their needs.
Social workers do not visit children and young people regularly enough, with
sometimes unacceptably long periods between visits. Assessments take too long and
lack a clear analysis of risk. Planning for children and young people is not outcome
focused or individual to childrens and young peoples needs and objectives are not
measurable. Not all children and young people in need have a written plan.
Documents and case records are not up to date or stored systematically.
Records of strategy discussions and child protection enquiries vary too much in
quality and lack detailed planning or proper consideration of roles, responsibilities
and timescales for completion of actions. Initial child protection conferences are not
timely enough. The service for children, young people and their families who need
support and intervention out of office hours is poorly resourced. Children and young
people frequently wait for unacceptably long periods for a response.
Recording of interviews carried out when children and young people return after
going missing is not thorough enough. Information derived from interviews is not
used adequately to analyse patterns and trends.
Poor attendance by social workers at the young persons sexual exploitation (YPSE)
panel has led to significant delays in reviewing and addressing risks to children and
young people. As a result, opportunities to intervene at an early enough stage are
lost.
The redesign and implementation of a single point of access has improved timeliness
of contacts and referrals significantly from a low base, and provides a timely and
effective response to contacts and referrals.
Partner agencies do not fully understand thresholds, and this results in a high


number of inappropriate referrals. The local authority and its partners are beginning
to work together to ensure better coordination and targeting of services.
Inspection findings
protection are inadequate. Inspectors identified 21 children and young people
in need of help and protection and who were not receiving adequate levels of
support and protection. These children and young people had waited too long
for a robust assessment of their needs and risks to ensure protection from
harm. The local authority took swift action to intervene in all cases reported to
it.
referrals from the public and partners have very recently improved. Five weeks
before the inspection, there were five access points through which to refer
concerns to childrens social care, which increased the risk of children and
young people being lost in the system. In too many cases, decisions to
progress to referral were not consistent or timely. As a result, some children
and young people were left too long at potential risk, and families were not
always being offered help early enough.
contacts and referrals from a low base  from 40% within 24 hours in June
understanding of and consistently apply thresholds for statutory intervention.
Cases were promptly transferred to a duty referral and assessment team for
further assessment and intervention.
clusters across the borough, with the aim of reducing the current duplication of
early intervention services, and to provide coordinated and targeted services.
An early-help strategy has been agreed, but is not yet fully implemented.
Without this strategy, children, young people and families may not receive help
that is appropriate for their individual needs, or that is early enough to prevent
problems increasing and to reduce the high number of children and young
people whose needs could be met at a lower level being referred to statutory
services.
place to report child assessment framework (CAF) activity or to monitor
progress or quality assurance of assessments under CAF. This means that the
local authority is unable to target improvements to early-help services and to
provide specific training to improve quality. The commitment of professionals to
undertake CAF assessments and to take on the lead professional role is too
variable, with a number reluctant to become fully involved. In the last six


months, only 169 CAF assessments were completed with 30% being completed
by childrens centres. The majority of recent assessments sampled were good
although a small number required improvement, with views of children and
young people not fully integrated and outcomes sought unclear.
evidence of improved outcomes. Childrens centres provide a range of relevant
services to parents and children, including alcohol and substance misuse
services, parenting programmes and support and advice in employment.
Targeted early intervention through the family intervention team (FIT) provides
effective support to families identified as part of the Troubled Families
programme. Some cases seen by inspectors showed improved outcomes, for
instance through delivery of Triple P parenting programmes and the
management of childrens and young peoples behaviour. Dudley has achieved
successful results with 740 families. Phase two has been launched and 170
families have been allocated to the FIT.
offering advice and support on whether early-help support can meet the needs
of families, and supports the CAF. This is beginning to ensure that children and
young people who have identified needs but who do not meet thresholds for a
statutory service are signposted to the appropriate level of service within early
help. Case sampling by inspectors demonstrated appropriate application of
thresholds.
intervention out of office hours is insufficiently resourced. As a result, children
and young people do not receive a good enough service. Inspectors saw cases
where children and young people who needed urgent intervention and
accommodation had remained in the care of police overnight due to the
insufficient capacity of the out-of-hours service. This is unacceptable and is
likely to be a worrying experience for children and young people.
social care for longer than necessary when they could have been stepped down
to early-help services or closed. Children in need panels established in August
identified that 377 cases out of 773 reviewed to date do not require a social
worker to be involved. In a very small minority of cases, the decision to step
down was premature as needs were not fully assessed and met. The local
authority has not undertaken any monitoring to track re-referrals of these
specific cases, and this is a missed opportunity to improve practice.
social workers visiting them. In the worst cases seen, the delay was five
months. In too many cases, it is not clear whether children and young people
are seen or spoken to alone because recording in case files is absent or poor.
At the time of the inspection, 33 children and young people did not have an


allocated social worker. Some had been waiting for 17, 25 or 29 days and for as
long as three months. In a number of cases, case records of child protection
statutory visits are blank. During the inspection, the local authority reviewed all
children and young people subject to child protection plans to assure
themselves that visits are being completed. Statutory visiting to children and
young people subject to child protection plans within the prescribed two weekly
timescale of the local authority is an improving picture, from 37% of visits
required in June 2015 to 78% in December 2015. However, the quality of the
recording is in many cases poor, with general conversations about day-to-day
activities rather than purposeful visiting to progress plans.
and needs of the child or young person. Some take many months to complete.
In December 2015, 38% of single assessments took longer than 45 days and
just 3% were completed in 10 days. Support to children, young people and
families during the assessment period is often inconsistent, resulting in children
and young people waiting too long for services. Managers at the time of the
inspection had a backlog (103) of assessments that required decisions to
authorise further work, delaying subsequent planning and transfer of cases.
Management oversight of assessments is weak and relates mainly to next-step
processes rather than providing a review of the quality of the assessment and
the resulting plan.
of risk, and risk is often implied rather than explicitly articulated. The individual
needs of children and young people are not always clear, as records are copied
across groups of brothers and sisters. Neither are the diverse needs of children
and young people arising from their culture, religion or ethnicity sufficiently well
detailed. As a result, the specific needs of individual children and young people
are not considered.
quality. The Family Adolescent Support Team (FAST) mostly completed these,
which included good parenting assessments that clearly identified risk and
provided a good level of analysis, leading to appropriate actions to help and
protect children and young people.
practice. However, the model is used inconsistently by practitioners and is not
embedded as a way of assessing risk and determining progress in minimising
risk. This is a missed opportunity to ensure better practice. Direct work tools
are not used consistently with children and young people. In examples of better
work seen, specific tools are used to ascertain the wishes of children and young
people, the voice of the child or young person is clear, assessments are child
focused and the experience of the child or young person is effectively assessed.
In addition, the FAST and Respect services provide good quality support to
children, young people and families.


strategy discussions. For these children and young people, risks had not been
properly considered, recognised or clearly defined. The vast majority of strategy
discussions are telephone conversations between police and a social care
manager, and do not involve other agencies. Not involving agencies such as
health and education in this important process limits the range of information
available and reduces the ability of those who are present to make robust
decisions about next steps.
quality. The vast majority lack detailed planning or proper consideration of
roles, responsibilities and timescales for completion of actions. A number of
social workers had difficulties finding these records on case files. Poor recording
prevents managers and newly allocated social workers from fully understanding
the risks and needs of children and young people. It also means that important
information about patterns of behaviour or previous concerns are not
consistently available to inform decision making.
date) held within 15 working days of the strategy discussion. However, 28% of
children and young people are potentially experiencing delay between having
risks identified and multi-agency consideration of plans to protect them. The
quality of social work reports prepared for conferences is variable and in some
cases not shared with parents, carers and the child protection chair prior to the
conference. As a result, children, young people, parents, partner agencies and
child protection chairs may not know what is to be discussed or recommended.
This limits their ability to understand fully any concerns and to influence
outcomes.
December 2015 down from 67% in October 2015. Progress against plans and
minutes of meetings are not always recorded. As a result, core groups do not
sufficiently develop the child protection plan or measure progress. This
significantly reduces their effectiveness in protecting or improving the lives and
safety of children and young people.
attend child protection conferences. Independent advocates are available to
children and young people involved in child protection processes, but the takeup of advocacy support is low.
young people did not have a child in need plan. The local authority was unable
to give inspectors an accurate figure of the number of children and young
people who had a plan due to a legacy of poor data quality. The overall quality
of children in need and child protection plans is weak. The majority lack a clear
focus on outcomes and timescales, and in some cases overly focus on the
needs of adults or brothers and sisters rather than the subject child or young


person. In other cases, they reflect an over-optimistic view of family
engagement. Contingency planning is not sufficiently robust and timescales for
alternative courses of action are not always evident.
of child protection plans. Neglect was a risk factor in 137 (40%) of these plans,
emotional abuse in 149 (43%), physical abuse in 46 (13.5%) and sexual abuse
in eight (2%). The local authority is aware that 62% of new admissions to care
during 2014/15 were for reasons of abuse and neglect, compared to 56%
nationally. However, the local authority does not have an inclusive strategy for
addressing neglect. Without this strategy, neglect is not given a sufficiently high
profile across all agencies, which means that some children and young people
may be left at potential risk for too long.
information is not immediately available to social workers and managers to
inform decision making, assessments and plans. The lack of chronologies is a
particular weakness in cases of neglect. This is a missed opportunity to identify
patterns and behaviours and to ensure that robust action is taken to safeguard
children and young people.
of sexual exploitation are increasingly supporting children and young people,
and in some cases reducing risks. A multi-agency child sexual exploitation team
set up in September 2015 screens all referrals for children and young people
identified as at risk of sexual exploitation, and holds multi-agency sexual
exploitation (MASE) meetings. However, the quality of information sharing is
poor. Social workers in the SPA do not have access to the recording system
used by the child sexual exploitation team or the Missing You team. This means
that, for new referrals, social workers and managers do not always know
whether children and young people are already known to be at risk of child
sexual exploitation or have previously had episodes of being missing. This limits
their ability to ensure that children and young people are protected and receive
the right help.
be at high risk of child sexual exploitation, and seven were considered to be at
medium risk. The YPSE panel, which is chaired by the police, reviews all
children and young people known to be at high and medium risk. However,
poor attendance by social workers at this meeting has led to significant delays
in reviewing and addressing risks to children and young people. As a result,
opportunities to intervene at an early enough stage are lost. A multi-agency
audit in July 2015 concluded that children and young people continue to be at
risk and acknowledged numerous missed opportunities to protect children and
young people.
young people, children and young people missing education, and perpetrators


is regularly discussed at YPSE panel meetings. However, information from
return interviews and information about children and young people at risk of
sexual exploitation and children and young people missing education are not
yet brought together to create a comprehensive picture to inform planning,
prevention and disruption activity. Awareness raising has taken place with
education settings, transport providers and licensed premises around the
possible warning signs to look out for with children and young people who may
be at risk of sexual exploitation. The local authority licensing team has been
successful in using their powers to revoke licenses.
who go missing have been recently strengthened. The head of safeguarding
chairs the newly formed children missing operational panel, which tracks and
cross-references all children and young people missing from home, care and
education. The panel also identifies those at risk of child sexual exploitation.
However, the strategy for missing children and young people is in draft and the
panel is in its infancy. Therefore, it is too early for it to have had any impact on
current childrens and young peoples experiences.
following missing episodes. However, interviews are not always timely (65%
within 72 hours in December 2015), and records of interviews are not good
enough, with a significant number of cases seen in which children and young
people had not been successfully engaged. Information from interviews is not
readily available or shared with the childs or young persons social worker or
relevant professionals. As a result, important information is not available to
inform future safety planning to reduce risk.
Risks to children who have disability are identified and addressed appropriately
and are assessed, investigated and escalated in a timely way by social workers
in the children with disabilities team. Transition arrangements between
childrens and adult services for children and young people who have disability
start too late, with the majority not assessed until they are 17 years old.
parents experiencing domestic abuse. All police notifications are initially
discussed and screened by the multi-agency domestic abuse referral team
(DART) using a risk matrix. When children and young people are screened as
high risk, they are promptly referred to the SPA. The multi-agency risk
assessment conference (MARAC) considers children and young people living in
households where domestic abuse is a risk. Minutes seen by inspectors showed
appropriate involvement of relevant agencies with actions and reviews followed
up.
young people has recently improved from a low base. An experienced interim
designated officer is now in post. However, the service remains without an


adequate database, and this affects how progress is tracked and monitored.
The local authority recognises that records have not always included rationales
for decisions made or recorded outcomes.
provision for homeless 16- to 17-year-olds, agreed by the housing department
and children services. However, managers and staff are not fully aware of its
existence. In order to reduce the risk of homelessness, mediation is available
through the housing youth hub to support children and young people to remain
with their families. When this is not successful or appropriate, a referral for
assessment and intervention is made to the SPA, which has recently
strengthened the pathway for homeless 16- to 17-year-olds.
and young people missing education and elective home education (EHE) and
maintains up-to-date records. Effective action is in place to locate children and
young people who have not taken up their school places or who are no longer
accessing education. A range of checks are completed to establish the
whereabouts of children and young people. These include contact with schools,
home visits and checks with other agencies. Currently, 47 children and young
people are known to be in the borough waiting to be placed in education
provision. Nine children and young people are on a reduced timetable, a very
small number are considered to be missing from education and 197 are being
educated at home.
A Prevent plan is delivered and monitored by members of Dudley Prevent
Delivery Group (DPDG). Ongoing monthly workshops providing raising
awareness (WRAP) training for frontline staff has significantly increased the
number of referrals received about children and young people who may be
vulnerable to radicalisation, although there has been none where further
escalation was required. The Channel panel meets monthly and is chaired by a
senior officer. Prevent ambassadors from secondary schools have been trained
to deliver low level Prevent sessions to Year 7 pupils within schools.

The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Inadequate

Summary
Services for children and young people looked after in Dudley are inadequate. Too
many children and young people remain in care when they could and should be
cared for through alternative arrangements. There is drift and delay in securing
permanent arrangements to return children and young people home or to permanent
placements outside the family. The local authority is not working effectively with the


judiciary and the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass)
to ensure that children and young people are subject to appropriate orders and
achieving permanent arrangements in a timely way. This means that many children
and young people do not know what plans are being made for their future.
Assessments are not good enough. They are not updated to reflect the changing
needs or circumstances of children and young people. The vast majority of children
and young people returning home do not benefit from an assessment and support
plans to maximise their potential for successful rehabilitation. Too many care plans
lack clear targets and timescales. It is not clear how needs will be met, by whom or
when. There is drift and delay in care planning, which results in too many children
and young people remaining in short-term placements and not being considered for
adoption early enough.
Social workers see children and young people on their own and take time to make
sure that they understand their wishes and feelings. However, 35% of visits do not
take place within the prescribed timescales of the local authority.
Independent reviewing officers (IRO) oversight of plans, including the need to
secure timely permanence, is not rigorous and lacks sufficient or effective challenge
to poor practice. The local authority does not have enough foster carers available to
provide placement choice.
The virtual school has been ineffective in supporting the educational needs of
children and young people looked after and educational outcomes for children and
young people looked after are very poor. The emotional and mental health needs of
children and young people looked after are not being met. Arrangements with
CAMHS do not prioritise children and young people looked after.
When children and young people go missing from care, return interviews are not of a
good enough quality and not used to inform planning and intervention. Safety
planning is not sufficiently used to reduce the risk of child sexual exploitation.
The majority of care leavers are in education, employment or training, and almost all
are in suitable accommodation. However, for some care leavers with complex needs,
support services and transitional arrangements are insufficiently developed to ensure
that all their needs are met.
Corporate parenting in Dudley is ineffective and new arrangements are yet to make
an impact. The collective voice of children and young people looked after through
the Children in Care Council (CICC) has not been heard or prioritised by the authority
and partners.
Inspection findings
need to be looked after are in secure placements and are in permanent
arrangements as quickly as possible. Planning for childrens and young peoples


futures is poor. Transition arrangements with adult services begin too late to
ensure proper and timely consideration of future needs. Children and young
people in care of the local authority do not achieve sufficiently well in
education, and the attainment gap continues to widen with potentially poor
outcomes as a result. There is a lack of emotional support for this most
vulnerable group, and burgeoning mental health issues are poorly supported by
mental health services, for which children and young people in care of the local
authority are not a priority. The local authority as a whole has not properly
considered all the needs of children and young people looked after as a good
corporate parent.
by Dudley council. At a rate of 105 children and young people looked after per
authorities and almost double the England average. A recent review of the
thresholds for bringing children and young people into care has resulted in only
a 4% reduction from 740 children and young people looked after since 31
March 2015. The local authority has started to review the children and young
people looked after cohort in an effort to reduce these numbers further and has
a clear understanding of deficits in practice resulting in high numbers in care.
This work is recent. The local authority is not yet able to be sure that all these
children and young people have the right plans, including permanent
arrangements for their care, and that these plans are progressed in timescales
appropriate for them.
not have done so. However, a small number of children and young people
should have become looked after more swiftly, and some children and young
people were discharged from care when the risks or reasons for
accommodation had not been fully addressed. The responsibility for decisions
about when children and young people should become looked after or
discharged from care has recently been reviewed and is now made at an
appropriately senior level. The local authority is beginning to focus its attention
on the high number of children and young people placed at home on care
orders (63) and on those children and young people subject to care orders and
who would benefit from alternative orders such as special guardianship.
securing legal permanence for children and young people, and the poor quality
of care planning and decision making. The recent (October 2015) introduction
of a legal gateway meeting has enabled a review of the arrangements of 77
children and young people looked after by the local authority to be undertaken.
instigated earlier to secure their care status and to further permanent
arrangements.


secure change to ensure the welfare of children and young people. A recent
review of the PLO process has included training for social workers and the
introduction of a review panel. This has seen a 97% rise in cases subject to
pre-proceedings, many of which have been subject to unnecessary drift and
delay in entering the pre-proceedings stage. This means that children and
young people have been at risk and waited too long for action to be taken to
change their circumstances.
children and young people remaining in their families and to improve
assessments prior to care proceedings. However, the local authority does not
yet fully understand if these meetings are effective or achieving what they were
intended to achieve.
drift and delay in permanence planning and absence of parallel planning had
created delay and uncertainty for children and young people. The increase in
numbers of proceedings and the necessary change from solicitors writing court
reports to social workers doing so have led to both a decline in report quality
and court criticism of compliance with the PLO. At the time of the inspection, 33
out of 92 cases in care proceedings were beyond the 26-week timescale. The
average length of care proceedings in 201415 was 30 weeks, which is the
England average and better than statistical neighbours at 31 weeks. However,
local authority data indicates that this performance is likely to worsen over
coming months given current delays.
majority of children and young people returning home do not benefit from an
up-to-date assessment and support plan. This does not maximise the potential
for successful rehabilitation. However, the number of children and young
people returning to care is low, with 12 children and young people coming back
into care for a second or subsequent time in the last year.
frequency for all children and young people looked after to a minimum of four
weekly to ensure that visits are completed. This new arrangement means that
social workers do not have the time to visit children and young people who are
less settled and in need of increased levels of support. The local authoritys own
data demonstrate that 35% of children and young people looked after do not
see their social workers as often as is prescribed by the local authority. When
children and young people are seen, social workers see them on their own and
take time to make sure that they understand their wishes and feelings.
and are advised on how to access an advocate. During 201415, 51 children
and young people were supported by an advocate. However, outcomes are not
evaluated, so the impact of this support has yet to be understood. The take-up


from the commissioned independent visitor service is increasing: 41 children
and young people looked after had an independent visitor in December 2015.
people become looked after. However, assessments are not routinely updated
to reflect changing circumstances and needs. Overall, assessments lack an
analysis of long-term needs and the childs or young persons voice through
direct work was not evident in all assessments seen. As a result, childrens and
young peoples care plans are not routinely informed by up-to-date holistic
assessments. Reports for reviews do include current information about the child
or young person, but these are not sharply focused on progress against the
care plan. Too many care plans lack clear targets and timescales. In these
cases, it is not clear how needs will be met, by whom and when.
have had a review of their plan within timescales. However, the quality of the
IROs oversight of plans, including the need to secure timely permanence plans,
is not rigorous and too many children and young people have been subject to
drift and delay. Formal escalation relating to lack of progress, absence of care
plans and poor standards of practice has only recently started. A lack of
capacity in the IRO service has affected the IROs ability to speak to children
and young people before their reviews. This means that IROs are not driving
improvements to ensure that children and young people receive a timely and
appropriate service.
placements leaving children and young people potentially vulnerable. Many of
these children and young people have remained in the same placement for two
years or more (72%). However, 14 long-term foster placements have been
disrupted during the past year and, although the learning was used to inform
future matching for the children and young people involved, it has not been
used for wider practice and service development. Children and young people
have been placed with short-term carers and have remained with them, some
for several years. Work is now underway to establish the numbers of children
and young people who can be matched, and to review the approval status of
foster carers. The local authority has offered assurance that children and young
people will be matched permanently to independent fostering placements if this
is in their best interests.
commissioned fostering. At the time of this inspection, the local authority had
only recruited five foster carers during 201415, with a further 16 mainstream
assessments in progress. The draft sufficiency statement highlights the need to
increase in-house fostering provision as a priority, because there is an overreliance on purchased provision, including placements for infants. The chief
officer has recently started to approve and scrutinise requests for all out-ofborough placements in an effort to improve management oversight.


supported well. Carers receive regular supervision and training and routinely
contribute to childrens and young peoples reviews. Delegated authority is not
in place for all children and young people, and this limits fosters carers ability
to support childrens and young peoples hobbies, activities and interests.
Where there are no in-house permanent fostering placements available,
Dudleys new Access to Resources panel approves the purchase of a placement
from the independent sector.
through special guardianship orders (SGOs). In 201415, 11% (25) children left
care through SGOs, which is an improvement from 7% in 201314. Special
guardians receive timely assessments and good plans are put in place,
supported by the specialist post-order support worker. However, some children
and young people in stable long-term foster placements would benefit from a
more systematic consideration of their foster carers applying for an SGO to
enable them to leave local authority care.
children and young people looked after. There has recently been more scrutiny
of the quality of personal education plans (PEPs) and use of the pupil premium.
However, in examples seen, the pupil premium is not being used effectively to
support progress. PEPs are not specific enough about attainment and targets
and continue to lack sufficient management oversight. Aspirations for children
and young people looked after are not challenging enough and predicted exam
results are overly optimistic, which demonstrates a lack of focus on the needs
of individual children and young people. Five children and young people looked
after were permanently excluded in 201415. The local authority reports that,
at the point of inspection, nine young people attended alternative provision for
between ten and 17 hours a week. Children and young people looked after who
are taught in Dudley are making less progress than children and young people
looked after taught in out-of-borough schools.
effective target setting with specific goals and appropriate support in place to
help children and young people reach their potential. However, in most cases,
targets and timescales are not clear. This makes measuring progress difficult.
While many plans contain detailed information about the child or young person,
this information is not used effectively to identify key issues and actions
required to support educational progress. The voice of the child or young
person is not consistently captured in PEPs, and not all PEPs identify how the
pupil premium should be used.
enough. There are 478 school-aged children and young people looked after,
outstanding secondary schools that children and young people looked after


attend has risen from 45% to 60%. While this is an improvement, it is still not
good enough.
average in reading, writing and mathematics. The gap in the attainment of
children looked after remains wide at 19 percentage points lower in reading, 25
percentage points lower in writing and 21 percentage points lower in
mathematics. While all children looked after at Key Stage 2 are making at least
expected progress, the gap for attainment of Level 4 in reading, writing and
mathematics has closed from 30% in 2014 to 24% in 2015.
years. The attainment gap for young people in the care of Dudley continues to
widen from that achieved by young people generally across England, from 31
percentage points in 2012 to 46 percentage points in 2014. The proportion of
young people looked after by Dudley gaining five GCSEs grades A* to C,
including English and mathematics, has also deteriorated over the last four
years, from 28% in 2012 to 12% in 2015. Young people looked after by this
local authority are not sufficiently helped to attain their potential and outcomes
for these young people are likely to be poorer as a result.
health assessments completed within timescales. This is below the England
average of 90% and below the local authority target of 95%. Performance has
not improved since 201314. The local authority has started to work closely
with health partners to improve this figure. Review health assessments, dental
checks and immunisations are taking place in a timely way, and performance in
this area is above the England average.
being sufficiently identified and met. Strengths and difficulties questionnaires
do not systematically inform health assessments and are not completed until
children and young people have been looked after for 12 months. This means
that children and young people are not screened to support their immediate
health needs. This is compounded by the lack of a fast-track service to CAMHS
for children and young people looked after. A children and young people looked
after psychology service run by the local authority is in place but long-standing
vacancies and a lack of focus on the work that needs to be undertaken by the
service means that children and young people are not benefiting from this
service.
missing and who may be at risk of child sexual exploitation or criminal
behaviour through the YPSE panel. Foster carers and residential staff follow
procedures for reporting children and young people looked after missing and
for seeking to locate them appropriately. Thirty-six children and young people
were missing from care in the last 12 months, of whom 11 children were
missing 167 times. Return interviews for children and young people who go


missing lack required detail, such as how long they have been missing. A lack
of persistence in understanding the reasons for missing episodes is evident. Key
documents are often missing from childrens and young peoples files, and care
plans are not updated to include a safety plan. This lack of supervision and
management oversight does not support improved outcomes for children and
young people who go missing from care. In December 2015, 12 children and
young people looked after were identified as being at risk of or subject to child
sexual exploitation. None of these children or young people had a safety plan in
place.
having a substance misuse issue, with 15 of those (60%) receiving an
intervention and 10 (40%) refusing support. This is better than the England
average. A close working relationship between youth offending services and the
children and young people when they are remanded into care. In 201415, 4%
of children and young people looked after were convicted and cautioned
compared with 7% in statistical neighbouring authorities and the England
average of 6%.
not meet from January to September 2015. The forum was refreshed in
October 2015. This development, along with a draft corporate parenting
strategy, has introduced a renewed focus. However, the work of the forum is
not yet making a positive difference to the lives of children and young people
looked after.
young people looked after was poorly attended by children, young people and
adults, and lacked support from the local authority. This has resulted in some
children and young people in care saying that they do not feel valued by the
local authority. Very recent support from the interim chief officer has secured
funding for the council, a review of the pledge to children and young people
looked after and a new website to support a more effective CICC. These recent
changes are positive but they are not yet ensuring a strong platform for
children and young people to be heard.
origin have not had their needs that arise from their diverse backgrounds
assessed well or planned for, indicating a lack of awareness among social
workers of the distinctive needs of these children and young people. Foster
carers receive training on how to protect children and young people from
bullying, homophobia and discrimination.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is inadequate
of Dudley council until very recently. Children and young people do not benefit
from the security of permanent arrangements through adoption quickly enough.
A legacy of inconsistent practice combined with weak management oversight of
care planning and decision making for children and young people is now
beginning to be addressed. However, for a number of children and young
people, this has meant that opportunities to secure permanent placements
through adoption have been missed or significantly delayed. The local authority
acknowledges that any recent progress in performance will not be evident in
that 93 children under five years of age became looked after in Dudley in 2012
This means that a high proportion of children under five continued to be looked
after two years after first entering care and had not been permanently placed.
Of these, six had adoption plans but were yet to be adopted. Only two children
aged over five were placed for adoption in the period 201215, and both were
aged six years. This indicates significant delays in finding permanent solutions
for children and a much-reduced likelihood of older children being adopted.
the time it takes for them to live with their adoptive families. The average time
it takes between a child or young person entering care and moving in with their
adoptive family is longer in Dudley, at 741 days, compared with the three-year
average and the national scorecard target of 547 days. Very recent remedial
work by the authority to improve adoption planning has resulted in some
improvement. However, too many children and young people over a lengthy
period have endured too many long delays in securing permanence through
adoption. The local authoritys own data for the first three quarters of 201516
record timescales of 589 days. This remains above both the national target and
performance of statistical neighbours.
order being made and children and young people being matched with adoptive
families. Current local authority data show that over the first nine months of
target by 52 days and statistical neighbours by 48 days.
between April 2012 and March 2015 were still waiting for adoptive placements.
In the cases of six of these children or young people, managers had made
decisions to change their adoption plans to alternative permanence options, but
their orders had yet to be revoked by October 2015. This demonstrates a


significant lack of urgency in permanence planning. Three children or young
people were identified as having waited for more than three years for an
adoptive placement. This lengthy delay places the likelihood of a successful
permanence outcome at unnecessary risk. Currently, 10 children and young
people have plans to discharge their placement orders, but these orders have
not been discharged yet, including a child whose adoption was disrupted in
December 2014. This substantial delay in progressing this childs care plan
demonstrates poor management oversight and prolonged uncertainty for the
child.
adoptive family within recommended timescales. This represents poor
performance, considerably below the national average of 51%. These delays
mean that children and young people are not moving into and benefitting from
permanent placements with an adoptive family quickly enough. Too many
children and young people wait too long to have a permanent alternative family
identified for them, with only 39% of children and young people waiting 18
months or less.
This is a missed opportunity. Managers have failed to develop or implement a
policy to progress this practice. The adoption service has only very recently
begun to raise this concept of securing permanence for children or young
people with prospective adopters, which demonstrates poor awareness of
developments in adoption practice.
oversight of those children or young people who need an adoptive or
alternative permanent family. A weekly panel that acts as a legal planning
gateway is a positive development, but while demonstrating some very early
improvement on prevention of delays for some children and young people, it is
too soon to assess its impact fully. Another benefit of the panel is that the
adoption team now receives early information about children and young people
to inform matching to adopters, but again it is too early to demonstrate impact.
authority approved 45 households as adopters in the period 201215 compared
with 113 placement orders made in the same period. The local authority
purchases access to adopters approved by other agencies to ensure that
greater choice is available. However, the negative impact of this is that these
resources are not then available to invest in developing their own pool of
adopters or other priority areas. The adoption service routinely uses the West
Midlands Adoption in the Black Country consortium and the national adoption
register to find families for children and young people who are waiting to be
placed. Developments for a regional adoption agency are in the very early
stages of planning and so offer no improvement to the circumstances of
children and young people overall yet.


involved in the training and assessment of carers on the Adoption Black County
Partnership. The positive benefits of this include immediate access to an
innovative initial online training programme, followed by three days group
training for prospective adopters.
(201415), 48 days longer than the England average. Despite improvements in
timescales for adopters having a child or young person matched, the average
number of days between registration and match for new matches exceeds the
England average by 19 days at 401 days.
adopters reports (PARs) show that detailed preparation work is completed to
help them understand childrens and young peoples needs and what will be
expected of them. Adopters spoken to said that they felt well informed about
the individual needs of children and young people. Life story work is progressed
with children and young people who need it, and later life letters are
appropriately detailed. Adopters spoken to were given a life storybook and
memory box for their child or young person, ensuring that those children and
young people are supported to understand their life history and have
information about their birth families.
placing brothers and sisters together, with 20 children and young people placed
in such groups out of a total of 40 children and young people adopted in 2014
backgrounds and cultures. Childrens and young peoples permanence reports
(CPRs) seen are thorough and contain sufficient detail of the childs or young
persons personality, identity and diverse needs to support planning and
decisions about matching to suitable adoptive families.
need it. Some assessments for adoption support take as long as three months
to complete and this is unacceptable. Decisions for specialist therapeutic
support and access to the Adoption Support Fund are authorised by an access
to resource panel. Current arrangements are cumbersome and do not facilitate
timely provision of support services. For example, adoption team workers not
only have to identify support services to meet need, but are then required to
obtain three costings of service provision before presenting to the panel for a
decision. Currently, managers are planning that all requests for adoption
support are dealt with by the SPA. The potential risk with this is that there is
further delay in responding to adopters needs effectively.
weak. Adoption support plans seen are too variable in quality and some do not


have clear timescales to achieve their aims. Managers currently have no
method to evaluate whether adoption support is helping families. There is
currently no method of measuring whether adoption support is helping families
over time, and there is no easily accessible process for commissioning specialist
support. All of these factors contribute to delay for families accessing support
and do not contribute to improving the circumstances of adopted children and
young people. Adopters spoken to are aware of their entitlements and the
current range of support provided by the adoption service.
reduced effectiveness in service delivery. A specialist adoption worker post has
been vacant since May 2015, and this is negatively affecting the capacity and
progress of the adoption team. Managers have also agreed to an additional
permanent post to support the post-adoption letterbox service, but this too is
vacant. As a direct result, important letterbox work in maintaining indirect
contacts and post-adoption agreements between birth family relatives, adopters
and adopted children and young people is delayed for the two thirds of the 743
letterbox members who are active. This means that children, young people and
birth families do not receive and progress information about people who are
important to them.
panel is suitably qualified and has extensive experience of adoption services.
Panel membership consists of a diverse ethnic group with a mix of adoptive
carers and independent members. However, the panel has only recently
identified the need to increase local authority representation to ensure that it
has sufficient social workers available to meet statutory regulations. At the time
of inspection, recruitment was taking place to address this shortfall. The chair
reports that the panel receives documents in a timely way because they are no
longer reliant on paper copies of documents and reports. For the voice of
children and young people to be heard, the panel is reliant on social workers
representing the childrens and young peoples views and on assessments.
These are not always clearly articulated.
legacy of poor leadership and management within the authority. The current
ADM makes timely decisions in accordance with regulations and has begun a
programme of improvement since taking over the role in August 2015. This
includes the development of a performance management framework, a clear
action plan for monitoring timescales for children and young people needing
adoption and a review of ADM procedures. However, since the local authority
has only just begun to establish monitoring of processes to achieve permanent
solutions, it is too early to evidence positive impact. The ADM acknowledges the
deficits in permanent solution planning in the authority and the importance for
children and young people of timely decisions and actions to ensure that they
live with permanent families. The ADM has responsibility for social work


practice across childrens services and is aware that it would be good practice
to ensure that arrangements are put in place for more independent oversight.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
on care leavers and drift in related policy development and implementation in
recent years. To rectify this, it has recently appointed an experienced interim
team manager to oversee the care leavers service and to implement the New
Belongings project to ensure that care leavers have an improved quality of
service in their journey to adulthood. This initiative is in its infancy but is
beginning to show positive improvements in the care leavers service. So far,
the project has delivered five council apprenticeships that are ring-fenced to
care leavers. It has also begun reviews of supported accommodation provision
and a review of the financial policy for care leavers.
effective support to 177 care leavers. In addition, there are a further 123 16and 17-year-olds looked after who are eligible by age for care leaving services.
Personal advisers have manageable caseloads and are able to spend time with
young people allocated to them. However, the arrangements mean that young
people are not allocated a personal adviser until they are 17.5 years old. This is
too late and does not ensure an early enough focus to support effective
transitions to independence or adult services for many young people.
majority (92%) of care leavers. Personal advisers contact and visit young
people regularly. A small minority of young people would benefit from contact
that is more robust, but evidence was seen of tenacious work in engaging those
who are harder to reach. Care leavers spoken to by inspectors are positive
about the support that they receive from their personal advisers.
accommodation. Care leavers have access to a variety of accommodation
including commissioned training flats, supported lodgings, semi-supported and
independent accommodation. Further work is being done by the local authority
to ensure that all accommodation is regularly reviewed to ensure its quality.
Care leavers housing needs are prioritised across the council and care leavers
are given a priority Band B access to social housing. Most care leavers told
inspectors that they feel safe where they are living and are satisfied with their
accommodation. The local authority does not use bed and breakfast
accommodation, and no young people are living in homes of multiple
occupancy at the time of the inspection.


wish. At the time of the inspection, 31 (17%) young people remained with their
foster carers under staying put arrangements.
dedicated weekly drop in is well attended by care leavers and ensures that they
have access to personal advisers, a Connexions adviser, and the designated
nurse for care leavers to access advice and support on sexual health. Of the
support group for parents and access to the family nurse partnership.
that a high proportion of care leavers move into education, employment or
training (EET). Those in further and higher education are supported
appropriately through bursaries. There has been a significant improvement in
the number of care leavers entering university, which now exceeds the national
target of 7%. Fifteen care leavers went to university in 2015 and eight care
leavers are in apprenticeships with private providers with a further five ringfenced apprenticeships recently agreed for care leavers within the local
authority
education, employment and training (EET). Care leavers are encouraged to take
part in programmes such as the Princes Trust and Duke of Edinburghs Award.
Twelve care leavers have accessed support from Talent Match run by Dudley
College, which provides mentoring for young people and supports young people
back into EET. Links with local colleges and training providers have enabled a
range of opportunities. According to the most recent local authority data, at
January 2016, 64.7% of 16- to 21-year-olds are recorded as in EET, including
some form of EET is high, at over 90%.
plans do not address key issues for young people, such as mental health or
substance misuse, or consider contingency planning. The majority of plans seen
are more effective, clearly reflect the views of care leavers, and give
appropriate attention to independence skills, education, training and
employment. Pathway reviews are carried out by personal advisers but do not
benefit from independent scrutiny, challenge or quality assurance to ensure
that young people are making progress. Although young people attend their
pathway planning meetings, information from relevant agencies is often
gathered by phone rather than by inviting them to attend, thereby missing an
opportunity for more meaningful interaction with young people.
independent living skills. This means that, for some, opportunities for successful
outcomes are more limited than they otherwise would be. Care leavers are in
many cases relying on personal advisers to prepare them for independence.


Young people themselves identified this shortfall in a recent survey, and current
planning by the local authority includes a greater focus on specific skill sets
such as cooking and finance.
services are not effective and start too late to ensure that young people have
the support that they require from adult services. Some young people have not
received an assessment from adult services until after their 18th birthday. This
means that some young people may not be in the right placement or
accommodation or receiving the services that they most need. As a result,
some young people experience anxieties and uncertainties at a critical period in
their lives.
limited to details about their birth and immunisations. This potentially leaves
young people unaware of important personal health information in adulthood.
Care leavers do not have timely and effective access to CAMHS and therapeutic
services. The large majority of care leavers are registered with a doctor and
most are registered with a dentist. Where a young person is a risk of child
sexual exploitation, a risk assessment is completed and appropriately referred
to the child sexual exploitation team and the YPSE panel or the adult
safeguarding multi-agency panel.
sets out the rights and entitlements of care leavers, education support and the
financial offer. The booklet offers a housing pledge, which states that the local
authority will make sure that care leavers homes are safe and that support is
provided along with the option of staying put. However, information on financial
support is not up to date and has caused some confusion about financial
entitlements for care leavers. The local authority has reviewed its financial
support to care leavers and now intends to increase it to the government
recommended allowance. Care leavers need to be informed about this change
as soon as possible.
unique to care leavers in Dudley. Currently, care leavers do not meet as a
separate forum from the CICC to discuss matters that are important to them.
This means that the specific views of care leavers, including their concerns, are
not being heard as well as they should be by the authority.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Senior leaders and managers have not ensured that children and young people
receive effective services that help and protect them. They cannot be assured that
children and young people are safe. Further, the planning for their care when they
become looked after is very poor. Deficits are long standing and have been known to
the local authority for some time. Despite this, it has not acted with sufficient
urgency to improve matters. As a result, many services have deteriorated.
The current senior leadership team is now providing strong leadership and strategic
vision in setting about rectifying these deficits. It has a sound understanding of the
deficits and has been systematic in its planning to establish the strategic foundations
on which to prioritise and drive forward the wide-ranging improvements required.
Partnership working has not provided the necessary challenge and support to the
local authority to tackle weaknesses. The recently established improvement board
and the Dudley Children and Young Peoples Alliance are very early steps in the
partnerships commitment to work together collaboratively to improve services to
children and young people in Dudley. These forums provide appropriate governance
arrangements but do not yet link effectively with other strategic activity across the
partnership. Many existing strategies are under review, not in place or currently
being developed, which impedes multi-agency working.
Elected members involvement as corporate parents is inadequate, and their scrutiny
is significantly underdeveloped. Recent political support to senior leaders and
additional financial investment is beginning to make a difference.
Local authority and joint commissioning arrangements are ineffective and are not
supported by robust performance monitoring arrangements. This means that it is not
possible to evaluate the impact of services provided to children and young people, to
analyse the shortfalls and to take action to meet gaps.
Poor senior and frontline management oversight, inaccurate performance information
and weak quality assurance arrangements have all contributed to the inconsistent
and poor-quality services provided to children and young people. New arrangements
are now in place but are yet to have impact. The instability of team managers
hampers progress.
The views of children, young people and their families do not fully inform service
developments within childrens social care, and this is a significant omission.
Arrangements to support children and young people at risk of or who have suffered
child sexual exploitation are in place but would be better supported through more


effective information sharing.
Inspection findings
the key areas inspected under this framework. Leaders cannot be assured that
children and young people are safe or that planning for those that are in the
care of the local authority is effective. Many current deficits are long standing
and have been known to the local authority for some time. Significant areas for
development identified at previous inspections have not been progressed.
Services provided for the help and protection of children and young people are
inadequate and do not ensure that risks are effectively identified and reduced.
Services for children and young people looked after by the local authority,
previously judged to be adequate, have deteriorated significantly and are now
inadequate.
vision in setting about rectifying these long-standing deficits. Concerted efforts
are being made by leaders to tackle and arrest a legacy of deteriorating
services. The local authority self-assessment is an accurate and honest
appraisal of the services it provides to vulnerable children and young people.
Leaders have a comprehensive understanding of the extent of the change
programme required. This is supported by a thorough, appropriately prioritised
and well-sequenced improvement plan. The local authority is working from a
very low base, and improvements will take time to result in real and sustained
change in the experiences of children and young people.
together local authority and partnership senior leaders to oversee temporarily
the delivery of the local authority improvement plan. An independent chair
appropriately facilitates board members to discuss openly strategic barriers to
progressing effective multi-agency working. While still in the early stages and
yet to have impact, improvement board members have taken individual
sponsorship responsibilities for key strands of the improvement plan and
recognise the urgency required to drive forward improvements.
including the LSCB, have not provided effective focus on shared strategic
priorities for the protection and care of children and young people in Dudley.
Partnership governance and monitoring arrangements to ensure the delivery of
existing strategies and development of others have been weak or absent. In
September 2015, the Dudley Children and Young Peoples Alliance replaced and
refreshed the previous Children and Young Peoples Trust arrangements. Its
governance arrangements with the improvement board are clear. However,
alignment to the health and well-being board and the LSCB are yet to be clearly
defined or understood. In addition, there is much more to do to ensure that
frontline practitioners and managers across agencies work collaboratively to
plan for and reduce risk to children and young people.


written, are in draft or are under review despite long-standing concerns about
the functioning of services. As a result, effective arrangements are not in place
to respond to a broad range of childrens and young peoples needs. These
include early-help provision, tackling neglect, joint commissioning arrangements
and many aspects of children and young people looked after provision. In
December 2015, the Dudley Children and Young Peoples Alliance did launch
the CAMHS Transformation Plan 20152020. This provides very early
indications of effective work at a strategic level to develop a coherent multiagency strategy and plan. It is informed by a needs analysis and draws on
some engagement activity with children and young people. However, the plan
is in its very early stages of implementation. This still leaves children and young
people without suitable pathways or access to services when they need them.
For example, suitable arrangements for young people to transition to adult
services or for children and young people who have experienced sexual
exploitation to access therapeutic services are not yet in place.
review existing contracts, procurement and commissioning arrangements. Many
of the current arrangements are long established and, while there is a range of
services, they are often fragmented or duplicated. Many are not yet outcome
focused so it is not known whether they are providing the right services to the
right children and young people at the right time. Much work is still to progress
and the delivery plan has only just begun. However, effective projectmanagement arrangements are now in place to drive forward urgently the
development of an integrated commissioning strategy. The joint strategic needs
analysis (JSNA) provides a broad range of general population analysis.
However, it is not sufficiently focused on the specific needs of vulnerable
children and young people.
developing a response to child sexual exploitation in Dudley. A wide range of
awareness-raising activity has taken place within the local community. In
September 2015, a specific multi-agency team to respond to the needs of
children at greatest risk of child sexual exploitation was launched. These
arrangements are providing an increasingly effective response. However,
information sharing and decision making arrangements are not yet embedded
across the partnership and reduce the effectiveness of the response to children
and young people.
discharge their responsibilities to children and young people looked after and
care leavers. In addition, scrutiny by elected members is significantly
underdeveloped despite the very recent efforts of officers to arrange support
via the Local Government Association. Scrutiny does not offer robust challenge
to the council about the effectiveness of services for the most vulnerable
children and young people in Dudley. However, senior leaders have been given
the full support of the lead member for children and the council leader. To this


end, 1.25 million additional funding provided during 201516 has contributed
to kick-starting priority improvements. This funding has allowed for the increase
in foster carer allowances to make recruitment more competitive within the
local market. It also provides the funding for additional posts to drive forward
the improvement plans. For example, the funding of a court progression
manager has provided significant and much-needed focus to reducing drift for
children and young people subject to public law proceedings.
significant challenge to the local authority. Proactive steps have been taken to
enable better collation of information with very recent changes to IT systems in
December 2015. However, the local authority still has areas where some key
information remains inaccurate or is manually collected and is not providing
real-time information. This weakens the local authoritys capacity to analyse
and respond to dips in performance. Staff compliance to minimum practice
standards, measured through performance information, is improving, but the
local authority is not yet in a place to be assured about the quality of practice
or the service that children and young people receive. Difficulties with some IT
systems mean that social workers are diverting their time from direct contact
with children, young people and families.
draws together a wide range of appropriate activities to examine the quality of
practice. These include routine auditing, thematic audits, practice observations,
engagement of children, young people, parents and professionals, complaints
information, performance data, supervision and feedback from the safeguarding
and review service. However, at this stage, this plan is aspirational and delivery
is not due to begin until at least March 2016. Until this time, the local authority
has very limited assurance of the quality of services that children and young
people receive. Audits undertaken for this inspection did not provide sufficient
qualitative analysis. Managers do not have the skills or the capacity to
undertake audits of the quality required to drive improvement. Two additional
temporary posts have been created to provide this capacity and to support the
development of audit skills.
some children and young people at risk, and too many cases with plans to
reduce risk, or secure long term permanence, are not expedited quickly
enough. At the time of the inspection, the local authority self-reports that 66%
of cases had management decisions recorded in the previous six weeks. This
leaves too many children and young people without management oversight in
that period. The local authority accepts that the quality of management
oversight and supervision is not yet consistently robust so that plans for
children and young people have drifted, and there has been delay in
responding to known risks that children and young people experience.
Arrangements before this date were too weak to address the scale of the


known deficits in social work practice. Staff training has been limited. Annual
staff performance reviews, where they have taken place, have not resulted in
plans to develop the skills and knowledge of staff to undertake their role. For
example, a social work practice model was introduced some years ago, but
training was not refreshed and new staff were not trained in the model. This
has led to inconsistent practice in assessing childrens and young peoples
needs. The chief social worker also leads on workforce development and has
done so since October 2015. He has very quickly begun to put in place
infrastructure to build the skills and knowledge of staff reflected in a new
workforce development strategy. This a coherent document that outlines
priority areas and sequenced work streams. However, it is a very recently
developed plan and work is in its infancy. The first phase of this has been
implemented, with a training needs analysis completed by 85% of staff,
although a full analysis has yet to be completed.
expectations for social work staff and managers. These events have been held
very recently and have yet to translate into improved practice. The excellence
in practice reference group provides a useful forum for staff to consult and to
engage them in the improvements required. Feedback from staff has led to the
suspension of the recruitment of newly qualified social workers until the local
authority is able to provide the support that is needed in their first year of
employment.
appointment to 24 new permanent social workers who have or are in the
process of commencing their employment with Dudley. Similarly, six new
permanent team managers have been appointed, two of whom have started.
Turnover of team managers has been high with a 36% turnover since April
performance management action to tackle some underperformance. However,
reliance on some temporary agency team managers has created inconsistency
for workers and drift and delay in risk reduction and care planning for children
and young people. Additional social work capacity and the beginnings of a
service restructure have reduced caseloads for some staff. Other workers
continue to have high caseloads pending ongoing service redesign.
development is limited. Insufficient progress in developing a systematic
strategic approach in response to complaints means that learning has been lost
and not responded to effectively. The complaints web page is not child-friendly.
This means that methods to hear from children and young people about their
experiences have not kept pace with current opportunities that technology
brings. Children and young people looked after have good access to a
commissioned advocates service, although very low numbers of children and
young people with a child protection or child in need plan have accessed an
advocate. The local authority does not yet understand the reasons for the low
level of take-up of this service.


people as a result of the services that they receive from childrens services.
Recent analysis of engagement activity by the Children and Young Peoples
Alliance established a number of key issues that it needs to address including
the poor analysis of childrens and young peoples views already collected and
duplication. Some useful consultation with children and young people has taken
place on a wider scale to establish the Dudley Deal, including work on the
vision and storyboards to support the JSNA. However, significant work to
engage children and young people fully and to work co-productively with them
as the Dudley Deal envisages is required.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate

Executive summary
The Dudley Safeguarding Children Board (DSCB) does not have arrangements in
place to meet its statutory responsibilities. Performance management and quality
assurance processes are not effective in identifying areas of work that require
significant improvement, and the Board is not able to assure itself that partner
agencies are fulfilling their statutory safeguarding obligations. The monitoring and
evaluation of training is not effective, and the delivery of multi-agency training is not
based on currently assessed need.
Significant drift and delay is evident in a range of Board activity. The Board business
unit is not adequately resourced or appropriately configured to provide effective
support to the Board, and the Board structure and processes do not yet support
focused and timely activity.
The Board has recognised and acted on the need to evaluate and improve its
effectiveness, and a detailed development action plan for the Board was signed off
during the inspection period. It is too early to evidence any improvements as a
result.
Board activity is not informed by the experiences of children and young people. No
feedback is gained from children and young people who have received safeguarding
services. Some positive engagement with young people to inform board priorities and
contribute to website development has been lost due to inadequate agency
responses in subsequent work with them.
The DSCB has driven and has strategic and operational oversight of work relating to
child sexual exploitation and missing children and young people. There are positive
developments in this area, although further work is required to embed this progress
fully, and risks relating to future resourcing have not been resolved.
Child death review work meets statutory requirements and analysis of the work has
underpinned practice improvements and prevention work. Recent progress is evident
in other areas, including identification and learning processes for cases considered by
the serious case review sub-group, but it is too soon for there to be evidence of
practice improvement as a result.


Recommendations

that it is fully compliant with its statutory responsibilities.
unit is appropriately structured and resourced to provide effective management
oversight and sufficient capacity to support the business of the Board.
partnership and developed to ensure that there is outcome-focused, timely and
effective activity linked to the Boards priorities. This includes engagement with
children and young people.
framework, embedding robust single- and multi-agency auditing of practice,
effective scrutiny of multi-agency performance data and feedback processes
from children and young people, families and staff.
training is delivered in line with identified priorities and needs and that effective
evaluation processes are in place for single- and multi-agency training.
improvement framework, training and quality assurance processes to identify,
disseminate, evaluate and monitor effectively the impact of learning and
improvement on the quality of service delivery.
guidance and where key risks are identified.
partner agencies to fulfil their statutory safeguarding requirements.
Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
place to fulfil its functions as required by statutory guidance. The governance
arrangements between the DSCB and partner boards do not operate effectively.
This is exemplified by a lack of Board representation on the childrens trust and
consequent absence of effective challenge or influence by the Board. A draft
partnership protocol does incorporate recent developments with the
establishment of the Children and Young Peoples Alliance and the
Improvement Board, but this has not yet been signed off and it is too early for
impact to be identified.


business unit is not adequately resourced or appropriately structured to provide
effective support to the Board. Efforts to remedy this with partner agencies
have been unsuccessful and remain unresolved. The structure and processes
supporting the Board do not facilitate timely and effective work despite some
recent restructuring, including undertaking the chairing of some sub-groups by
non-local authority representatives. Board members state that they are not well
supported to understand their role and to develop their effectiveness as Board
members.
The Board commissioned an external peer review and has undertaken a selfassessment. The self-assessment, reported on in November 2015, indicated
that in 19 out of 21 standards the Board had not begun to consider that area of
work, or that no active work was taking place. The peer diagnostic that
reported in January 2016 indicated that the Board was not meeting basic
requirements and that the overall management of both strategic and
operational risk by the Board was underdeveloped. The Board development
action plan arising from the diagnostic and the self-assessment was signed off
during the inspection period. It is therefore too early to evidence any
improvements as a result.
practice improvement may be required have not been identified through Board
activity. At the point of inspection, the Board had no quality assurance
framework. Coordinated multi-agency auditing and learning processes are not
in place. No multi-agency audit activity took place in 201415. The need for a
multi-agency audit plan was identified for 201516, but this has not yet been
completed or implemented. Some audit activity took place in 2015, but the
Board has not considered the results. An audit of cases of child sexual
exploitation that was undertaken in summer 2015 did consider individual cases,
but the identification of learning themes and an action plan to disseminate that
learning have not yet been presented to the Board. An audit of contact and
referrals was completed in December but findings have not yet been presented
to the Board. There is no reporting to the Board of individual agency audit
activity and findings. These deficits have significantly limited the Boards
understanding of the effectiveness of safeguarding work across Dudley.
to have an overview of safeguarding performance across agencies. The
performance data is primarily provided by the local authority, and the scrutiny
of that data has not been sufficiently rigorous to identify key areas of practice
shortfall, including core child protection activity. There has been significant drift
and delay in developing and implementing agreed multi-agency data set to
underpin more effective scrutiny of partner-agency work in safeguarding.
Additionally, there is an absence of feedback from children, young people,
families and staff to inform judgements on the quality of services.


obligations as set out in chapter 2 of Working together 2015 have been
subject to unacceptable delay and drift. The section 11 and section 175 audit
processes that where initiated in December 2014 are not yet completed at the
time of the inspection. Action plans from those agencies that have made
returns have been requested, but these have not all been returned at the time
of the inspection. The length of time over which the data has been collected
means that it is of limited use, exacerbated by the fact that there has also been
organisational change in many agencies in the period. The section 175 audits
have not been completed at the time of the inspection, which means that the
Board is not able to assess whether or how schools are fulfilling their statutory
obligations in relation to safeguarding. This is a significant gap.
management of allegations against professionals and private fostering.
However, there has been no reporting on other key areas, including early help,
which is required by Working together 2015. The Board has not assessed the
effectiveness of early help and has not been able to identify or drive any
required developments in early help as a result.
threshold document has only recently been revised and signed off and there
has not been time for this to be widely disseminated. The Board has considered
performance data in relation to the threshold to social care and has supported
the implementation of the single point of access (SPA) and the development of
the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH). The Board has not scrutinised the
application of thresholds for children and young people entering care or
thresholds within early help.
safeguard and promote the welfare of children and young people. The delivery
of training to date has not been underpinned by a training needs analysis or
been clearly informed by Board priorities. There has been a lack of
management oversight and the training resource has not been targeted to
prioritise need. The evaluation of training is limited and is not linked to other
quality assurance activity. The Board has recognised the shortfall and has
currently suspended the training delivered by the Board trainers to release
capacity to support a training review, including a training needs analysis. The
workforce development approach is currently being reviewed, with plans to link
with regional training developments. A training strategy has been written, but
this will need to be reconsidered on completion of the review and needs
analysis.
Positive initial engagement with young people in 2014 did inform some Board
priority setting, but subsequent planned scrutiny of multi-agency activity by
young people did not materialise due to lack of partner-agency engagement.
Suggestions made by young people in relation to the website were not acted


on. The participation officer reports that this lack of consultation and
participation has led to disengagement of young people from the Board and will
present significant challenges for future work with them.
sexual exploitation and missing children, although further work is required to
embed this progress fully, given this inspections findings in relation to current
operational practice. The DSCBs strategic and operational oversight of the work
and recent developments linking missing and child sexual exploitation work is
evident. Awareness-raising work has taken place, with further work planned in
March 2016. Intelligence information on victims, perpetrators and locations is
used to inform actions, and quarterly performance data gives an oversight and
some analysis of activity relating to children and young people at risk and
locations. The multi-agency data set relating to child sexual exploitation is not
yet sufficiently developed to give a comprehensive oversight of multi-agency
work in this area. Police did report that a regional police data set for child
sexual exploitation had recently been agreed, but this is not yet available to the
Board. Further work is required to ensure that prompt information sharing
between agencies always takes place, and that themes and patterns from all
missing and sexual exploitation work are comprehensively utilised to inform
activity. Risks relating to future resourcing have not been resolved to date.
Progress in this area of work is at risk because partner agencies have not
agreed to continue funding the child sexual exploitation coordinator post
beyond March 2016, and there has been no agreed resourcing to meet the
identified need for administrative and analytical support.
considered following process improvements in the last six months that were
driven by a new sub-group chair. Current work includes a joint thematic review
of two cases that uses a recognised systems-based approach with an
independent lead reviewer. One of the cases has met the criteria for a serious
case review. There has been appropriate liaison with the national panel, which
has agreed the current approach by Dudley. Dudley has contributed to a
serious case review led by another authority that was published during the
inspection. When cases do not meet the criteria for a serious case review, but
when learning may take place, participative learning processes are used.
Learning from recent exercises has not yet been disseminated, so it is not
possible to evaluate how effectively practice improvements have been
embedded.
However, it does not detail effectively how key links between serious and other
case reviews, quality assurance processes and training will operate to identify,
disseminate and evaluate the impact of learning. Findings from this inspection
have indicated that learning and required practice improvements identified from
a previous case review in 2013 (Child C) have not been wholly embedded.


when board activity and practice information have identified a clear need.
Previous case reviews, individual management reviews and numbers of children
and young people subject to a plan under the category of neglect have clearly
indicated the need for a neglect strategy. This has not been progressed in a
timely way, and work on the strategy and implementation is in its early stages.
This has meant that improvements in the quality and timeliness of responses to
neglect have not been developed.
too early to evidence impact. The Board has set up a task and finish group and
initial community engagement was reported. A female genital mutilation
strategy has recently been developed but no detailed action plan was evident at
the time of inspection, so it is unclear how issues will be addressed or by
whom.
of Working together 2015. The child death review annual report 201415 gives
a detailed analysis of the local picture, appropriately locating this in a national
and regional context. Recommendations from learning are identified and
practice improvements evidenced.
assessment of the performance and effectiveness of local services. Information
and data used in the report are limited, and analysis undertaken does not
clearly identify and understand weaknesses or detail actions required to address
those weaknesses. The report does detail broad areas of learning from case
reviews but does not detail how that learning has or will be disseminated.
Contributions made by partner agencies and board expenditure as required by
Working together 2015 are not detailed despite the insufficient resourcing of
the Board being a key unresolved issue. The annual report had not been
presented to the health and well-being board at the time of the inspection.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Peter McEntee
Deputy lead inspector: Linda Steele
Team inspectors: Jenny Turnross, Graham Reiter, Harmesh Manghra, Pauline Turner,
Julie Knight
Shadow inspectors: Lucy Martin
Senior data analyst: Peter McLaughlin, Donna Neill
Quality assurance manager: Lynn Radley


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


