Gloucestershire
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 27 February to 23 March 2017
Report published: 13 June 2017

Childrens services in Gloucestershire are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Inadequate

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Overall, services for children in Gloucestershire are inadequate.
Senior leaders have not sufficiently prioritised or improved the quality of social work
practice since services for children in need of help and protection were judged
inadequate in 2011, and the quality of services to children and families has now
deteriorated significantly. As a result, there are serious and widespread failures for
children in need of help and protection.
Serious concerns about the integrity of the current senior leadership team were
raised during this inspection. Inspectors discovered significant discrepancies in some
information provided to them by the senior leadership team, which demonstrated
that some staff feel vulnerable, unsupported by senior managers and fearful of
challenging or exposing poor practice. Relationships between senior managers and
practitioners have broken down. Inspection findings and staff feedback, as well as an
unprecedented number of whistleblowing concerns, demonstrate that the
management oversight of childrens services is failing to protect children and
families.
However, there is evidence of recent financial and political will to improve services
for children and families that has led to a number of new developments.
Nevertheless, improvements have not been swift enough and have not been robustly
monitored by senior leaders to ensure that they consistently deliver improved
outcomes for children. Poor relationships between managers and staff, and a high
number of inexperienced social workers, coupled with a high turnover of staff, have
further compounded the ability of senior leaders to deliver sustained improvement.
The quality and accuracy of performance information available to senior managers
are poor and do not enable senior managers to scrutinise performance and social
work practice rigorously enough. Quality assurance processes are underdeveloped
and are not sufficiently well targeted or purposeful in identifying key weaknesses in
practice. Audit activity has been limited, and findings from audits have not been
collated effectively or used sufficiently well to drive improvement in childrens
services.
Management oversight is inadequate. It lacks rigour and direction. It continually fails
to identify key weaknesses in social work practice or ongoing risks to children. The
impact of child protection chairs and independent reviewing officers in securing
better outcomes for children is limited. Key decisions and actions to support children
are not pursued rigorously enough or completed in a timely manner.
Significant weaknesses in social work practice are prevalent across help and
protection, and in some areas of children looked after, children are not seen early
enough by social workers, and significant delays in responding to their needs mean
that some children are left exposed to unassessed risk for far too long. Thresholds
for access to services are not consistently applied. Assessments, decision-making and


planning for children are poor and frequently adult-focused. Case records are poorly
maintained.
Children in need and child protection plans are not sufficiently clear or robust.
Children experience a high number of repeat referrals and repeat child protection
plans, as well as significant delays in initiating care proceedings. Strategy meetings
are not always timely, and this inevitably leads to delays in child protection enquiries.
Arrangements to identify and support children at risk of sexual exploitation are an
improving area of practice. However, the quality of individual casework to protect
young people continues to be variable. Young people are not routinely offered a
return home interview after they have been missing.
Delays in decisions to look after children mean that they do not always become
looked after when they need to. However, children are visited frequently by their
social workers and many receive a child-centred and sensitive service from workers
who know them well. Permanency planning for children is not yet consistent and
pre-proceedings work is not robust enough. Life-story work and direct work with
children are effective when undertaken, but are not routinely embedded in practice.
Educational outcomes for children in care are variable, and attainment and progress
at key stage 2 through to key stage 4 are too low. School attendance by children in
Year 11 and above is poor, and while improvement strategies are in place, these are
not yet sufficiently effective in improving attainment and attendance for children.
The local authority is in touch with the vast majority of its care leavers, who receive
good support from personal advisers and access to a range of suitable
accommodation. However, the local authority has not made sustained efforts to
contact and keep in touch with all care leavers. The quality of pathway planning is
poor. Some care leavers are placed in bed and breakfast accommodation with
insufficient support, which is unacceptable. A high number of care leavers are not in
employment, education or training.
Some improvements to the quality of practice are taking place. These include the
strengthening of early-help services and improved commissioning arrangements. The
local authority has demonstrated a significant strength in the appointment of, and
subsequent learning from, the young people who form the ambassadors team. They
ensure that the experiences of vulnerable children and young people are highlighted
and integrated well into service planning.
Stable managers in the fostering and adoption teams continue to support and
develop strong practice. Early permanence to adoption is highly effective in ensuring
that children are placed at their adoptive home as early as possible.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home. This home was judged to be
good at its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
February 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
November 2010. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since August 2011.
 The DCS is also responsible for some services for vulnerable adults.
 The chief executive has been in post since May 2005.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
June 2014.
 The local authority has commissioned out youth support services, including youth
offending and targeted support for young people, including care leavers. The
commissioned youth support service (Prospects) also provides leadership and
management for children in care over the age of 11 and care leavers.
 Childrens centre provision is provided by a national charity and two local social
enterprises.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 124,799 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Gloucestershire. This is 20.2% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 14.4% (at 31 August 2014) of the local authoritys children aged
under 16 years are living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 10.83% (the national average is 14.5%)
 in secondary schools is 7.55% (the national average is 13.2%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 7.7% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 The largest minority ethnic group of children and young people in the area is
Mixed and Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 7.5% (the national average is 20.1%)
 in secondary schools is 5.2% (the national average is 15.7%).
Child protection in this area
 At 28 February 2017, 7,319 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 28 February 2017, 461 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 568 at 31 March 2016.
 At 28 February 2017, 19 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from 18 at 31 March 2016.
 In the two years prior to the inspection, seven serious incident notifications were
submitted to Ofsted and three serious case reviews were completed by the local
authority.
 There are two serious case reviews ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 28 February 2017, the local authority is looking after 604 children. This is an
increase from 549 at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
authority area
out of the authority area
authority area
 In the past 12 months:
 there have been 31 adoptions


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


returned to be looked after
independent living
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after or are now living
in houses in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that thresholds for services are consistently understood and applied,
so that all children receive an appropriate and timely response when they
need it.


Ensure that all work is allocated within appropriate timescales, and that
consistent management oversight regularly reviews capacity and ensures that
actions are implemented to safeguard children and progress their plans.


Ensure that assessments of children, including children looked after, are
timely and proportionate, identify risk and protective factors effectively, and
lead to robust and measurable plans.


Ensure that strategy meetings are timely and that there is effective safety
planning for children prior to an initial child protection conference being held.


Take immediate action to ensure that the quality of management oversight
and supervision are strengthened, and that the support and guidance given to
social workers are clearly evidenced to enable them to progress work
effectively and in a timely way. (Paragraph 30 and 112)


Take urgent steps to ensure that social workers and managers receive
relevant child sexual exploitation training and that children who are identified
as at risk of sexual exploitation are subject to a risk assessment, and offered
responsive and appropriate help.


Ensure that all young people who go missing from home and care are offered
prompt return home interviews and that the information obtained is used
effectively to support their safety plans.


Ensure that children come into care in a planned way, whenever possible, and
that prompt legal advice and immediate social work action ensure that preproceedings work and care proceedings are both swiftly actioned and have a
demonstrable and positive impact for children.


Continue to improve short-term placement stability, particularly for older
adolescents with complex needs, by expanding the resources and placement
choice available.


Ensure that the importance of permanency planning is understood by all staff,
particularly professionals at the front door, and that it is implemented in a
timely way for all children.


Ensure that life-story work and direct work is offered within the childs
timescale to help them to understand their histories and experiences.


Ensure that the quality assurance function and escalation process of both
independent reviewing officers and child protection chairs are well embedded


and purposeful, and that their findings and challenges are well considered and
acted upon to improve outcomes for children.

Ensure that up-to-date, accurate data is collated and analysed to support the
virtual school to evaluate impact and improvement for children looked after
and their educational needs.


Devise and implement effective strategies to reduce the number of care
leavers who are not in education, employment or training, and provide
Gloucestershire care leavers with opportunities for work experience, work
placements and traineeships in the local authority.


Ensure that social workers make sustained attempts to keep in touch with all
care leavers and monitor their welfare effectively, while maintaining robust
case records.


Ensure that the quality of pathway plans is consistently good and that care
leavers are actively encouraged to contribute to the content and development
of these plans.


Ensure that in circumstances where emergency bed and breakfast
accommodation is used, these arrangements are risk-assessed and that the
young person is robustly monitored and supported.


Implement a system so that findings from reviews, audits, staff surveys,
complaints and serious case reviews, and feedback from children, parents and
carers, are collected, analysed, systematically actioned and regularly
evaluated.


Improve performance information, and ensure that data is accurate and
consistently well used to understand the quality of performance in localities
and practice areas, and that this informs robust planning for improvement.


Summary for children and young people
 Inspectors found that services for children in Gloucestershire have deteriorated
since the last inspection in February 2011. This means that children who need
help and protection do not always have the right help, at the right time, to keep
them safe.
 Social workers do not visit children and young people who are living with their
own family regularly enough to make sure that they are safe. When they do visit
children, they do not always record what the children tell them. This means that
the plans that they make for children and their families are not always well
informed.
 Children and young people experience too many changes of social workers.
Assessments and plans need to be clearer, so that everyone knows what has to
change to make things better for children.
 Senior managers do not always check that social workers are doing what they
should be doing to make sure that children and families receive the help that they
need quickly enough. This means that there are too many delays in families
receiving help and support.
 Some children are left in unsafe situations for too long. However, once the
decision has been made for them to be looked after by the local authority, the
planning for their care improves. Children have better support when they live with
foster carers or family members.
 Most children who are looked after by the local authority live in the same
placement for a long time and have the help that they need to ensure that they
are healthy and go to school regularly.
 Children whose plan is for them to be adopted are very quickly placed with
families and receive a very good level of support. Adopters speak highly of the
support that they receive to ensure that children and young people remain settled
and live in homes that best meet their needs.
 Young people leaving care receive a service that needs to improve. They are
given help to find suitable accommodation, and staff mostly keep in touch with
them to provide help and support, but the quality of the written plans to help
them to prepare for adult life is not good enough.
 Senior managers are aware that there is much to be done to improve the service
that children receive. They accept and now understand that keeping children and
young people safe must be a priority.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Inadequate

Summary
Services for children in need of help and protection are inadequate, resulting in
serious and widespread failures. Children are not seen early enough by social
workers, and the significant delays in responding to their needs mean that some
children are left exposed to unassessed risk for far too long. Thresholds for access
to services are not consistently applied. Assessments, decision-making and
planning for children are poor and frequently adult-focused. Case records are
poorly maintained. When children do receive help, cases are stepped down to early
help or closed too soon, without evidence of sustainable change and reduced risk.
Not all work is allocated, and a lack of management oversight leaves children in
situations of risk without their needs being assessed. Childrens views are not
always clearly evident in assessments and plans. Social workers do not always visit
children regularly enough to make sure that they are safe. When they do visit
children, they do not always record what the children tell them, and this
contributes to delays and poor decisions to protect them.
The quality of assessments and plans is too variable. Although some are good, too
many repeatedly fail to consider childrens histories to ensure that all risks to
children are identified. Plans are often overly optimistic about the capacity of
parents to change or their ability to protect their children, particularly for those
children who experience domestic abuse, parental substance misuse or the
cumulative impact of neglect.
Strategy meetings are frequently delayed, and subsequent action plans are not
consistently robust or measurable. There is a lack of safety planning for children
between the strategy meetings and the initial child protection conferences.
The provision of early-help services is improving. The development of a clearly
understood early-help pathway is seeing an increase in the number of children
benefiting from early-help provision.
The quality of practice provided for children who go missing or who are at risk of
child sexual exploitation, although improving, is not yet sufficiently robust for all
children. Return home interviews are not always undertaken, leading to missed
opportunities to engage effectively with young people. Child sexual exploitation
risk assessments are not regularly updated to inform better safety planning for
children.


Inspection findings

Inspectors found serious and widespread failures in services for children in
need of help and protection. Severe weaknesses in performance monitoring,
quality assurance, management oversight and the quality of social work
practice have led to serious delays in assessing risk and putting plans in place
to protect children. There are delays at every point of the childs journey.
Current systems and processes are ineffective.


A significant number of childrens cases seen by inspectors were referred back
to the local authority in which social workers and managers had failed to
identify children at risk and, in particular, to respond appropriately to
escalating risks in families. This included children left at potential risk of
significant harm for far too long, and who required immediate action to
safeguard them.


Early-help services have recently been restructured and strengthened
following an organisational review, in order to improve targeted interventions
and increase the number of families accessing early-help provision. Services
are being developed on a locality basis and are therefore becoming
increasingly responsive to local need. Childrens centres are now providing a
service for children from birth to 11 years of age, to support families as
children move into secondary school. Increasing numbers of children have an
early-help plan, and social workers report that they have a clearer
understanding of the services available for children and families. Multiprofessional and multi-agency training has led to a more cohesive approach to
assessment and planning for early help through my assessment, my plan and
my plan plus.


Initial contacts for childrens social care are screened by the triage service.
Most are dealt with in a timely manner, with appropriate actions being
identified. However, for a number of contacts, inspectors saw delays in
decision-making for children. A lack of performance data and management
oversight means that the effects of delay are not recognised or managed
effectively. Thresholds for services are not understood as well as they should
be by practitioners, including those from other agencies. The rationale for
sending some initial contacts to the multi-agency safeguarding hub is not
always clear, and contributes to further delays in assessments being allocated.


Visits to children to assess their needs are not happening quickly enough.
Local authority data for January 2017 identifies that only 60% of children are
seen within appropriate timescales from referral, which leaves children in
situations of unassessed risk for too long.


The development of a multi-agency daily meeting to consider the needs of
children and families exposed to domestic violence is effective. Appropriate
information-sharing and decision-making result in a coordinated partnership
approach and response.



Child protection strategy discussions are not held soon enough when concerns
about children are first identified. Delays between strategy discussions and
initial child protection conferences were seen in too many cases, without
adequate safety planning in place to ensure that children are protected prior
to the development of a multi-agency child protection plan.
(Recommendation)


Chronologies are not used well enough in care planning for children. Either an
absence of chronologies or their ineffective use means that historical
information about known risk to children does not routinely inform current
planning. The impact of domestic abuse, adult substance misuse or parental
mental health is not always understood or given sufficient focus in terms of
the cumulative and emotional impact on children. There is an over-reliance on
parental self-reporting, with insufficient challenge or consultation with
partners to verify parents accounts of events and incidents. In stronger
assessments, childrens views are clear and include a thorough assessment of
risk with clear actions, but too many are descriptive and lack sufficient or
effective analysis. (Recommendation)


In too many cases, management oversight is absent or weak, and lacks rigour
and direction. Supervision is happening on a regular basis but, in many cases,
it is not used well enough to understand childrens safety and progress.
Managers at all levels do not challenge poor practice. (Recommendation)


In some cases, children and families are not allocated a social worker for
several weeks, leaving children in situations of unassessed risk. The lack of
management oversight, actions not being implemented, changes in social
worker and a failure to recognise and respond to childrens changing
circumstances contribute to children not being adequately supported or
protected. At the time of the inspection, there were 47 children and young
people who were unallocated within the Gloucester team. (Recommendation)


Social work reports about children and families that are used in child
protection conferences are not always supported by current assessments and
up-to-date chronologies, and many reports lack sufficient analysis of risk. This
means that decisions to protect children lack rigour.


Advocacy is available to support children in child protection conferences, and
is highly regarded as a valuable service that enables children to understand
and participate in conferences. However, in some cases that were seen by
inspectors, there was no evidence of any direct work with children to support
their participation in child protection conferences. There is a lack of awareness
among social workers of the availability of the advocacy service to support
children. An absence of advocacy support for children in child protection core
groups and children in need planning meetings hampers their full participation
in important meetings.



Overall, childrens plans are poor, with a lack of focus on risk and protective
factors. Plans do not always contain the views of parents or children. Too
many child protection plans do not identify the key risks to enable parents and
professionals to be clear about what needs to change, to ensure that children
are better protected and within what timescale, or the consequences if things
do not improve.


The absence of an escalation policy impedes the ability of child protection
chairs to formally challenge poor social work practice. When concerns have
been raised, they have not been responded to with sufficient rigour by senior
leaders. (Recommendation)


Processes to step up cases to statutory intervention or step down to early help
are not embedded, and this has led to children not receiving an appropriate
and timely service. When children cease to be the subject of a child protection
plan, a child in need plan is implemented. However, in many cases, children in
need plans lack rigour and are then stepped down to universal services far too
early. Inspectors saw examples where a period of child protection and child in
need planning had not achieved substantive change, resulting in children
being re-referred within a short period of time for further help and protection.
One third of child protection plans open at the time of the inspection were for
children for whom this was a second or subsequent period of child protection
planning. For this group of children, the previous plan had been closed too
soon or the work to reduce risk had been largely ineffective.


Poor management oversight and an absence of a formal review process mean
that some children have been subject to a child protection plan for more than
two years where improvements to their circumstances were not made or
sustained. There is a lack of effective challenge and action to support
improvement for children who are subject to a child protection plan. In
particular, there is a failure to identify at an early stage when interventions
are not reducing risk for these children. In a number of cases seen by
inspectors, decisions to hold legal planning meetings and consider care
proceedings are significantly delayed and, when decisions are made to initiate
care proceedings, there are further delays before action is taken.


Inconsistent attendance and participation by professionals at child protection
conferences mean that there are insufficient multi-agency contributions to
important discussions to help to keep children safe. Social work reports are
not always shared with parents prior to a conference, which means that
parents full participation in the conference is severely limited.


Almost all children who are subject to a child protection or a child in need plan
are visited by social workers in accordance with their plans. However, the
frequency of visiting is not always consistent with the level of identified need.
For some children, staff turnover has had a negative impact on children
enjoying the consistency of a named, allocated worker who knows them well.


The quality of visits to children is too variable, and the wishes and feelings of
children are poorly reflected in their case files.

In a small minority of cases, individual work with children puts their
experience at the heart of the decisions being made to safeguard them.
However, in too many cases the experience of children is not always known.
Individual and direct work with children is only evidenced in a very few cases.
Case recording does not capture the purpose of visits to children, and the
visits are often too adult-focused, not individualised when children are part of
a brother or sister group, and do not reflect childrens cultural and diversity
needs. Visits do not consistently record whether children are seen or whether
they are seen alone.


Child protection core group meeting are mostly ineffective. Information
gathered at core groups is not routinely used to inform planning and improve
childrens experiences. Meetings do not always occur within the required
timescale. An absence of effective contingency planning, or the failure to
implement plans within specified timescales, has led to drift and delay and, in
some cases, delays in taking decisive action to protect children.


Responses to young people at risk of homelessness are appropriately
assessed by the 16-plus assessment team. There is a timely response to need,
and interventions are adapted to changing circumstances. Young people are
accommodated by the local authority in a timely manner when their
circumstances warrant such an intervention.


Children with disabilities receive a responsive service consistent with their
level of need. The development of a birth to 25 service is still in its infancy,
but it should reduce transition points for young people and their families.


In most cases, the response to concerns about children by the emergency
duty team is proportionate to the identified risk. However, contact with
children out of hours is not routinely recorded on childrens case records. As a
consequence, information-sharing between the out-of-hours service and
daytime staff is poor and potentially puts children at risk of significant harm.


Managers use well-developed, thorough and carefully evaluated systems to
identify and track children who are missing from education (CME). The CME
team has developed close working partnerships, which it uses well, with a
wide range of agencies. These include health and social care professionals,
education providers and the United Kingdom Visas and Immigration Agency to
locate children and their families when they go missing.


The quality of practice provided for children who go missing or who are at risk
of child sexual exploitation is not yet sufficiently robust for all children. Not all
children who have had a missing episode in the past six months in which a
child sexual exploitation risk is identified have a completed risk assessment.


Risk assessments are not routinely updated to inform better safety planning
for children.

Completing return home interviews after a period of being missing is an
improving picture. However, the number of completed return home interviews
still remains too low. Local authority data indicates that only 41% of children
reported as missing in December 2016 had a return home interview. This
means that important details about what happens when children go missing
are not being captured quickly enough to inform planning and support for
children at risk. Where return interviews are held, in most cases, the quality of
information and analysis is poor. This limits the opportunities to reduce further
missing episodes. (Recommendation)


Multi-agency risk assessment conferences and multi-agency public protection
arrangements are satisfactory, with appropriate multi-agency attendance. The
safety needs of children are appropriately considered at these meetings.


Private fostering arrangements are mostly well identified and understood
across the partnership. Awareness raising in the wider community is more
limited. Some work with local schools and language schools has taken place,
but this is in its infancy and is not sufficiently robust. The timeliness of visits
to children who are privately fostered is variable, as is the quality of
assessments.


Allegations against adults who work or volunteer with children are treated
seriously. Tracking and information-sharing processes are in place. Allegations
meetings are held, with appropriate attendees, and result in a proportionate
response and relevant actions being identified.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Children looked after in Gloucestershire do not receive a consistently good service.
A legacy of poor practice, a weak stepping-up service for children who require care
following a child in need or child protection plan and increasing numbers of
children looked after are challenges for the local authority.
There are delays in issuing care proceedings, and the pre-proceedings process is
insufficiently robust and timely. Some children wait too long to be looked after
and, as a consequence, they are left for far too long in risky situations. Of the
children most recently looked after, the majority have come into care in an
unplanned way, despite them and their families being known to the local authority.
Children are visited frequently by their social workers, and many receive a childcentred and sensitive service by workers who know them well. For some children,
having too many changes of social worker has had an impact on their ability to
build a meaningful relationship with someone who knows them well. Children do
have timely care plans and reviews, but these are not consistently child-focused
and do not result in improved outcomes for all children. The risks associated with
children going missing from care or at risk of child sexual exploitation are known
and considered, but the response is inconsistent and insufficiently thorough for
each child.
Permanency planning is variable, with some children not having this considered at
the earliest possible stage. However, many children do have good outcomes and
live in long-term secure and stable placements.
Life-story work is of a high quality, but is not always available in a timely way.
Long-term placement stability is good, including for children placed out of the
authority. Short-term placement stability is improving and this needs to have
continued focus, particularly for older adolescents. The fostering service is a
strength, and is managed effectively with well-trained and supported foster carers.
Adoption is a particular strength, with some innovative practice supporting high
numbers of children being placed in permanent placements and adoption being
secured for a wide range of children.
The Children in Care Council is influential and well supported to participate in a
wide range of activities that improve services for children looked after and across
the council.
Services for care leavers require improvement. Pathway planning and the
frequency of keeping in touch with all young people are areas for improvement.


Inspection findings

In order to improve the experience and outcomes of children looked after, the
local authority has reorganised services for children looked after. The local
authority has recognised the need to address a legacy of poor practice in a
number of areas, namely frequent, or inappropriate, use of section 20, poorquality pre-proceedings and court work, poor early permanency planning,
poor short-term placement stability and an absence of challenge from the
independent reviewing officers (IROs). The actions to address all these
concerns are starting to have an impact and real benefit for children, with
work by practitioners being of a significantly better quality in the past two to
three months. This has not yet reached a level where all work is consistently
good for all children looked after.


The additional investment in a new head of service for permanence, already in
post, a new additional placement team from April 2017, two additional fulltime IROs and a new case-tracking manager to oversee court work indicates
that senior leaders have understood the weaknesses in service provision.
Although no child looked after was seen to be unsafe during the inspection,
much of the work does not yet demonstrate a good, qualitative understanding
of the comprehensive experience of each child.


The number of children looked after in Gloucestershire is increasing, overall.
All children looked after require that they are kept safe and that the threshold
to care is appropriate. However, there is significant drift and delay in issuing
care proceedings for some children, even when this is the agreed plan, and
there are delays in following up actions from pre-proceedings work, leaving
some children living in risky situations for far too long. An improvement plan
to address delay is only showing an impact for a small number of children,
and the local authority must continue actively and assertively to drive
improvements in the timeliness, quality and impact of pre-proceedings and
care proceedings work. The quality of the pre-proceedings letters seen by
inspectors is good. (Recommendation)


Currently, half of care proceedings take more than 26 weeks, with an average
time of 31 weeks. The number of timely care proceedings has appropriately
increased from 36% in March 2016 to 43% at the time of the inspection,
ensuring that children are increasingly being better protected by a court order.
The local authority has successfully reduced the number of children voluntarily
accommodated under section 20 to 34%, and is working with local courts and
the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) to
address a legacy of poor practice in this area. The recent implementation of a
monthly meeting with Cafcass is assisting this development.


Most children are visited regularly and seen alone by their social worker, who
knows them well and understands their wishes. This has been affected by
children experiencing too many changes of social worker. Assessments and


plans consistently contain sufficient detail of childrens circumstances, but vary
in the quality of their recorded analysis, the childrens views or the day-to-day
current lived experience of children. Most work meets some of these criteria,
but not much of the work meets all. This level and style of practice were also
seen in child permanence reports and recent court work, which were of an
adequate quality yet could be improved by increased sensitivity, analysis and
attention to individual detail. However, life-story work with children is of a
high quality, although not consistently timely. The impact of support,
supervision and guidance from frontline managers is not always evident in
assisting social workers to improve their practice. (Recommendation)

Childrens reviews routinely take place, and care plans are updated and on
file. Care plans are not sufficiently focused on the impact of childrens early
experiences. Consideration of permanency is not consistently considered at
the earliest possible stage for each child. The local authority is aware of this,
and it is a key priority in its current planning. A permanence summit in 2016,
training by Cafcass and increased challenge by the IROs are starting to have
some positive impact. The local authority recognises that the pace of
improvement has been far too slow. As a result, a dedicated head of service
for permanence has been appointed to ensure that the pace of improvement
is swifter, and that consideration of permanence planning at the earliest
possible stage results in consistent outcomes for all children more quickly.
(Recommendation)


The numbers of children who return to care are reducing and are at their
lowest since the local authority began measuring this indicator, but are still
too high at 11%. The local authority has some services that are successfully
reducing the numbers of children returning to care. For example, the diversion
placement support team is a strong, effective and well-respected service for
children, with professionals working hard either to prevent children becoming
looked after a second time or to ensure that they return home safely. The
success of the reunification project has meant that 42 of 54 children have
been able to return home to family and remain at home since April 2016. A
further small number of young people were able to move from residential care
to foster care, where they remain.


An experienced designated nurse and designated consultant paediatrician for
children looked after provide a good knowledge and skill base, ensuring
effective multi-agency working in relation to childrens health needs. An
annual conference, workshops and training support practice development. The
health needs of the 28 unaccompanied asylum seekers who are looked after
are met through the voluntary sectors provision of drop-in cafes, offering
translation and befriending services. All of the health needs for children looked
after, including initial and review health assessments, are now coordinated by
three doctors surgeries, overseen by the designated nurse and designated
doctor, providing a more consistent overview of childrens health needs.



Some innovative practice is underway, including support regarding mental
health concerns. The Teens in crisis pilot, started in July 2016, offers an
online counselling service for young people. This was championed by the
young ambassadors who spoke at the scrutiny panel in support of the idea.
To date, 78 young people have accessed 260 sessions, with a waiting time of
under a week, and an early evaluation is showing a positive impact on
improving the emotional resilience of children.


Schools and designated teachers prioritise the needs of children looked after,
including those children who live out of the area. Effective strategies are used
to protect children from discrimination and bullying. However, only 75% of
children looked after currently attend good or better schools. Children in
underperforming schools receive additional direct support and monitoring by
staff from the virtual school, although the effectiveness of this strategy has
not been evaluated.


Virtual school staff are sufficiently resourced to oversee and support all
children looked after. The virtual school has introduced Praise to progress
programmes, which recognise and reward the achievements of children,
teachers and foster carers. Celebration evenings and individual children
receiving handwritten cards from senior managers to recognise their
attendance at school are valued and appreciated by all concerned.


The virtual school team works very closely and productively with school staff,
and increasingly foster carers, providing training, practical support and advice
that promote learning for children looked after. All school staff interviewed by
inspectors were emphatic that such training had helped to improve their
classroom and pastoral support practice. Virtual school staff hold regular and
much appreciated good practice sessions for schools designated teachers,
and the virtual school is a trusted and valued partner. School attendance is
monitored. However, strategies to improve attendance have not yet had a
positive impact on children from Year 11 onwards.


The impact of the virtual schools intervention and support strategies is
unclear, not least because progress data is unreliable. While the pupil
premium is distributed efficiently to schools, its use is not measured
meaningfully by schools or the virtual school, and overall it has had limited
quantifiable impact. Virtual school managers recognise that just under half of
the personal education plans (PEPs) produced for each child need some
improvement, based only on the numbers of completed PEPs, not on the
impact of intervention and support strategies. Most of the targets set in PEPs
are neither specific nor measurable. The attainment of qualifications by
children looked after is too low. Only a small minority of children looked after
gain good GCSE qualifications at A* to C including English and mathematics.
Overall, there is no evidence of sustained improvement in academic outcomes
or progress over the past three years. (Recommendation)



No children looked after have been permanently excluded from school during
the past three years. The level of fixed-term exclusions, at 15%, while
reducing, is still too high. This has recently been identified as a cause for
concern and the local authority needs to implement effective strategies quickly
to reduce it. Four providers of alternative school provision operate across the
county, and the attainment of qualifications in alternative provision is
extremely low for children looked after. The proportion of children returning
from alternative provision is very high in mainstream primary schools, but is
only around 87% in secondary education. A new managed transition scheme
has been piloted to increase the sustainability of childrens return to secondary
education. This is due to be rolled out in full in April 2017.


The local authority maintains a thorough record of children who are electively
home educated (EHE). The number of EHE children is high, currently 596.
Although the local authority has developed initiatives with schools to try to
reduce this number, the number of children becoming EHE has risen by 20%
from last year.


The fostering service is managed effectively, and is a strength in the
organisation and continues to improve, and foster carers are well trained and
supported. A busy fostering panel is appropriately chaired by an experienced
independent chairperson. Foster carers understand delegated authority and
are happy with the support that they receive. Although they do not
consistently receive all information on children at the time when a child is
placed with them, they generally consider that the service for children is
improving overall, and feel valued and appreciated by the local authority. Two
foster carers helpfully sit as representatives on the corporate parenting panel.


Social workers in the fostering service are knowledgeable. Assessments of
carers, statutory checks and support for carers are generally of a good quality,
and foster carer agreements, visits and foster carer training are all up to date
and clearly recorded on the foster carers file. The fostering service helpfully
uses an independent person to undertake a standards of care investigation,
offering independent scrutiny of assessments of foster carers. Annual reviews
of foster carers are undertaken on time.


The local authority has had some challenges to ensure that all children receive
good short-term placement stability and that there is sufficient placement
choice available. This is despite the fostering team exceeding its in-year
recruitment target and the helpful practice of conducting regular stability
meetings for vulnerable placements. Placement initiatives, such as an extra
payment to carers to be on the out-of-hours list for children over the age of
issues for the local authority.


The use of family and friends is appropriately considered, but timeliness needs
to improve. The majority of regulation 24 assessments require an extension to


the time taken for the assessment to be completed, although this is carefully
overseen and monitored through the fostering panel process.

Despite these challenges, the local authority is able to ensure that the vast
majority of children live within the county (512 of the 604 children looked
after are placed within Gloucestershire) and to offer a high level of placement
support to children placed out of the area. One residential manager described
the social worker as dedicated to the child and consistently available, and
that it had been one of the best placement moves to the home that she had
experienced. Children with disabilities have access to a well-run short-break
service.


The local authority has recently implemented a dedicated IRO team for
children looked after. More than 100 children chair their own reviews in
Gloucestershire, with some receiving a certificate for their chairing skills. Since
July 2016, the IRO team has raised 120 challenges and escalations, showing
an increasing awareness and confidence in the process. For example, initially
many were about electronic records not being up to date, but more recently
the concerns raised include delays in permanence planning, children being
vulnerable in their placements and children missing from care where no action
is taken to safeguard them. The impact of these challenges varies and there is
still a considerable amount of work to do to maximise the impact and
consistently to listen to and respect the input of this skilled and stable group
within the service. (Recommendation)


Children who are missing or at risk of child sexual exploitation are known to
the local authority, and some action is taken to consider the risk that they are
exposed to. However, the response is frequently reactive and the impact is
variable. Risk has reduced for some children due to the security and stability
of their placement. For other children, there is an inconsistent completion of
return home interviews, and these do not always contain sufficient
information to reduce the likelihood of going missing again. Trigger plans are
completed and on file, and do contain useful background information, but
overall there needs to be a greater focus on preventative work with each child
to ensure that children are consistently kept safe. (Recommendation)


Long-term placement stability for children looked after is an area of strength
in the local authority (73% at December 2016). Many children, including large
groups of brothers and sisters living together, are safe and secure, with a
sense of belonging. This includes long-term fostering, where there have been
work. Children receive high-quality life-story work, but there are delays for
some children in being offered this service. (Recommendation)


A group of 15 ambassadors, each with care experience, are employed by the
local authority, and are highly influential and work well in partnership to
improve services for children. They describe themselves as sweeping through
the council like a storm. They are an impressive and dynamic presence in the


council, and participate in a wide range of activities. They are involved in
training and staff recruitment, as well as attendance at the corporate
parenting and scrutiny panel. They offer more than the sum total of the
activities and events by enhancing the emotional understanding of the
organisation, by each having a dedicated focus and by being supported to
share their individual experiences at the highest corporate level to staff,
schools and the Local Safeguarding Children Board, and at external events.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

Securing permanent families for children who need adoption is a key priority
and strength in Gloucestershire. Adoption is routinely considered for all
children if they are unable to live permanently with their birth family. Most
children who need permanence have achieved this through adoption and, in
particular, a high number of brothers and sisters are adopted together. In the
these, 54 were living at their adoptive home and 26 of them have an adoption
order.


Most children with a plan for adoption find homes quickly, and move
purposefully and at a pace suitable for them and their adopters. The time
between the courts granting authority to place and matching to an adoptive
family is 104 days in Gloucestershire, 17 days below the government
threshold of 121 days. This high performance is as a direct result of the
tenacity of the service in considering and achieving early permanence for
adoption through foster to adopt wherever possible. However, in the 12
months prior to inspection, this timescale had risen to 206 days, wholly due to
the local authoritys robust commitment to placing brothers and sisters
together.


Early permanence to adoption is highly effective. The ethos and spirit of
achieving early permanence permeates all the work in the adoption team.
Adopters are well supported, and are asked to consider opting out of foster
to adopt rather than opting in during the assessment process. The benefits
and risks of early permanence through adoption are thoroughly explored at
the earliest point in the assessment. Experienced early permanent adopters
influence and deliver effective support and training that result in more
prospective adopters being willing to work with the uncertainty of committing
to a child prior to placement order.


Since 2011, there have been 42 early permanence to adoptions, and in the
past 12 months 22 adoption orders have been secured, ensuring that children
live with their adoptive parents from the earliest possible stage of the process.
All children making the transition to adoption did so from foster care, and this
is managed in a sensitive and considered way, minimising the impact on


children, foster carers and adopters. The adoption panel is robust and
effective. Adopters are dual approved at panel as both suitable to adopt and
suitable for early permanence placement. The panel regularly reviews
arrangements and continues to assess applicants suitability and motivation
while awaiting an appropriate match. Since 2011, five early permanence
matches have not led to adoption and, in all cases, children were either
appropriately returned to birth family members or achieved adoption through
other successful matches. In three of the five cases, adopters have
subsequently experienced a successful early permanence match and in two
cases have adopted.

A well-established and mature adoption service benefits from knowledgeable
and passionate managers and workers with a wide range of experience and
skills. Practitioners in the service have extensive experience, and bring a wide
range of skills and commitment, underpinned by effective and competent
managers who have established a high standard of expectations and practice.
This has resulted in Gloucestershire, as an adoption agency, having a good
reputation locally and regionally. This helps to attract a high volume of
enquiries from prospective adopters, and many return to the agency when
they wish to consider adopting another child. All the adopters spoken to had
experienced a very positive reception and spoke highly of the support received
during the assessment process, when they were matched and after they had
adopted their child.


A comprehensive matching risk assessment, which includes foster carers,
adopters and relevant social workers, rigorously assesses the strengths and
vulnerabilities of a potential placement as a response to an identified link
between a child and adopter. This assessment informs a robust support plan
effectively and is a key contributory factor in securing the high numbers of
early permanence placements. Support plans comprehensively identify all
aspects of additional resource in the short, medium and long term. These
include therapeutic direct work with children, counselling and individual
psychological support, according to assessed need. Adopters also access
responsive therapeutic services to help them to support the work undertaken
with their child.


Gloucestershire piloted the implementation of the adoption support fund in
successful applications to date. Support after adoption plans are
comprehensive, and include extensive and resourceful packages. This enables
children to form secure attachments and receive therapeutic support to help
them to understand their early childhood experiences. The local authority
match funds individual children to ensure the continuation of complex
packages of support that include individual and enduring therapeutic support.
This enables brothers and sisters, and children with complex needs, to achieve
security and permanence through adoption, and it minimises disruptions.
There were only two between April 2015 and March 2016.



Adopters are assessed and approved in an appropriate way that reflects their
circumstances and experience, and this means that, for some, the process
takes longer than four months at stage two. All adopters spoken to value the
pace of the assessment and consider that this has enabled them to feel fully
prepared for the realities of adoption. Adopters are prepared and trained to a
high standard, and speak positively about the quality of communication,
engagement, training and support provided by the agency. For those waiting
for a suitable match, there are workshops and regular reviews to support
continued engagement in the process. The most recent targeted recruitment
activity and support have a focus on finding families for brothers and sisters to
live together and, as a result, the number of prospective adopters reduced
from 78 to 40 families by March 2016. However, this reflects the familyfinding profile of children who are waiting to find permanent families.


An experienced adoption panel adviser provides rigorous oversight of the
quality of work to the panel. The role of agency decision-maker, undertaken
by three heads of service supported by good administration, provides a timely,
flexible and responsive service that manages the range of adoption work
effectively.


The adoption panel chair brings extensive knowledge of adoption and leads a
suitably experienced panel effectively, including adopters and adopted adults,
to bring a real perspective on the experience of children. The panel chair
guides the panel to focus on strengths of the applicants, which puts applicants
at their ease and enables full engagement in the panel process.


The panel promotes good practice and gives regular feedback to the agency
about the quality of work, to inform and lead to improved practice. In
particular, prospective adopter reports are insightful, analytical and strong in
areas of diversity and identity, in particular single adopters and same-sex
couples. Matching reports now give a real sense of why children are suitable
to live with particular adopters and how they will meet the unique needs of
children, now and in the future. Child permanence reports are not yet
consistently of good quality. Although most seen at this inspection show
sufficient understanding of the case, they lack detail, sensitivity and an
inclusion of children's views.


Life-story work is of high quality. Those seen are detailed, age-appropriate
and sensitively considered, and the use of pictorial toy story-books, using
cartoon characters, enables younger children to have some understanding of
their birth histories and supports adopters to have early conversations with
children. Therapeutic life-story work using art and crafts is effective, and
increasingly helps older children to explore why they are not able to live with
their birth family, and helps them to make sense of, and recover from, early
childhood trauma.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement

The overall quality and effectiveness of social workers interventions with care
leavers are variable. However, the practical help and emotional support
provided enable most care leavers to develop sufficient independence skills
and to build emotional resilience in preparing for adulthood. While most care
leavers spoken to by inspectors now report having stable and meaningful
relationships with their social workers or personal advisers, the majority of
care leavers have experienced significant changes to their allocated worker
over the past year. Some care leavers related how their social worker
regularly went above and beyond what they expected of them or had never
given up finding ways to support them to turn their life around.


The care leaver team, currently based across three accessible sites, enables
care leavers to access support at a local level for information, advice and
social events. Dedicated youth support workers work closely with the care
leaver team, providing specialist support for mental health, sexual health, and
pregnancy and parenthood concerns. An active care leavers forum provides an
effective voice for care leavers to fully contribute to further improvements to
their service.


Specialist transformational support provided by social workers to care leavers
is well targeted and effective. For example, young parent care leavers are
accommodated in dedicated cluster units in Gloucestershire, and these are
providing high-quality, on-site parenting support. Additionally, care leavers
receive good-quality responses and prompt interventions from social workers
in circumstances when risk is identified. For example, responses to incidents
of domestic violence or sexual abuse result in timely, effective risk
assessments and joint working with relevant agencies to develop robust plans
to protect the young person. This work has been further reinforced through
learning from a recently published local serious case review, and
arrangements to support young people in violent relationships have been
strengthened as a result.


The local authority is in touch with the majority of its care leavers. However,
six months or longer. Insufficient arrangements for this cohort of young
people and incomplete case records do not demonstrate sustained efforts by
social workers to engage with each young person. These weaknesses and the
impact on the young person are not sufficiently identified or challenged by
managers, and this has left some care leavers potentially vulnerable and
unsupported. (Recommendation)


The quality and timeliness of pathway plans are variable. While pathway plans
record essential information, most plans are not sufficiently aspirational and


do not reflect a comprehensive, well-rounded plan for each individual. A high
number of pathway plans are completed without sufficient consideration of
the young persons views or their participation. As a result, pathway plans are
not valued by care leavers. While some good examples were seen by
inspectors, most did not sufficiently consider the challenges experienced by
the young person, for example in relation to drug or alcohol use or offending
behaviour. (Recommendation)

Social workers provide prompt financial support for care leavers to access
specialists, including therapeutic services, doctors, opticians and dentists, as
and when required. Care leavers now receive health passports, and are
aware of these and how to access their full health history. However, not
enough care leavers have received a recent health assessment in the past 12
months. Case records do not sufficiently reflect attempts to encourage the
young people to engage in these health assessments and, as a result, young
people have not had access to timely healthcare and are not being actively
encouraged to lead a healthy lifestyle.


Care leavers are well supported to gain a national insurance number, their
original or copy birth certificate and a passport. Arrangements to help care
leavers to learn basic life skills, such as budgeting and cooking, are not yet
consistently enabling all care leavers to feel confident in these areas. Care
leavers attendance at the few life-skills sessions offered by the care leaver
team has been low, despite sustained efforts by the team to encourage their
involvement. Of care leavers over 21 years of age, 65% are now in education,
training or employment and this reflects a determination to encourage second
chance learning. Care leavers have a good idea of their entitlements, but the
explanatory booklets are out of date. Care leavers are now contributing to the
compiling of revised versions.


Senior managers in the care leaver team routinely analyse performance data
on care leavers using a range of appropriate and informative key indicators.
While this has led to some improvements across the service, the focus has not
been sufficiently consistent. The quantitative and qualitative data on those
who are in education, training or employment reflects that, while the local
authority is aware that high numbers of care leavers are not in education,
employment or training, the strategies to reduce this cohort are not always
effective. (Recommendation)


Most care leavers do not achieve any qualifications, and only a very small
minority attain good GCSEs, including English and mathematics. However, 33
care leavers are currently on degree-level courses at various universities. Care
leavers have access to post-16 personal, vocational and academic
development opportunities, such as taught sessions in functional skills in
English and mathematics at Levels 1 and 2, but only a few achieve a
qualification in these subjects. The local authority has a Work it Out project,
which aims to offer a range of employment pathways for care leavers, While


this has benefited some care leavers, the local authority recognises that there
is developmental work needed in respect of paid employment options.

Most care leavers are able to access a range of good-quality accommodation
in Gloucestershire. A high proportion of care leavers live in suitable
accommodation and 27 care leavers are staying put with their foster carers.
The local authority has a good range of accommodation available to match
various planned stages in care leavers progression to independence, including
transitional, supported, semi-independent, independent and temporary
accommodation. Well-integrated and mostly effective arrangements are in
place to allocate appropriate accommodation for care leavers. These include
the effective START programme, which provides good support for young
people preparing to become care leavers. Although feedback to the local
authority by care leavers suggests most care leavers feel safe in their
accommodation, not all care leavers spoken to by inspectors said that they felt
safe in their accommodation or in Gloucestershire generally, and the reasons
for this need to be explored further. (Recommendation)


The local authority currently lacks sufficient short-term emergency
accommodation. In the six months prior to the inspection, bed and breakfast
accommodation had been used for six care leavers in an emergency or at the
young persons request. These arrangements are inappropriate, with
insufficient systems to robustly monitor the safety and welfare of the young
person. Risk assessments are not robustly completed or sufficiently recorded,
and monitoring arrangements are not systematic. The local authority has
identified that these arrangements require strengthening and is in the process
of implementing new short-term accommodation commissioning
arrangements. (Recommendation)


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
The leadership, management and governance of childrens services in
Gloucestershire are inadequate. Inspectors discovered significant discrepancies in
some information provided to them by the senior leadership team, bringing into
question the integrity of the leadership of childrens services. Senior managers do
not provide an environment in which healthy challenge is evident and social work
practice is allowed to flourish, and a high number of staff reported that they feel
vulnerable, unsupported by senior managers and fearful of challenging or exposing
poor practice.
Senior leaders have not been swift enough to take effective action to address the
widespread and serious failings in the services for children who need help and
protection. The local authority has needed to take immediate action on too many
cases identified at this inspection to ensure that children are safeguarded and, in
some cases, to take protective action so that children are not suffering immediate
harm.
A lack of a robust system to ensure that actions from case audits are consistently
completed results in continuing drift and delay for children. The cases audited
during this inspection highlighted that most of those for children in need of help
and protection are characterised by poor identification of risk, and weak and
inconsistent management oversight.
Stable managers in the fostering and adoption teams continue to support and
develop stronger practice. Early permanence to adoption is highly effective in
ensuring that children are placed at their adoptive home as early as possible.
The local authority and its partners demonstrate a clear commitment to a strong
partnership approach to commissioning, influenced by the views of young people,
that is delivering locally determined and accessible services in neighbourhood
areas, making maximum use of joint resources.
Instability in the workforce is having a significant impact on the quality of practice.
The turnover of social workers and managers is high. The majority of social
workers have less than two years post-qualifying experience and, for too many,
the caseloads are too high and include complex cases that require a good depth of
knowledge and experience. Coupled with inconsistent, weak management
oversight and poor supervision, this does not support effective or high-quality help
for children and families.


The focus on work to establish and support the work of the young ambassadors,
championed by the corporate parenting board, is a good example of how young
people are influential in shaping services.
Inspection findings

The experiences and progress for children in need of help and protection are
inadequate. Services have deteriorated significantly since the last inspection in
change, they have not been successful in delivering the changes quickly
enough to address the deficits in frontline operational practice. Where they
have identified weak practice and poor management oversight, the measures
to make improvements have lacked rigour and pace. Consequently, a high
number of cases referred to the local authority included cases where action
was required either fully to understand the risks that children were exposed to
or to respond appropriately to levels of risks for children. Too many children
have not had their needs and risks recognised or have remained in situations
of escalating and actual risk of significant harm for too long.


Senior leaders have not demonstrated sufficient understanding of the extent
of the widespread and serious failures for children in need of help and
protection, until this inspection. In all cases referred by inspectors, the local
authority agreed with their findings. These included the need to take
immediate safeguarding actions for compliance with child protection
procedures, to progress cases through the legal framework, to reduce delays
in taking action and to give a robust response to children at risk of sexual
exploitation and children who go missing.


The director of commissioning (children and families) and the senior
leadership team articulate a strong determination and commitment to improve
services for children. However, an unprecedented number of staff
anonymously raised concerns with the inspectors about the culture of bullying
and blame that is prevalent in childrens social care. Senior managers have
not been able to support an environment in which healthy challenge is
consistently evident and social work practice is allowed to flourish.


A review of safeguarding and audit arrangements was commissioned by the
director in January 2017. This report highlighted that a lack of a centrally
driven system prevented the local authority from having effective oversight of
the impact of audit outcomes. The lack of a robust system to ensure that the
actions from audits are consistently completed results in continuing drift and
delay for children. Recent work to improve the robustness of audits is having
some positive impact, as seen in the quality of the 20 cases identified for audit
during this inspection. However, these highlighted that, for children in need of
help and protection, most cases are characterised by poor identification of
risk, delays in progressing assessments and plans, and weak management
oversight. Senior managers have not demonstrated that they fully understand


the significance of the cumulative impact of poor-quality practice for this
group of children. (Recommendation)

An external assessment of the independent review service in April 2016
highlighted considerable weaknesses in the quality of assessments, the quality
and consistency of plans, and the absence of childrens wishes and feelings to
inform decisions. These features have been evident in this inspection. While
the establishment of dedicated independent reviewing officers and conference
chairs has been implemented, the lack of an established escalation process for
child protection chairs has meant that, when concerns have been raised about
the quality of practice and decision-making, there is little evidence of robust
action from senior managers.


Frontline management oversight of practice is inconsistent and mostly poor in
child protection services, and the process of auditing the quality of practice is
not systematic or established enough to give an accurate understanding of the
quality of frontline practice. Senior managers do not have a strong and
confident assessment of the impact and experiences of children who need
help and protection.


Frontline management for children looked after is also a weaker area of
practice, although the better able and more experienced middle managers
have driven improvements for children looked after, recognising where there
is still more work to do. Stable and competent managers in the fostering and
adoption teams continue to support and develop strong practice.


The local authoritys and its partners response to prioritisation and strategic
oversight of child sexual exploitation is not yet leading to consistently effective
practice for children at risk and those who go missing. Operational social work
practice to understand the risks of child sexual exploitation is too often weak.
Social workers and managers lack an understanding of the impact of child
sexual exploitation and for those who go missing, and are not consistently
using assessments to identify risk to inform plans to improve outcomes for
these groups of children. Information from return home interviews following
children going missing is not sufficiently detailed or consistently completed to
enable a good understanding of the motivation behind missing episodes for
individual children. The lack of comprehensive aggregated information at a
strategic level means that the local authority and partners do not always know
the children who are most at risk in order to prioritise appropriate and
effective action. (Recommendation)


The use of performance management data to drive improvements in key
areas of practice is not consistently accurate, systematic or established across
all practice areas or localities. Performance in significant areas, such as the
length of time that children are on child protection plans, the number of
children with second and subsequent plans and the timeliness of assessments,
is not analysed sufficiently at a strategic level to understand impact or to
inform and monitor improvements. Where the data focuses on cause and


effect, this is resulting in a better understanding of the issues and more
effective action to address practice, for example the improved rates of young
people offending and performance in the over 11s service. (Recommendation)

Weekly performance reports are starting to inform managers about the
strengths and performance challenges for individual teams and practitioners.
However, this is not yet resulting in improved practice in some key areas. The
performance data available highlights clear anomalies and practice differences
between teams that do not yet trigger sufficient analysis by senior managers
to prioritise improvements in either the practice areas or the geographical
localities. The local authority does not yet have a performance forum to
consider learning across the council that supports improved practice. Although
developed, and with implementation imminent, this is a missed opportunity to
pull together learning from the staff survey, complaints, serious case reviews
and audits, and to demonstrate a transparent and open culture to learning
and sharing of good practice.


There is a clear commitment to a strong partnership approach to
commissioning in Gloucestershire that maximises the impact of collective
resources to delivering accessible services based on a clear understanding of
local need. Commissioning decisions are influenced by young people, for
example Future in mind, that led to the establishment of the On your mind
Gloucestershire website. This provides accessible, confidential advice and
support for young people who have emotional and mental health concerns,
and includes a pilot online counselling service that is valued by young people.
The new IRIS project, although not yet operational, is ambitious in addressing
the safety and stability of placements for older adolescents with highly
complex needs, and is a good example of effective joint commissioning.


Cross-party overview and scrutiny arrangements focus on key issues of
performance, for example the recruitment and retention of staff, and the
views of the workforce on how to improve practice. While the chief executive
and lead member both have an awareness of key strengths and weaknesses
across childrens services, the severity of the failings in some key areas of the
service had not been articulated to them sufficiently well by senior managers.
Political and senior leaders have recognised the need and taken action to
increase resources in childrens social care, demonstrating commitment to
improving the lives of children in Gloucestershire, with recent significant
financial resources being made available to increase the number of frontline
social workers.


Instability in the workforce is having a significant effect on the quality of
practice. The current turnover of social workers and managers, although
comparable with other local areas, is high, and this means that children are
not able to form positive and lasting relationships with social workers. The
majority of social workers have less than two years post-qualifying experience
and, for too many, particularly those in their assessed and supported year in
employment, the caseloads are too high and include complex cases that


require a good depth of knowledge and experience. Coupled with inconsistent
and weak management oversight, this does not support effective and highquality social work practice. The quality of training provided to staff is
improving. However, the evaluation of training is poor and the impact of
training is not assessed effectively by managers through supervision and case
audit activity.

The supervision of workers and managers, while taking place, does not
sufficiently demonstrate clear guidance to workers to address the deficits in
practice and performance, and does not provide clear expectations to
complete and progress work in a timely way. Social workers and managers
recording on case files is weak and is absent from too many childrens cases,
meaning that it is not always possible to tell how critical decisions regarding
childrens lives have been reached. Childrens wishes and feelings are not
consistently recorded, and do not inform assessments and plans.
(Recommendation)


The focus on work to establish and support the work of the ambassadors,
championed by the corporate parenting board, is a good example of how
young people engage effectively and are influential in shaping services. The
group of 17 young people are employed and are active participants in the
corporate parenting board, scrutiny committee and commissioning
arrangements. The impact of the work of the young ambassadors is wide
ranging, enabling key messages and their experiences to be shared effectively
across the service, as well as contributing in a meaningful way to service
development.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
The Gloucestershire Safeguarding Children Board (GSCB) requires improvement.
While it fulfils its statutory responsibilities and there is strong commitment to the
work of the board from key statutory agencies, there are gaps in the boards
activities and monitoring of frontline practice in childrens services that limit its
effectiveness.
The board is appropriately constituted and is generally well attended by key
partners, including lay members. The GSCB is financially sound, with partners
supporting the work of the board proportionately. The board benefits from having
a respected and experienced independent chair, and the work of the board is well
supported by an appropriately resourced and well-managed business unit. The
chair of the GSCB is also a member of the childrens partnership and has built up
effective working links with the Health and Wellbeing Board and the Safeguarding
Adults Board. This enables him to influence the direction of work and priority
setting, such as coordinated services for those affected by domestic abuse.
However, work to develop strategies and associated toolkits to address neglect
and child sexual exploitation has yet to be fully embedded or effective across the
partnership.
The board demonstrates open and candid challenge between board members, and
this has been effective in some areas, for example in improving safeguarding
practice within the multi-agency safeguarding hub. However, limited analysis and a
lack of qualitative commentary on the boards dataset inhibit its ability to monitor
and understand the overall effectiveness of services. This compromises
opportunities to challenge partner agencies where practice is poor.
The board has developed a multi-agency audit programme that has considered
services to disabled children and children at risk of sexual exploitation outside the
local authority area. However, the audit programme needs to become further
embedded and more sharply focused to provide assurance to the board that the
services provided and work undertaken to keep children safe are consistently
robust and effective across the county. The inclusion of young people on the board
is generally a strength, although the participation of children and families in
auditing activity requires development.
The board has a comprehensive range of training events and e-learning courses
that have increased the number of practitioners who have received training. The
training events include lessons learned from serious case reviews, although the
extensive range of messages emerging from this work has diluted the learning.
Longitudinal evaluation of the impact of this training requires further development.


Recommendations

Strengthen the range of performance information provided to the board to
include relevant information from all partners and ensure that evaluative
commentary is provided to improve services.


Embed the multi-agency audit programme in order for the board to have
greater assurance of the quality of frontline safeguarding practice.


Strengthen the evaluation of training to ensure that it is robust and can
evidence positive impact on outcomes for children and their families.


Hold partners to account for evaluating the impact on practice of the learning
from serious case reviews.


Ensure that the annual report provides a rigorous assessment of the
performance and effectiveness of local services.


Ensure that the neglect strategy and associated toolkit is promoted across the
county and its effectiveness measured to improve outcomes for children.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

Gloucestershire Local Safeguarding Board (GSCB) meets its statutory duties
and undertakes a broad range of work to safeguard children across the
county. Governance arrangements between the GSCB and the local authority
are well established. The independent chair is proactive and credible. He
attends regular alignment meetings with the independent chair of the
Gloucestershire Safeguarding Adults Board, the director of childrens services
and the directors of adult social services. GSCB members express confidence
in the independent chair, who is both skilled and knowledgeable in this area of
work.


The GSCB is also an equal partner of the Gloucestershire childrens
partnership and the chair is a member of the Health and Wellbeing Board
(HWB). The GSCB has strong links with the HWB. These arrangements ensure
that safeguarding children is appropriately considered and the planning is
aligned. For example, GSCB has ensured that the HWB domestic abuse
commissioning strategy fits the boards levels of intervention guidance. The
GSCB currently operates eight sub-groups that are appropriately aligned to
the GSCBs key statutory responsibilities and priorities. Police, health and
childrens social care are well represented on the sub-groups and the GSCB
executive.


Attendance at the board is generally good, although the board is reviewing its
current structure to consider how it can progress its objectives most
efficiently. There is commitment and engagement from attendees that has


resulted in a greater ownership of safeguarding issues across the partnership.
However, the board is not sufficiently informed about the quality of all
frontline services and practice. Limited analysis through audits and a lack of
qualitative commentary on the boards dataset inhibit its ability to monitor and
understand the overall effectiveness of services. This prevents opportunities
for challenge to partner agencies when practice is poor.

The board has a wide breadth of membership from all statutory partners. The
level of seniority is appropriate to facilitate influence and improvement. The
private and voluntary sectors are represented, and the board benefits from
the active engagement and challenge by three lay members. Their work is a
strength, ensuring, for example, that services for children with disabilities are
kept in sharp focus. The board benefits from highly effective support and
commitment from the business manager and the wider business unit.


The GSCB quality assurance framework has included internal review and
regional peer challenge. This incorporates a multi-agency audit schedule,
serious case reviews and learning from an online pupil survey, as well as
learning from the ambassadors for vulnerable children and young people. It
does not currently support the board to monitor all safeguarding activity
effectively across the county. The board is aware of the limitations of the
dataset and is beginning to ensure that the story behind the data is captured,
as well as presenting data from a wider variety of sources. (Recommendation)


The board demonstrates increasingly open and candid challenge between
board members, and this has been effective in some areas, for example in
improving awareness of the role of the multi-agency safeguarding hub. Formal
challenges are recorded and monitored. Similarly, following emerging
concerns regarding the consistency of early-help decision-making and support,
the GSCB undertook through the quality assurance sub-group a deep dive
audit of early-help services. Although the audit provided assurance that a
range of preventative work is happening in the county, it also found that it
was not always effective for some families with complex needs. The findings
were shared with the childrens partnership to inform the development and
implementation of the early-help graduated pathway.


The voice of the child is an area of strength within the work of the board.
Engagement with the ambassadors is innovative and influential, and they
have been engaged effectively in contributing to the summary of the annual
report, workshops presented during the safeguarding roadshows and the
GSCB planning days. Recent developments to formalise their involvement are
to be welcomed.


Child sexual exploitation arrangements are coordinated and monitored
through the child sexual exploitation and missing sub-group, but this does
not yet lead to improved practice for this vulnerable group of children.
Awareness raising was supported by a successful conference delivered in
collaboration with the office of the police and crime commissioner. It is of


note that the rate of referrals has increased significantly as the work of this
group has evolved. The role of schools in preventing child sexual exploitation
is included in the Gloucestershire child sexual exploitation strategy, and the
workforce development sub-group has extended the current training offer
from a half a day to a full training day.

Robust processes are in place to consider and undertake serious case reviews.
Serious case reviews are initiated where necessary and in line with statutory
guidance. The board has commissioned six serious case reviews in the recent
past, demonstrating innovation in developing a Gloucestershire model for this
work. The associated findings and recommendations from reviews have
presented some challenge to ensure that the learning is disseminated. Board
members agree that issues of capacity have diluted the learning opportunities,
and work is currently being undertaken to refine the learning into key themes.


The progress of serious case reviews and the completion of subsequent multiagency recommendations are appropriately monitored and reported to the
board. More work is required to ensure that individual agency actions are fully
addressed and are improving outcomes for children. Reviews are published
and GSCB oversees roadshow events and briefing sessions that are held to
disseminate learning. These have proved to be popular and are evaluated as
effective. The ambassadors attend and speak at these events and facilitate
workshops. However, the impact of learning from serious case reviews is not
widely evident. For example, although a number of serious case reviews have
found that more work is required to create a culture of interagency challenge,
evidence of progress is limited. Despite much work in this area, there has
been no significant increase in formal escalations. Frontline practitioners
spoken to during this inspection were not always aware of the learning from
serious case reviews. (Recommendation)


Similarly, the need to improve the professional response to neglect is a key
learning outcome from a number of serious case reviews. Having identified
the lack of progress in this area, work has been undertaken to develop a
neglect strategy and toolkit. The neglect strategy was launched in August
this should result in a more consistent identification of neglect and lead to
more effective help at an earlier stage, the guidance is yet to be disseminated.
The pace of implementation has been too slow, with the consequence that
some children are still left in neglectful circumstances for far too long.
(Recommendation).


The multi-agency quality assurance sub-group operates an annual cycle of
audits that has included in the recent past consideration of services to children
with disabilities, children in care and child sexual exploitation. Although the
audit reports are completed satisfactorily and lead to recommendations and
action plans, a sharper focus is required to assess and inform the monitoring
of core child protection activity. (Recommendation)



The education sub-group provides good opportunities, through well-attended
forums, for raising concerns, disseminating information and sharing good
practice between schools and GSCB partners. A safeguarding audit of schools,
tailored to address the objectives of the board, achieved an excellent 100%
rate of return. The work of this sub-group has also been highly effective in
supporting work to raise awareness of child sexual exploitation. It has
promoted the delivery of the play, Chelseas choice to 45,000 secondary
school pupils, and a play for younger children, In the net, has been
successfully piloted and is now shown each year to Year 4 pupils in primary
schools across Gloucestershire.


The board supports and uses the south west child protection procedures,
which have been localised where necessary and made subject to frequent
review. The threshold document, known locally as the Levels of Intervention
guidance, has been revised to reflect changes to policy and the local delivery
structure. The understanding of thresholds for children who require early help
but do not meet the threshold for statutory intervention is more recently
implemented and is not yet fully embedded.


Policies and procedures are accessible through the GSCB website. This is an
accessible and informative resource, with links to relevant good-quality
information on a range of safeguarding issues. The board is well up on the
opportunities to develop communication through social media. The use of
electronic alerts and Twitter is increasingly providing opportunities for the
board to raise awareness of key issues, for example to promote the more
widespread use of the child sexual exploitation screening tool.


The GSCB provides an appropriate range of multi-agency safeguarding
training that reflects the priorities of the board. Demand for interagency
courses is consistently high, and the board is maintaining good attendance
figures across all courses. In 201415, GSCB ran 147 courses and trained
changing need, as it captures learning from the GSCBs own audits and
serious case reviews for the current training programmes.


All training is evaluated, but the low number of feedback responses on
individuals practice three months after their training inhibits evaluation of its
effectiveness to deliver safeguarding services. There is a Training Evaluation
and Impact Framework in place, which clearly sets out the multi-agency
training evaluation process. The chair acknowledges that more work is
required in this area in order for the board to be confident about the impact of
training in terms of quality of practice and improved outcomes for children.
(Recommendation)


The child death overview panel (CDOP) is well established, with membership
from all key partners, and it carries out its functions effectively. CDOP reports
regularly to the board and produces a well-written annual report on trends


and themes in child deaths. A review of all deaths has led to awarenessraising activities, including the production of a leaflet regarding safer sleeping
and the dangers of shaking infants. It is notable that Gloucestershire CDOP,
through the national CDOP network-learning programme, disseminated
learning to reduce the risk of aspiration when tube feeding children at night.

The annual report 201516, while ambitious, is overly descriptive. Although it
covers all appropriate areas, it does not present a rigorous and transparent
analysis of safeguarding practice across the county to provide an assessment
of the performance and effectiveness of local services. The summary
document encapsulates well the key achievements and objectives. Local
priorities are reflected in the business plan, with priorities linked to sub-group
activities including the commissioning of audits and the planning of training.
(Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and one
regulatory inspector from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Emmy Tomsett
Deputy lead inspector: Marcie Taylor
Team inspectors: Andy Whippey, Brenda McInerney, Sean Tarpey, Nick Crombie,
Louise Hocking
Additional inspector: Matthew Reed
Regulatory inspector: Linda Bond
Senior data analyst: Matthew King
Quality assurance manager: Helen Cawston


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


