Kirklees
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 12 September to 6 October 2016
Report published: 25 November 2016

Childrens services in Kirklees are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Inadequate

after

and

achieving


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Services for vulnerable children in Kirklees are inadequate, due to serious and
widespread failures which result in some children not being protected or having their
needs met. Although senior managers and councillors are aware of the inadequacies
and have implemented an improvement plan, this has yet to result in sufficient
improvements to the experience of vulnerable children in Kirklees. During the
inspection, inspectors identified concerns in many of cases that they scrutinised, due
to inadequate actions currently being taken by the local authority to safeguard and
promote childrens welfare.
In August 2015, the chief executive was alerted to concerns about social work
practice by the Kirklees Safeguarding Children Board. As a result, he commissioned
an external review of services, and this identified serious concerns. An internal audit
was then undertaken of 226 cases, approximately 10% of the cases open to the
service at the time, and this found widespread poor practice, including for some
children where urgent action was then taken to safeguard them. In response, the
chief executive recruited an interim assistant director, appointed a new director for
children and young people, and established a multi-agency development board to
lead the improvement journey.
Since the new director assumed her post in April 2016, there have been considerable
efforts to accelerate the improvement of childrens services by extending the
membership of the development board to include regional partners and establishing
a childrens scrutiny partnership. Senior management-chaired panels have been
introduced to improve decision making at key points. A quality assurance framework
has been developed, more independent reviewing officers and child protection chairs
appointed and a dispute resolution process implemented to identify concerns. Much
work has also been put into developing performance data, practice standards and a
workforce strategy, including tackling some individual poor practice. The council also
committed an additional four million pounds to childrens services.
However, at the time of the inspection, many of these recent developments have yet
to be embedded and are not yet making a sufficient difference to childrens
experiences. Many strategies are in draft form. Inspectors found that they could not
trust the performance information being produced. The quality assurance framework
has yet to be rolled out. The electronic recording system  which underpins the work
of the social workers  is not fit for purpose. Support to staff is inconsistent. For
instance, many are not receiving an induction, training or supervision. Across the
service, caseloads are inconsistent and, for some workers, too high.
As a result of the improvement focus by the new director and the new senior
management team over the past five months, over 500 children, who had been
subject to a child protection conference or a child looked after review during this
time, were identified by the new dispute resolution process as receiving a poor
service. However, when issues have been identified, the responses have not always


addressed the concerns in a robust manner, resulting in some children remaining in
unsafe environments or in situations where their needs were not being met.
The local authority has not systematically assured itself, in all cases open to it, that
children are safe and are being provided with services that meet their needs and this
is a major weakness in the plans to improve services in Kirklees. Inspectors found
that many children continue to receive a poor service in Kirklees. There are
considerable issues in relation to the help and protection services, with too many
children not having their needs met and actions being taken to protect them being
seriously delayed. This is due to serious deficits in social work management and
practice. Assessments and plans are often poor, failing to recognise risk. Decision
making to ensure that children are safe are inconsistent, leaving some children not
safeguarded. Multi-agency meetings are not taking place and there is too much focus
on the parents, rather than on the experience of children. Children are not always
visited by social workers at the timescales identified in their plans.
Services for children looked after are also inadequate, due to serious and widespread
issues. Inspectors saw delays in removing from home children who were not safe
and poor court work that failed to provide the evidence to ensure that children at risk
of significant harm were then placed in safe environments. There is a lack of support
services for children on the edge of care. Inspectors also saw far too many children
placed a long distance from their communities due to a lack of foster and residential
homes in the borough. Childrens and young peoples concern about being away
from their family and friends features in some complaints, which are not being
responded to in a timely manner. Too many children subject to a care order are
living at home with their parents without a plan for permanence, and this has been
ongoing for years  up to 10 years, in a small number of cases. Children wait too
long for independent visitors.
In some aspects of childrens services, there have been marked improvements
following review and robust management action. Due to an improved focus on
securing permanence, the use of adoption and special guardianship orders has
appropriately increased, although there are still delays for some children. The
recording of decision making and ensuring learning from adoption breakdowns need
further improvement. Support to care leavers has also improved, but more work is
needed to ensure that there are sufficient personal advisors to improve pathway
plans and independence support, and to address the high numbers of young people
who are not in employment, education or training.
Multi-agency partnership working is poor. Partner agencies have not been sufficiently
involved in the multi-agency safeguarding hub. The strategic response to child sexual
exploitation is good, although potential risk factors are not always recognised by
social workers and other professionals. The Kirklees Safeguarding Children Board had
not been aware of the significant inadequacies in childrens services or provided
sufficient challenge to the effectiveness of safeguarding in the local area. Corporate
parents do not yet have sufficient oversight of looked after childrens services, due to


poor performance information and insufficient participation by children and young
people.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)



Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. Four were judged to be good
or outstanding at their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements/
arrangements for the protection of children was in November 2011. The local
authority was judged to be good.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
November 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services has been in post since April 2016.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since April

Children living in this area
 Approximately 98,350 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Kirklees. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 19% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 20.1% (the national average is 15.2%)
 in secondary schools is 19.6% (the national average is 14.1%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 32.6% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British and people of mixed race.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 27.5% (the national average is 20.1%)
 in secondary schools is 21.6% (the national average is 15.7%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data, where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2016, 2,522 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 March 2016, 415 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 343 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 March 2016, nine children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a decrease from 10 at 31 March 2015.
 Over the last three years, 14 serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and five serious case reviews have been completed or are ongoing at the
time of the inspection.

Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2016, 652 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 66 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 620 (63 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015.
 Of this number, 277 (or 42.5%) live outside the local authority area
authority area
 two live in residential special schools,3 both of whom live out of the
authority area
area
 four children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the past 12 months:
 there have been 42 adoptions
returned to be looked after
to independent living
 three children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses in multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or fewer per year.


Recommendations

Take urgent action to ensure that all children currently being provided with a
service are safeguarded and their welfare is promoted.


Ensure that all staff, including agency staff, are supported to have more
consistent relationships with children and to deliver high-quality services
through manageable caseloads, induction, supervision and training.


Ensure that concerns identified in the dispute resolution process are dealt with
promptly and comprehensively, including by independent reviewing officers and
child protection chairs.


Improve the timeliness and quality of response to complaints from children and
their families, including disseminating the learning.


Ensure that robust performance data drives improvements in the service.


Fully embed the quality assurance framework across childrens services.


Ensure that the procured electronic recording system is fit for purpose and
supports improved practice across the whole service


Improve the oversight and challenge of the corporate parenting board by
ensuring the availability of robust performance data, and that childrens views
influence the focus and decision making of the board.


Ensure that all assessments and plans focus on reducing risk and improving
childrens outcomes, with clearly defined timescales for actions, responsibilities
and regular review.

that records of this work are unique to each child.
identified in the plans and that, when appropriate, children are seen alone.
safeguarding hub information sharing and decision making, and that thresholds
are consistently applied.
robust consideration to safeguarding issues. This is to include consideration and
recording of risks identified in multi-agency risk assessment conference
meetings.
plans are made together and that actions are recorded.


that planning meetings, including core groups and child in need meetings, are
held as required.
crisis.
promptly, to include improving the quality of pre-proceedings letters to parents,
clear contingency planning and ensuring robust monitoring of cases in preproceedings.
these are appropriate and that children are not unnecessarily made subject to a
care order.
people do not need to be placed at a distance from their communities.
they need one.
timeliness of decision making, recording a clear rationale for decisions made
and using the learning when adoption placements breakdown.
advisor from their 16th birthday and that they have sufficient support to live
independently.
education or training.
after and care leavers.
support packages.
commissioning of services for children.


Summary for children and young people
 Inspectors found that many services for children in Kirklees are poor.
 Sometimes, when you need to be protected, you do not get the right levels of
support to help you when you need it. Sometimes, your parents do not get the
assistance that they need quickly enough to assist them with their problems.
Social workers, police, schools and doctors do not always work together well
enough to support your families.
 Social workers take too long to decide if it is best for you to become looked after,
leaving some of you unsafe at home. When you do become looked after, you
often need to live many miles from your home, meaning that you do not get to
see your family, friends and pets when you would like. Also, plans to help you if
you are looked after are not good enough to make sure that you get all the
support that you need.
 Generally, when you are looked after, you live with people who understand and
meet your needs well. You get good support from health services. You are also
now doing much better at school, and more of you gain five good GCSEs.
 The new leaders know what needs to change and are working hard to improve
services for children. Some things are starting to improve, such as the support for
children who need permanent alternative homes and the support for care leavers,
but other changes are needed urgently.
 More of you are now being adopted, although some of you still wait too long for a
family. If you are adopted, you and your new family receive good support that
helps you to settle in well.
 If you are a care leaver, the local authority is in touch with you, knows where you
are living and what you are doing. This means that it can continue to offer you
the help and support that you may need. Most of you who leave care, including
those of you with a disability or learning difficulty, are helped to find decent
housing and to settle in. More of you are staying with your foster families.
However, there is not enough help to support your emotional health and you do
not always get the right services to support you into adulthood. Too many of you
are not being supported well enough to achieve your potential.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Inadequate

There are serious and widespread failures across the services that provide help
and protection in Kirklees. Inspectors identified concerns in over a third of
childrens cases looked at, including unrecognised neglect and abuse. Much of the
social work support is poor, including inadequate assessments, decision making,
planning and management oversight. As a result, some children are not having
their needs met and are remaining in high-risk environments for too long, and
there are serious delays in actions being taken to protect them. Although urgent
concerns are, in the main, dealt with promptly, many of these should have been
actioned earlier, when lower-level concerns were first identified.
Early help services are too focused on the needs of parents, particularly when
there are concerns about domestic abuse. Thresholds in the early help services
and the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) are not applied consistently,
resulting in some children not being assessed or receiving a service when they
should. Some partner agencies are not part of the MASH, resulting in a lack of
thorough consideration of all of the needs of children and young people. Plans are
in place to extend the MASH to include a wider range of multi-agency partners.
Child protection enquiries are initiated promptly and concerns are appropriately
escalated. However, strategy meetings do not always have sufficient contributions
from other agencies and fail to plan to take actions together, resulting in a lack of
focus on protecting children.
Social work support is not focused sufficiently on reducing risk for children and
young people. Many assessments are over-optimistic about parents ability to
sustain changes. Childrens individual needs are not always recognised.
Multi-agency planning is poor. Core groups and Child in Need planning meetings
are regularly delayed and, at times, do not take place. Only 50% of initial child
protection conferences are convened within statutory timescales. Visits to children
are not always made within the timescales identified in plans. Management
challenge is neither sufficiently robust nor making a difference for children.
Social workers and other agencies do not always recognise potential risks in
relation to child sexual exploitation. However, when concerns are identified, there
is a good multi-agency response to support the children and young people.
Some aspects of the work are good. Children who are privately fostered are helped
effectively. Support is good when there are concerns about radicalisation and
violent extremism. Young people who are missing from home receive a timely and
independent return home interview. The local authority designated officer also


provides a coordinated response when there are concerns about professionals who
work with children.
Inspection findings
help and protection. As a result, many are not having their needs recognised
promptly or essential support put in place. Inspectors saw some children not
being protected from further incidents of significant harm.
Assessments carried out within early help services often lack analysis and are
not risk focused. At times, workers have not recognised the need to step up
increasing concerns to social care. For instance, some children who are affected
by domestic abuse are left at risk due to too much focus on parental issues.
Some children are not being seen to ensure that they are safeguarded.
(Recommendation)
response by the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) is not sufficiently
robust. Partner agencies are appropriately referring children when they have
concerns. However, the decision making within the MASH is inconsistent. Some
partner agencies are still to join the MASH, and the lack of capacity in others
limits the timely and thorough collation of information. There is also a lack of
information requested from services outside of the MASH, such as adult mental
health. In many cases looked at by inspectors, the subsequent MASH analysis
of information was weak. The application of thresholds by managers is also
inconsistent and often too high. (Recommendation)
referrals. This is considerably higher than that of comparator authorities, at
needs met through the initial response from early help services, the MASH and
childrens social care, and this resulted in further requests for support.
Inspectors also found serious inconsistencies between managers about what
should be actioned, and saw examples of the same referral being made a
number of times with different decisions being made, and even appropriate
actions being over-ruled and cases closed, leaving children in potentially highrisk situations. (Recommendation)
effective response from the emergency duty service. Visits are undertaken by
experienced social workers to assess risk. Appropriate services or intervention
are then offered to ensure childrens safety. The details of the actions are then
passed to the day services to facilitate continuity and information sharing.


saw some children, identified by the MASH as potentially children in need, being
inappropriately signposted to the early help services. This included some
children with a disability, who are then not receiving the statutory assessment
required under statutory guidance. Other children are transferred to the newly
formed assessment and intervention teams for a single assessment. Timescales
for undertaking single assessments are not informed by the needs of children.
Inspectors found examples where assessments were stopped, as they were
considerably out of date, with some cases then being inappropriately closed
without the presenting safeguarding needs of children and their families having
been addressed.
information gained from other agencies. However, many did not refer to
previous history, did not highlight risks and strengths, lacked consideration of
the voice and experience of the child, and focused mainly on the adults in the
household. This does not ensure that childrens needs are known and plans are
in place to ensure that they are safeguarded. (Recommendation)
children to have a single social worker from assessment until a decision for
permanence is made. However, due to the large number of agency staff, many
children and families have had changes to their worker. Therefore, children are
not building meaningful relationships with these key individuals in their lives.
evidence of challenge, is lacking. Inspectors saw that this had resulted in delays
in ensuring that children are safeguarded. New practice standards have recently
been introduced. However, at the time of the inspection, some workers and
managers were not complying with those standards. (Recommendation)
are held in a timely manner. However, not all agencies attend and the joint
planning between the local authority and the police is poor. Inspectors saw
examples of the police and social care visiting the child separately, resulting in
children and families having to tell their story more than once and causing them
further distress. (Recommendation)
there are often delays. The local authoritys own data reports that only 50% of
initial conferences are convened within the statutory timescale. These delays
mean that children do not always receive a timely response or provision of
services to ensure that they are protected. (Recommendation)
subsequent time is reported by the local authority to be 26.9%, which is higher
than comparators at 17%. Inspectors found that poor decision making,
ineffective challenge at key times and insufficient focus on the childs


experience impacted on the sustainability of any changes. For instance,
inspectors found that assessments of parents are often over-optimistic,
particularly in domestic abuse situations, including the separation of parents
being taken at face value and viewed as permanent, despite previous history
indicating that a number of separations have already taken place. The
cumulative consequences for the childrens well-being have not been
considered. (Recommendation)
people to prepare for, attend or be represented at child protection conferences.
Child protection advocacy was delivered to 281 young people in 201516, and
this is good, enabling them to participate and understand what is happening.
Many assessments do not look at the individual needs of the children. They
either focus on one child and do not consider other members of the family, or
assess all the children together and fail to evaluate the individual impact of
circumstances. Day-to-day case records are duplicated across all children in the
family. Inspectors saw examples of file records for a particular child when there
was no mention of that child in the record of the work undertaken. Issues
relating to gender, sexuality, place in family and ethnicity are, at times, referred
to. However, the impact of these issues is not fully explored.
(Recommendation)
assessment conferences, which are primarily focused on those most at risk
from domestic violence. These draw upon a range of services for families to
support change and reduce risks for children. However, information from these
meetings is not present in the social care records. Consequently, risks to
children are not always sufficiently clear or addressed. Inspectors did find
effective use of and liaison with the parental drug and alcohol service, which
supported families to make positive changes. (Recommendation)
sexual exploitation and referred to the dedicated team. However, when the risk
of child sexual exploitation is identified, children and young people receive
effective support. The multi-agency team undertakes risk assessments which
are used to identify young peoples needs. Intensive direct work takes place at
the young persons pace. There is also effective co-working with the police to
ensure that disruption activity takes place and that geographical hotspots are
targeted. (Recommendation)
independent return home interview. Workers from the targeted youth support
service undertake the visit. This ensures that children have the opportunity to
talk through their experience and concerns, with the aim of reducing future
risks. Kirklees has developed a No Child out of Sight strategy and multi-agency


approach which bring together all services that have involvement with children
who go missing. This includes representations from early years provision,
schools and mosques. Children missing from education are tracked and
monitored by a discreet service, and no case is closed without a successful
conclusion. Work is also undertaken with independent schools to offer support
and guidance on attendance management and safeguarding.
service. Young people are offered a crash pad to ensure their immediate
safety and, when appropriate, are referred in the longer term to supported
independent living facilities. When appropriate, young people are offered the
option to be looked after. Inspectors also found effective mediation work for
young people to return to and remain at home. These services are a significant
improvement on those that were available when concerns were identified
through an inspection carried out by Her Majestys Inspectorate of Probation in
regulations at the time of the inspection. They receive a sensitive and
supportive service. Further work is ongoing to raise awareness of private
fostering among professionals and the communities in Kirklees.
well-coordinated service. The services available to meet assessed needs range
from group work and counselling to one-to-one work. Support is offered to the
whole family. Work is also carried out to highlight the issue in schools and
communities through a good range of activities.
agencies when there are concerns about professionals and those who have
much contact with children and young people, putting them at risk. There is
good contact with social workers, and records on the childrens files
demonstrate that the protection of children is at the forefront of decision
making.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Inadequate

Summary
There are serious and widespread failures in the services for children looked after
which have resulted in delays in looking after some children and young people who
have been at significant risk of harm at home. Inspectors found poor-quality work,
including a lack of edge of care services to support children to remain at home,
poorly coordinated work that needed to be completed prior to court proceedings,
and inadequate court work that caused delay in ensuring that children were
protected and removed to a safe environment.
There are widespread shortfalls in the quality of the current support for children
looked after. Poor-quality assessments, care planning and reviewing mean that the
needs of children looked after are not comprehensively identified and responded to
in a timely way. In the past five months, as a result of improved scrutiny,
independent reviewing officers (IROs) have alerted managers to over 400 practice
concerns about children looked after, such as not being visited regularly, delays in
progressing plans, poor-quality placements and social workers not recognising risk.
Inspectors found that the response to these concerns was neither sufficiently
robust nor making a sufficient difference to childrens experiences.
There are insufficient foster home and residential home placements within Kirklees.
This results in too many children being placed over 20 miles from their homes.
There has been a significant reduction in placement stability, with increasing
numbers of children having three or more placements in the past year. Some
children have also been living with their parents for far too long while subject to a
full care order: in a small number of cases, this has been for over a decade,
indicating long-standing deficits in the quality of support, planning and reviewing.
The response to complaints is weak, with some significant delays in addressing
concerns. There are also insufficient independent visitors to support those
identified as meeting the criteria for the service, but advocacy support is good.
Although some children are still waiting too long to be adopted, mainly due to poor
practice in the past, timeliness in the adoption process has improved following a
review of adoption services in February 2016. Further work is needed to ensure
that the rationale for decision making is comprehensively recorded and meetings
take place when there are placement breakdowns to learn the lessons to improve
future practice. A recently formed dedicated team is providing good assessment
and ongoing support for children subject to special guardianship orders.
Most care leavers enjoy positive and trusting relationships with their workers. They
move into good-quality and suitable accommodation, with many staying with their
foster carers. However, too many pathway plans are poor, there are delays
appointing personal advisors and too many care leavers are not in education,
employment or training.


Inspection findings
many children have remained at risk of significant harm. Opportunities to
identify risk and intervene earlier have been missed for many children looked
after. Services to support children on the edge of care are underdeveloped and,
as a result, children and families have not received the support that they need
to prevent situations from worsening and further harm occurring.
(Recommendation)
process, and in reviewing and progressing work once pre-proceedings work has
formally started. Decisions to initiate proceedings when circumstances for
children do not change are inconsistent. In the majority of cases seen, letters
to parents are not clear in outlining what needs to change, how and by when,
with a clear outline of action to be taken if circumstances do not improve.
Examples were seen when care applications were not made, despite clear
breaches by parents of the contract of expectations. This has meant that the
local authority has not intervened effectively to ensure that children are
safeguarded. Prior to the inspection, the local authority recognised these
serious weaknesses. Very recent developments include the appointment of a
manager and two case workers, the implementation of legal gateway meetings
and pre-birth tracking meetings to improve oversight of proceedings and
decision making, but these are not yet demonstrating a sufficient impact.
(Recommendation)
planned risk management and work prior to the birth have not been taken. This
has resulted in emergency action to remove children into care, which increases
trauma for families and has not ensured that the best placements are planned
for/matched. (Recommendation)
evidence to support the removal of children from the care of their parents has
not always been presented to the courts. Inspectors identified that this has left
some children and young people in situations where they were at risk of
significant harm. (Recommendation)
who are looked after are not updated to reflect changes, current needs and
circumstances. This means that plans do not support effective care and
placement planning. Consideration of, and plans to meet, childrens needs
arising from diversity were neither evident nor appropriately considered in most
of the cases seen. In particular, issues relating to childrens heritage were


missed. In a large minority of cases seen by inspectors, plans were neither
evident, completed nor updated in timely way. The authority has developed
child-friendly care plans which do describe the childs situation, but do not
effectively identify or drive areas for ongoing work or risk management.
(Recommendation)
effectively reviewed or the timely progression of work been supported.
Challenge was not undertaken or effective when required. The local authority
has taken action to improve the functioning of the IRO service and has both
increased the capacity of and undertaken development work with the service.
This has resulted in a marked increase in the use of the dispute resolution
process. There were over 400 disputes recorded between April and August
widespread poor practice across the range of work with children looked after.
The local authoritys analysis and the cases seen by inspectors identified serious
issues, including concerns over unsuitable and unregulated placements, plans
not being in place or known by young people, inappropriate support, visiting
not in place and review decisions not being completed. Moreover, too many
disputes were not responded to or resolved in a timely way, leaving children
with their needs unmet. (Recommendation)
while being subject to full care orders. In a small number of cases, this has
been for over a decade. The management oversight and review have been
ineffective, which means that children have been living without permanence
being secured for them for too long. The local authority has recently enhanced
the management oversight of children placed at home, and work has been
initiated to discharge some of the long-standing arrangements.
(Recommendation)
of management panels to ensure that essential work is now undertaken. This
has meant that consideration is now given to permanence for all children and
young people in a timely manner. This has resulted in improvements in
consideration of adoption for all children. There has been an effective use of
special guardianship orders to ensure that children and young people are in
permanent placements that meet their needs. A specialist connected persons
team has supported this development and there is increasing recognition of
guardianship as a viable option for permanence in care planning. Coordinated
support to children and families with a special guardianship order is generally
good.
children looked after. A very high percentage  42.5% (277)  of the looked
after population is placed outside Kirklees. Although the majority of children are
in placements that meet their needs, where they receive high-quality education,
health and care support, some children and young people have raised concerns


about the distance from their families and friends. A placement strategy has not
been finalised and a comprehensive action plan to address placement shortfall
is not yet in place. (Recommendation)
placements in the past year. In those cases seen by inspectors, a lack of, or
poor-quality, assessment did not support effective placement planning or
matching. Support offered to placements did not meet the level of need in the
majority of cases. Since April 2016, the local authority has recognised the need
to enhance the in-house placement support service by the recruitment of a
psychologist, a psychotherapist, and a child and adolescent mental health
services worker. However, to date, referrals to the current service have not
been sufficiently timely to support effective work in maintaining fragile
placements. (Recommendation)
persistent approaches to matching children, including those with complex needs
and keeping brothers and sisters together. However, delays in initiating the
family-finding process and the timeliness of pursuing external placements to
meet childrens needs were evident in the majority of cases seen.
year and, despite creative recruitment work, not enough potential carers are
being identified and recruited to meet identified need. The fostering service has
approved 12 new mainstream foster carers in the past year, and three sets of
connected carers. The deregistration of 23 carers has diminished the available
pool of carers, even though some of these deregistrations reflect robust
reassessments following concerns or complaints. The fostering recruitment
strategy over the past year has concentrated on foster carers for all ages, with
an emphasis on carers for children over 10 years, as well as supported lodgings
and mother and child assessment carers.
social workers. They are encouraged to embrace a specific parenting model
which focuses on their own innate strengths and skills to cope with challenging
behaviour. Carers report success in its use even with their own children, and
that it makes them feel more confident and validated.
capacity to ensure that all of those who meet the criteria receive this service.
Advocacy, though, is accessible and well established for children looked after.
There were 125 advocacy referrals between April and June 2016. Young people
spoken to in the inspection reported positive views and use of advocates.
(Recommendation)
local placements, most children and young people are well supported to meet


their educational and health needs. A recently established looked after
children health team, with nurses integrated into looked after children teams,
supports timely initial and review health assessments, dental care and
immunisations, including for those children placed out of authority. Initial health
assessments are effective in picking up health needs which have not previously
been identified, and strengths and difficulties questionnaires are consistently
used to assess young peoples emotional well-being and identify support
options. Although it has been a priority, there has been insufficient progress to
ensure that all children and young people are able to access therapeutic and
mental health support. (Recommendation)
five to 16 years in Kirklees are improving. Inspectors saw good support by
foster carers, residential homes and social workers. The well-managed virtual
school is also ensuring that children looked after increasingly receive
appropriate and rapid support to help to overcome barriers to learning. Virtual
school support for children looked after in the early years and post-16 is at an
earlier stage of development, but work is already in progress to ensure that
current school leavers sustain their places in further education. All children
looked after aged three and upwards have a personal education plan (PEP),
and the attendance of under-threes at an early years setting is monitored.
schools, this is often due to a decision not to move a child when approaching
the end of a key stage or GCSEs. Close monitoring results in relevant
appropriate intervention.
The voice of the child is presented well. Also, the use of the pupil premium to
support the progress of pupils is robustly identified and clear. However, other
sections of the plans are not fully completed or have too little detail for the
targets to be clear. The use and close monitoring of the pupil premium through
e-PEPs, including ongoing one-to-one support, is beginning to have an impact
on closing the attainment gap for this group of pupils. The gap between
children looked after in Kirklees and the overall cohort is much less than in
other authorities for key stages 1 to 3.
Pupils at key stages 1 to 4 are generally making good levels of progress, given
their starting points. Despite some slight falls in attainment in some areas, for
example at key stage 1, outcomes are at or above those for similar authorities
and the national average, particularly in mathematics.
GCSEs, including mathematics and English, at A* to C grades, which is well
above the national rate of 14% for children looked after. Fifty-eight per cent
achieved five GCSEs at A* to G.


improving attendance and reducing the number of children being educated in
alterative provision. Attendance at school is above 90% for the majority of
children who are looked after. The exception is for Years 9 and 11, and this is
due to complex needs, movement into secure accommodation or pregnancy. At
the time of the inspection, 11 children looked after were receiving alternative
education. In all cases, the authority makes careful checks on the quality and
suitability of the provision, and all provision is registered and monitored.
who are looked after out of Kirklees are educated. Performance in school is
closely monitored by the Kirklees virtual school. Children out of area have
access to a good range of different projects to support their progress.
support young people who are looked after and, in the cases seen, clear and
effective liaison takes place with the social worker, with a reduction in offending
behaviour evident in most of those cases. Where young people have a
substance misuse problem, the specialist YOT worker also works directly with
them. The YOT reports a good reduction in the percentage of children looked
after who are known to them, from 12% to 5.9%, which has been assisted by
training with local providers in reducing the criminalisation of young people
looked after.
return interview, and effective liaison is assisted by the police missing
coordinator being located within the children looked after service. When there
is a risk of child sexual exploitation, children who are looked after are offered
effective support and counselling by a national voluntary organisation.
been involved in a range of work, including participating in recruitment and
offering training for foster carers and staff about being a young person who is
looked after. The group that was met by inspectors reported positively on the
good support provided to them by the childrens rights service, helping them to
make a positive contribution in Kirklees.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
conducted in January 2016 recommended improvements to the timeliness of
decision making for permanence, adopter recruitment and the length of time
that children wait to be placed with potential adoptive parents. The authority
has prioritised these specific areas and, as a result, there have been recent
improvements to the adoption support provided in Kirklees. However, the


impact of these improvements is yet to be embedded, and many children and
young people still wait too long to be adopted.
on average 635 days from entering care before moving in with their adoptive
families. For adoptions in 201516, the Kirklees measure worsened to 714 days.
The local authority has an understanding of the cases that have impacted on
this performance and has identified where improvements are required. The
authority has introduced a permanence panel to ensure that timely
consideration is given to permanence for all children and young people.
Recording of the decision making, though, is not always clear on the childs file,
resulting in a lack of clarity in the childs primary records regarding the reasons
for that decision. (Recommendation)
previous year when 45 were adopted. The increase this year is above the
national adoption trend and reflects the recent placements of some hard-toplace groups of children, such as the over fives and family groups.
assessments recommend that this is the best plan. In 201516, 11 groups of
brothers and sisters were placed together, and three groups remain in need of
a placement. No brother and sister groups were placed separately following an
assessment that recommended that they should be placed together. When
there are difficulties in finding a local match for a child or a group of brothers
and sisters, the adoption service makes effective use of regional consortium
links, national adoption agencies and media opportunities to widen the pool of
potential adopters.
have broadened searches for potential adopters for these children by linking
with a range of external agencies, including a television documentary to be
aired in National Adoption Week.
growing number of babies and young children identified as needing a
permanent placement in Kirklees, as well as placements for older children and
brother and sister groups. Regional, national and interagency links are regularly
used to widen searches for suitable adoptive parents.
are being promoted by the recent introduction of specialist family finders from
the adoption service who attend permanence planning meetings. Over the past
year, 11 children have been adopted through this process, with four more
children still in proceedings. This practice creates greater opportunities for
children to be placed with their adopters at an early stage and minimises delay.


multi-agency collaboration. Adopters who spoke to inspectors reported that the
assessment process was well handled, though challenging, and that the
adoption workers enabled them to really understand the impact of adoption.
There are 14 sets of potential adopters currently waiting to be matched. Links
have been made with national networks to ensure that they have access to
additional potential matches. The service is reflecting on the learning from
assessments of this group of adopters to inform future recruitment targeting.
in the past year, yet disruption meetings have still not taken place. Liaison
between the adoption service and the reviewing unit has not resulted in
arrangements for these meetings. This is a missed opportunity to learn and
identify any assessment or matching shortfalls. (Recommendation)
well. The experienced chairs provide scrutiny and challenge which inform the
development of improved practice. Approved adopters sit on the panel both to
inform about their experiences and provide additional independent scrutiny.
and later-life letters are started at the earliest opportunity, in the majority of
cases. The standard of the work seen was good, with families and foster carers
helping to create a portfolio of photographs to create a visual story. They are
effective histories to assist children to make sense of the reasons behind the
decisions leading to adoption that were taken on their behalf.
established, responsive and accessible. A dedicated team develops
comprehensive support assessments and coordinates interagency involvement.
The adoption support plans seen by inspectors were comprehensive and
evaluative, and lead to targeted and effective support that maintains
placements. Adoption support is rated highly by adopters and is complemented
by accessible further training opportunities. Additional celebration events and
peer support groups for adopters and children ensure their ongoing positive
relationship with the authority.
The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
enjoy positive and trusting relationships with their workers. They move into
good-quality and suitable accommodation, with many staying with their foster
carers. However, transitions are not planned for in a timely way, and young
people do not always have the most focused support to meet their needs.


leavers, and reports that it is in touch with all but two of its 183 care leavers.
Young people who have been placed out of the area also have good contact
with the authority, with many supported well to return to Kirklees on leaving
care.
Planning for leaving care does take place, although there have been insufficient
personal advisors to provide young people with support from their 16th
birthday, as identified as necessary in statutory regulations. Recently, care
leavers have been allocated a personal advisor within six months of their 18th
birthday, and there are plans in place to extend this to meet the requirements
in regulations. Care leavers also receive support from a range of other
agencies, including housing and health. (Recommendation)
the potential outcomes of their behaviour, especially in relation to risks,
including those that might affect their sexual, emotional and physical health. As
a consequence, almost all care leavers who spoke with inspectors have a good
understanding of how to keep themselves safe and say that they feel safe.
tools and often do not accurately reflect the work done to support young
people as they leave care. The majority are too descriptive, and are often not
fully complete. The education section of most plans is very poor and does not
reflect the work now being done by dedicated care-leaver careers advisers.
Some of the care leavers who spoke with inspectors could not remember
completing a pathway plan, therefore could not comment on its usefulness or
otherwise. (Recommendation).
or training (NEET) is 47%, compared to 44% in neighbouring authorities. The
authority has a clear focus on improving the situation, headed by the EET
strategy group. Targeted interventions are now made to engage and sustain
young people in education or training. As a result, at the time of inspection less
than 10% of this years school leavers are NEET and their progress is closely
tracked. Examples of support include one-to-one advice and guidance sessions,
introductions to potential work placements and support to attend college
courses. A number of charities and training providers offer foundation-level
study programmes for young people age 16 to 18, but provision for young
people who are not yet ready for these is limited. Although Kirklees does offer
apprenticeships, only two care leavers have taken up the opportunity.
(Recommendation).
prestigious universities, and achieve good degrees. For the 16 care leavers who
are in higher education, a good package of support, including financial and
emotional support, is helping them to achieve well.


supported by their carers, social workers and personal advisors. Some care
leavers are well supported to develop their independence and self-help skills by
access to the care leavers centre, Young Dewsbury, which is run by the local
authority. The centre works effectively in partnership with the local authority.
Staff at the centre, two of whom are former care leavers, provide useful and
bespoke support, helping young people to develop the skills that they need to
live independently, for example budgeting and cooking. Young people can also
access help with job search and interview skills, and support with housing and
health issues. This support is dependent on where young people live, and not
all are able to access the same high-quality preparation for independence.
(Recommendation).
available to them. These are detailed in an informative booklet, partially
designed by care leavers, although at the moment it is not available in a
suitable format for young people with differing communication needs.
passports. Dedicated looked after children nurses are available to provide
support, advice and written information. As a result, care leavers are well
supported in relation to their physical health. Most care leavers recognise the
need to take responsibility for their own health needs. However, a number of
care leavers expressed concern to inspectors about their mental health needs
not being well addressed. Despite changes to create a single point of access to
mental health services, care leavers experience long waits to access appropriate
mental health services. (Recommendation).
for those care leavers with an identified and long-standing disability. For the
majority, education or training and housing needs are supported well by
improving joint working between agencies. A number of care leavers with a
disability have been very effectively supported by the Shared Lives team,
including a transition into adult care with their foster carers.
well accommodated. Other than 10 young people in custody, only one care
leaver is in unsuitable accommodation, but this is about to change to a tenancy.
The numbers of care leavers who are staying put with former foster carers are
increasing slowly, and there are currently 19. Kirklees housing services give
priority to care leavers on the housing list and offer support when they bid for
tenancies. They provide very effective pre-tenancy and tenancy support to
vulnerable young people, especially for those with a disability.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Standards of practice since the last Ofsted inspection in 2011 have significantly
deteriorated. The chief executive, senior managers and members did not recognise
this decline until the end of 2015. External review and a series of audits identified
that the scale and scope were widespread, and that services were not effective in
protecting children. Despite extensive efforts by leaders, managers and members
to improve services since then, there remain many children and young people who
are experiencing a poor service because of inadequate social work practice and
poor frontline management. Senior leaders have not systematically assured
themselves that all children open to childrens social care are being effectively
safeguarded and their needs met, and this is a major weakness in the plans to
improve services in Kirklees.
The new director of children and young peoples services took up post in April
foundations, both for strengthening the line of sight of frontline practice and for
good social work to flourish. At the time of the inspection, it was too soon to see
much impact from these very recent changes in improving the experience of
vulnerable children in Kirklees. The performance data and the authoritys electronic
recording system are still not fit for purpose. A quality assurance framework has
been introduced recently, although is not yet embedded. Increased independent
reviewing officer and child protection chairing capacity is improving the oversight
of practice, although this is not yet sufficiently improving the quality of social work
practice or improving outcomes for children.
Staff stability is a significant challenge, and 25% of the workforce is agency staff.
The high turnover of social workers and managers significantly impacts on the
quality of services received by children and young people. Overall, the induction,
supervision and training of staff are inconsistent, with insufficient oversight and
challenge of poor practice.
Operationally, multi-agency planning is weak, including the functioning of the
multi-agency safeguarding hub and joint planning for children in need, child
protection and children looked after. Risks relating to child sexual exploitation are
not always recognised by social workers and other agencies. The Kirklees
Safeguarding Children Board and corporate parents had not recognised the
widespread weaknesses in the services being provided to many children. The
oversight and the involvement of children and young people in the work of both
boards are weak.


Areas that have shown improvement as a result of strengthened arrangements
include improved permanence planning, adoption, services for young people
leaving care and some aspects of the support provided to children looked after.
Inspection findings
declined. Serious weaknesses were identified by leaders and an improvement
plan put into place. Extensive efforts by the new senior leadership team have
begun to impact on practice. However, sustained improvements are not evident
and many children continue to receive a poor social work service.
Board (KSCB) audit in August 2015. However, the extent of these weaknesses
was not fully understood at the time. The local authority commissioned an
external review across all areas of social work practice. This identified
widespread and systemic weaknesses in the help for and protection of
vulnerable children in Kirklees. Between February and April 2016, the local
authority audited 226 childrens files, 10% of those cases open at the time. This
identified that 54% of those children had received an inadequate social work
service and a small number of children needed urgent action to be taken to
protect them. Subsequently, the local authority increased its quality assurance
capacity. However it has yet to assure itself systematically that all children open
to childrens services are safe and their needs are being met.
She and her new management team have a clear, long-term vision of services
for children and families in Kirklees. Since her appointment, she has extended
the work of the development board and worked with neighbouring authorities
to assist in developing further capacity.
service restructure to increase accountability and reduce the number of
changes of social workers children experience; a review of the multi-agency
safeguarding hub (MASH) to provide a single point of entry to access social
work support; the development of a performance management framework to
measure improvement; and the implementation of a refreshed workforce
strategy, focused on recruitment and retention. Where the workforce is stable,
improving quality is more evident.
meetings between the chief executive officer and the independent chair of
KSCB, and weekly meetings between the lead member and the director. The
new lead member has an improved overview and understanding of frontline
practice, not only from the external reviews of service provision but also
through chairing the renewed corporate parenting panel and the Children's
Trust, as well as attending the Health and Wellbeing Board and KSCB. A new


childrens services council scrutiny committee has been introduced. An
additional panel for members in relation to child sexual exploitation further
increases scrutiny arrangements for some of the most vulnerable children.
service improvements. This is a recent issue and follows the departure of many
permanent members of staff in the past year, as a result of some permanent
staff exiting due to poor performance and the councils restructuring of its
services. The staff turnover rate is 10.9%. However, it is significantly higher in
some parts of the service, such as in the duty and care assessment teams. A
quarter of the workforce is of agency staff, including social workers, team
managers and service managers. Agency workers also provide cover for longterm sickness and vacancies in the workforce. The local authority has
experienced a number of agency staff leaving the service, some as a result of
poor practice. The local authority has negotiated with social work agencies
extended periods of notice to manage this turnover of staff better. Changes in
managers, though, have led to inconsistent management decision making and
application of thresholds. Young people told inspectors that they found that
they were unable to develop positive relationships with their social workers
because of changes in staff. One young person told inspectors that they were
unhappy about having three new workers in a period of six months.
of experienced social workers and team managers through enhanced packages
of employment. A new workforce development strategy is underpinned by a set
of clear principles to enable social work to flourish, and is accompanied by an
appropriately prioritised action plan which includes delivery of a comprehensive
training programme. Given its infancy, there has been limited impact. However,
newly qualified social workers spoke highly of their protected learning
environment within a team of all newly qualified staff. These staff receive good
support, including a structured four-week induction, a buddying system with an
advanced practitioner and tailored training focusing on core social work skills.
Some social workers are now benefiting from smaller caseloads, in particular
those who are working with children looked after. The principal social workers
capacity has been increased and there is a renewed focus on back-to-basics
training. Inspectors identified a small number of children benefiting from a
review of their files by experienced agency staff, with appropriate action then
being taken to protect them and meet their needs proactively.
recently revised its supervision policy and provided further training for
managers. However, the impact of this is not yet evident. Inspectors saw that
supervision lacks a focus on children and does not drive forward care planning.
Agency staff often do not have supervision. (Recommendation)
managers and newly allocated workers to identify progress and work to be
undertaken. During the inspection, social workers and team managers were


unable to locate key documents relating to children, including assessments and
plans. Senior managers and leaders have recognised that children's files do not
provide good-quality or effective recording mechanisms, and have secured
funding to procure a new electronic recording system. (Recommendation)
adequate. Where the workforce is stable, overall there is adequate
management oversight. However, it is significantly poorer in those parts of the
service that are experiencing frequent staff changes. Within these areas,
inspectors identified inconsistent application of thresholds, risks not being
sufficiently identified, explored or responded to and a lack of critical challenge
of poor practice which contributed to children receiving an inadequate service.
continues to be a serious issue for the local authority. To address weaknesses
in the identification of risk and inconsistent management decision making, the
local authority has established a number of panels chaired by senior managers
to ensure a clear line of sight on frontline practice. Inspectors were provided
with evidence of improved planning for some children. However, not all of
these panels are embedded or effective, such as the pre-birth panel.
protection chairs has enabled a sharper focus on practice. The recent dispute
resolution process identified over 500 practice concerns in child protection and
looked after childrens social work over a five-month period. However,
corrective actions have not always been timely, resulting in children remaining
in situations where their needs were not met and, in some cases, where they
were potentially at risk of significant harm. (Recommendation)
concerns and referred back 100 of these to the authority for urgent review and
further actions to be taken. The individual response to these was robust, for the
vast majority. However, inspectors were concerned that the local authority has
not proactively assured itself that all children and young people whom they are
working with are safe and that their needs are being met. The local authoritys
own audits, the dispute resolution concerns, and the sampling and tracking
done by inspectors demonstrate that the risks to a significant number of
children who are currently being provided with a service remain unknown and
unexplored. (Recommendation)
quality assurance framework that was launched during the period of inspection.
Performance information is provided on a whole-service and team basis to
identify some key areas of underperformance. However, the poor quality of
data drawn from the electronic recording system inhibits the local authoritys
priority to establish an effective performance culture. For example, managers
are unable to report accurately on children being seen and they do not have
confidence in the management information produced, but instead develop


manual systems to help them to understand performance. Inspectors found the
quality of data the performance data produced by the local authority to be
unreliable, with serious deficiencies in its accuracy. (Recommendation)
when data is scrutinised and lines of enquiry explored. A review of each area of
service is undertaken by the assistant director, with appropriate challenge
evident. This is helping to improve accountability for poor performance.
However, the local authority does not yet have a good understanding of the
reasons for some performance outliers, such as the 48% increase in children
subject to child protection plans and the increase in children becoming subject
to plan for a second or subsequent time. (Recommendation)
children and young people living at a significant distance from Kirklees, away
from their friends and families. The joint strategic assessment and local
authority needs analysis lack depth in profiling and understanding the needs of
children looked after. A commissioning cycle is not yet established.
(Recommendation)
commitment to improving services to help and protect children by way of the
development board and sessions between community safety partnerships,
Kirklees Adult Safeguarding Board, KSCB and the Health and Wellbeing Board,
which have identified cross-cutting themes and priorities such as female genital
mutilation. The Health and Wellbeing Board has focused on some areas of
childrens commissioning. This includes a recent child sexual exploitation
commissioning strategy which contributes to the polices and crime
commissioners planning across the region. However, there is more to be done
operationally to ensure that agencies understand their responsibilities in relation
to contributing to good-quality assessments and planning for children,
recognising risks in relation to child sexual exploitation, and information sharing
and decision making in the MASH.
corporate parenting board remains underdeveloped. Performance information is
not sufficiently developed to provide robust oversight, facilitate effective
challenge or drive improvements for children and young people. Young people
have not sufficiently participated in the board meetings and it is unclear how
they are influencing its priorities. (Recommendation)


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
Executive summary
Kirklees Safeguarding Children Board (KSCB) is judged to be inadequate, as it is
not discharging all of its statutory functions as outlined in Working Together 2015.
In particular, some partner agencies are not members of the board.
The KSCB has not fully recognised the extent of the improvements required across
the partnership. The frequency and impact of its auditing activities have not
responded sufficiently to the serious and widespread issues in childrens services.
Consequently, the board has not monitored the extent of the difficulties or
provided systematic and independent scrutiny and challenge.
The KSCB has not progressed serious case reviews and actions to improve practice
in a timely manner. The child death overview panel has also delayed analysing all
local child deaths.
The multi-agency performance data that the KSCB receives is poor and there are
significant delays in partners contributing data. The KSCB has not systematically
tracked or analysed emerging patterns and trends over time. It has not been
sufficiently challenging of partners, resulting in inconsistent chairs and participation
in workstreams. This has impacted on the quality, consistency and pace of
progress.
The KSCB has not had sufficient oversight of all vulnerable children to understand
the effectiveness of safeguarding practice across the partnership in relation to
specific cohorts of children identified in the national guidance as needing to be
considered by Local Safeguarding Children Boards.
There are insufficient multi-agency trainers, and the voice of children and young
people is underdeveloped in driving improvements in the boards work.
The board has now a revised child sexual exploitation strategy and action plan
outlining the need for improvements in key areas of preventing, identifying and
responding to children at risk. However, there remain issues about all professionals
in agencies recognising indicators and risk factors relating to child sexual
exploitation.


Recommendations
Safeguarding Children Board (KSCB) to improve safeguarding across Kirklees.
all groups of vulnerable children, specifically the effectiveness of services for
children with disabilities, those who are young carers, those living out of the
area, and those receiving services and interventions within the Prevent
programme.
ensure that the board maintains effective oversight and monitoring of childrens
experiences of safeguarding and the effectiveness of services.
child death overview panel (CDOP), addressing the causes of delays in
considering child deaths, and that accurate and timely data is available, with
analysis, to inform the CDOP annual report.
looked after and care leavers, across the business of KSCB.
address delays in progressing SCR action plans.
training programme, and that analysis takes place to identify its impact on
improving services.
child sexual exploitation.
has an ongoing analysis of the performance and effectiveness of local services,
and the reasons for any emerging patterns or trends.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
widespread weaknesses in childrens services and has provided insufficient
challenge to the local authority over the inadequacies found during this
inspection. The independent chair of KSCB has been in post since 2010 and
reports previous complacency across the partnership in holding childrens
services to account. Following a peer review and the commissioning of an
external consultant, shortfalls were identified in the boards work. As a result,


some aspects have improved. However, not all requirements set out in Working
Together 2015 are met.
and their responsibilities to safeguard children in Kirklees, which has resulted in
inadequate progress in some highly concerning areas. Serious case review
(SCR) action plans have not been progressed in a timely way. There have been
delays in progressing reviews of child deaths and ensuring that national
guidelines are met. Multi-agency performance data is insufficient to provide an
overview of the quality of safeguarding practice. There are also serious
discrepancies between partner agencies that have actioned board priorities
within their own organisations.
children identified as young carers, children with disabilities, children looked
after placed out of Kirklees and children for whom there are concerns about
radicalisation. Neither has the board had full sight or influence of early help
developments until recently. This is now a priority within the business plan for
implement the vision for early help and prevention. The board has led a review
of thresholds in consultation with partners, which has led to a revised
continuum of needs and responses document that was launched in August
consistently applied across the partnership. (Recommendation)
settings not represented on the board, namely mainstream schools, colleges
and faith organisations. There is now a representative from the voluntary sector
after a short gap in attendance. Positively, two consistent lay members are
active members of the board and provide an independent perspective from the
local community. (Recommendation)
the section 11 audit challenge day, interviewing board members and facilitating
workshops at a conference for practitioners. However, the board has identified
the need to be more inclusive of childrens and young peoples influence across
its priorities. This extends to existing groups such as the Children in Care
Council and care leavers, who are not currently consulted and involved, despite
their well-informed perspectives. (Recommendation)
there has been extensive and ongoing activity to refocus the priorities of the
board through a revised business plan for 201617. All the key strategies and
frameworks have been reviewed in recent months and, overall, are clear
working documents. The KSCB website is accessible, with good links to all KSCB
business. A challenge log has been developed and completed retrospectively.
The board itself has action plans to improve how the board structures its
workstreams and membership and focuses on its priorities. However, there


continue to be difficulties in securing consistent chairs for some workstreams,
for example evaluation and effectiveness, learning and development, and the
CDOP. This continues to impact on the progress made. (Recommendation)
January 2016, one SCR has been published, and another has been completed
and is awaiting a publication date following the completion of criminal
proceedings. A further SCR has been commissioned. The national panel did not
agree with the KSCB recommendation not to carry out a SCR, and this has
prompted the board to revisit this case. Overall, there have been some lengthy
delays in progressing actions. The quality of SCR action plans contributes to
these delays, as some actions are not specific with clear timescales. The
dissemination of learning by KSCB organisations has also not been sufficiently
rigorous, and implementation and progress have not been monitored.
(Recommendation).
are significant delays in partners submitting the required data. This is impacting
on how soon the board has sight of data. For example, the data for 201516 is
not yet complete. This limits the boards ability to identify emerging trends and
how well childrens needs are met. The patterns and trends over time are not
analysed sufficiently to understand any changes, influences and then how best
to provide challenge. This limits the quality of the annual report, with the most
recently published report for 201415 containing very little analysis of the
effectiveness of child safeguarding. The board is now working to agree a
smaller, core dataset across the partnership to focus on key areas of
performance to facilitate better oversight. This is work in progress, as is
improving the KSCB annual report for 201516, which is in draft form and lacks
sufficient consideration of key safeguarding issues. (Recommendation)
majority of the audits being undertaken in single agencies then collated into
overall findings. This misses the opportunity to understand and learn the multiagency lessons from collectively analysing practice and focusing on the same
children and families. This approach also reduces the shared scrutiny and
challenge element, as the method relies on self-assessment. The quality of
auditing activity is neither consistently nor sufficiently focused on the outcomes
for or impact on children and families. Nor are practitioners and managers
involved in auditing, which misses this connection with frontline practice and
the opportunity to strengthen learning. There are also challenges in partner
agencies identification of representatives for auditing activity, which continues
to delay planned audits. The KSCB undertook a small audit of cases in which
children experiencing neglect had delays in being allocated a social worker. This
audit appropriately identified concerns in August 2015, and the report was
presented at the next board in December 2015. The board did not undertake
further activity to assure itself of the extent of the issues for children and revise
its strategy for oversight and monitoring. (Recommendation)


September 2015 to understand a childs journey from a safeguarding
perspective. This was initiated due to concerns raised at the board by partners
and reported locally. There have been delays in progressing this, but it is very
recently concluded and is awaiting a final report.
following a further external review which outlined the need for improvements in
key areas of preventing, identifying and responding to children at risk. This
area of work was underdeveloped across the partnership, and the action plan
outlines a clear direction in which to make improvements in line with national
learning. Although, in the main, the work to address child sexual exploitation is
robust, there remain serious deficits in professionals recognition of these issues
within cases. During 2016, the board also recognised the need to improve its
oversight of children missing education, of children who are home educated
and of unregulated schools. (Recommendation)
now offers a comprehensive range of training to support the workforce with key
areas of safeguarding. The e-learning packages are well promoted as part of
the training offer. There are flexible options, such as lunchtime seminars and
separating full days into manageable half days. However, there are ongoing
issues with poor attendance, which the board has begun to prioritise and raise
with partners. The actual number in the pool of trainers has been insufficient.
For example, when the key post-holder was absent for four months, very little
training took place. The quality and impact of some training are evaluated.
However, improvements are needed in analysing the impact of training. For
example, 18% of respondents can identify how practice has improved from SCR
learning, but there is no evaluation from the majority of 82% who did not
comment. (Recommendation).
reviewing child deaths are shared with a neighbour authority, as are the
chairing arrangements. A recent decision has been made to review deaths of
babies of under 23 weeks gestation, in line with national guidance, as this was
not happening. The quality and analysis of data for the CDOP are poor and are
not systematically collated throughout the year, and the figures for 201516 are
still being analysed. At the point of this inspection, the reviews of 35 deaths are
not yet concluded. Fifteen of the 35 deaths were notified prior to 2016. In 11 of
the 15 cases presented to the panel, it was determined that further information
was required before conclusions could be drawn. (Recommendation)
services and lead members to share information. The chair is included on the
local authoritys development board to link closely with the improvements that
the local authority is striving for. The KSCB has formalised links with the
Safeguarding Adult Board and the community partnership board in the last year
through three-board meetings and development days. This liaison has resulted


in agreeing and developing agreed strategies for tackling female genital
mutilation, reducing incidents of child sexual exploitation at all ages and
delivering early help for all ages. These are recent developments and are to be
tested for operational impact. Further developments are underway to extend
work with the Health and Wellbeing Board and the Childrens Trust.
good quality. The board audits compliance through section 11 audits every 18
months. The last audit, in August 2015, added specific questions on child sexual
exploitation. Agencies responses were tested through panels at a challenge
event. Positively, this included a young persons panel, with prepared testing
questions and contributions to the feedback. From this, agencies were asked to
devise child sexual exploitation action plans, although the quality of these
varied. Due to capacity, the board has not been able to follow through when
responses were not sufficient, for example when key agencies answered Not
applicable to key questions.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted and two additional inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Neil Penswick
Deputy lead inspector: Lisa Summers
Team inspectors: Rachel Holden, Graham Reiter, Stella Elliot, Kath Townsley, Fiona
Parker
Shadow inspectors: Mandy Nightingale, Lorna Schlechte
Senior data analyst: Matthew King, Patrick Thomson
Quality assurance manager: Sarah Urding


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance, Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


