Knowsley Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 29 April  21 May 2014
Report published: 30 June 2014
The overall judgement is inadequate
There are widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed
or at risk of harm.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

Inadequate


Requires
improvement


Inadequate


Requires
improvement


Inadequate

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is
inadequate
The LSCB is not demonstrating that it has effective arrangements in place and the
required skills to discharge its statutory duties.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the local safeguarding children board


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority has serious weaknesses and is not yet good because

Widespread failures and inconsistent practice across help and protection
services leave some children and young people at risk of suffering harm. Too
many children and young people who need help and support or who need to be
cared for by the local authority experience drift and delay. Some have been left
for too long in situations where they have suffered harm.


Early help services are not well coordinated or targeted, therefore the local
authority cannot be sure that children and young people who most need
support get it or that early intervention is preventing the need for statutory
involvement. Although increasing, the number of common assessments (CAF)
undertaken remains low and the quality is poor overall, so that in many cases
childrens needs are not recognised or addressed early enough.


The threshold for referral to childrens social care is not consistently applied by
partner agencies and childrens services. A significant number of cases are
inappropriately assessed prior to being stepped down to a CAF due to not
meeting the threshold for a social work service.


Assessments undertaken by social workers do not consistently consider all risks
to children and young people. Children and young people in need of help and
protection are not always seen alone as part of their assessments. Their voices
are not heard and their experiences are not fully understood. Social workers
place too much focus on the needs of adults.


While strategy discussions are held promptly, they do not always involve the
minimum representation of agencies required by Working Together. The social
workers who carry out child protection enquiries are not usually involved in the
strategy discussion and dont share in the valuable initial exchange of
information that helps to decide the action needed.


Plans to protect children are often not clear or outcome focused. This has
resulted in drawn out ineffective engagement with families which has not
achieved the desired improvements. Too many child protection plans are ended
before real long term change is achieved, with children needing a further
protection plan to secure their safety. Reviews are not sufficiently effective in
challenging the lack of progress.


The quality of record keeping is variable and often poor across all the social
work teams with, for example, little use of chronologies to gain understanding
of historical factors that may be significant in assessment of risk. Recording in
many childrens files is not up to date.



There are significant weaknesses in management oversight with a legacy of
infrequent and poor supervision of social work staff, particularly in the
safeguarding and assessment teams. While there has been a very recent
improvement through ensuring that all staff have regular supervision, the
quality remains low. These weaknesses have contributed to the lack of progress
in plans.


A high turnover of social workers in the assessment and safeguarding teams
has resulted in too many children being unable to develop effective
relationships with their social workers. This contrasts with the experience of
children in the looked after childrens team, many of whom form good
relationships with their social workers.

and drift through a lack of robust care planning and review; some also wait too
long before permanence plans are made. The quality of care plans is poor and
insufficient challenge is provided by independent reviewing officers. The quality
of pathway plans for care leavers is inconsistent, with some lacking clarity
about young peoples needs.
adopted when this is in the childs best interest.
suitable placements are available to meet the needs of all children looked after
in Knowsley. Not all children looked after benefit from stable placements that
meet all their needs. Performance on stability has declined in the past year and
is poorer than comparators.
Children make good progress in the early years and across Key Stage 2.
However, in secondary schools the level of progress falls significantly.
Outcomes at Key Stage 4 are not good enough and the gap between children
looked after and their peers in Knowsley is too large.
does not hold information from all education providers. This makes it difficult to
monitor the progress these children are making, to challenge the effectiveness
of the provision, or to know whether additional support is needed.
help plan service developments, for example the needs of children becoming
looked after do not inform fostering recruitment.
information about their entitlements, how to complain or how to access
advocacy services. The electronic information system does not support good
planning or provide good quality management information.


management is under-developed and there is no established quality assurance
system. This makes it difficult for all managers to monitor the quality of social
work practice or the progress of actions designed to improve it.
The local authority has the following strengths
significant deficits in the provision of services to children and families. An
improvement plan has been drawn up and some remedial action has already
started. This includes a plan for more effective access to early help and a redesign of fieldwork services to address too many children experiencing poor
outcomes.
social workers. Social workers are positive about the recent changes.
as Families First, Stronger Families, Encompass, the Freedom Project and
services for families and children with disabilities.
through the courts.
optical assessments, including assessment of their emotional well-being.
stable relationships with their social workers. These children are listened to and
their wishes and feelings are explored and recorded. Many are positive about
their placement and the relationships they have with their carers.
child sexual exploitation, there are established systems to ensure their wishes
and feelings are considered when they return.
looked after in Knowsley perform a valuable role including collecting and
representing the views of children and young people to inform service delivery.
and are accessing education, training and employment.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
apply the threshold for referral to childrens social care.
the regular auditing of case records, personal education plans and CAFs.
with a focus on the quality of supervision offered. Deliver training for managers
to support the development of supervision in line with the supervision policy.
senior management oversight of the experiences of these staff.
agencies and include the workers who will carry out any enquiries, and ensure
that the minutes of the meeting include clear directions and rationale for
actions. Ensure the outcomes of child protection enquiries are always shared
with the key professionals involved with the child and family.
plans are regular and carried out by suitably experienced social workers, that
children are seen alone and that records include their views.

family routinely attend in order that information is fully shared and plans are
understood and carried out promptly.
the earliest point. This should include improving matching processes for
children who need long term placements to ensure their needs are being met
and their outcomes secured.
after are timely and those children with an adoption plan are adopted without
avoidable delay.
Areas for improvement
improve the quality of CAFs completed so they are an effective system for
coordinating early help to families who need this.


help is delivered to those who most need it, and evaluate the extent to which
early help prevents the need for more intensive intervention.
account of historical factors and that strengths and risks are fully considered.
Ensure that children and young people are always seen alone and spoken to as
part of the assessment process.
measurable, have timescales, and are written clearly in order that all involved
understand what they need to do.
provide written reports so that all risks are considered and appropriate
decisions and plans can be made.
conference.
independent reviewing officers, in particular in cases where there has been or
there is risk of drift and delay in plans being progressed.
those in front line social work teams.
work with children.
placements are responsive to the needs of the current and future children
looked after population from Knowsley.
pupil progress against clear targets in personal education plans. For all children
looked after who receive education outside the borough, ensure that sufficient
information is received to evaluate their progress and ensure their outcomes
are improving.
and analysis of young peoples aspirations to support their plan for a successful
transition into adulthood.
information about their entitlements, how to complain and how to access the
advocacy service. Ensure that this is clearly recorded.


assessment and planning and provide useful management information reports.
children and young people in care in Knowsley can expect from their social
workers, senior managers and politicians and partners who provide services to
young people in care.
assessment particularly in relation to the experiences of vulnerable children,
and re-align priorities and areas for development as a result.
Health and Wellbeing Board.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of five of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted,
one contracted inspector and one additional inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Robert Hackeson
Team inspectors: Peter McEntee, Tracey Metcalfe, Jansy Kelly, Kathryn Gethin,
Nancy Meehan and Ralph Trevelyan-Butler.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 32,788 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Knowsley. This is 22% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 31% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty (the
national average is 20%).
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 29.4% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 34.1% (the national average is 15.1%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 4.5% of
all children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a
whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are mixed ethnic background and Asian or Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 2.1% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 0.6% (the national average is 13.6%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 1,118 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a 9.6%
reduction from 1,237 at 31 March 2013.
 At 31 March 2014, 195 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is a 36.4% increase from 143 at 31 March 2013.
 At 31 March 2014, one child lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from zero at 31 March 2013.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 262 children are being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 78.7 per 10,000 children). This is a 10.5% increase from 237
(73.1 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2013. Of this number:
local authority area
area
 No children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months there have been:
subsequently returned to be looked after
moved on to independent living
 There are no children and young people who have ceased to be
looked after and are now living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates four group children centres. Three have
recently been inspected. Two were judged as good and one outstanding by
Ofsted.
 The local authority operates four childrens homes, all of which were judged
as good in their last full inspection. In their most recent interim Ofsted
inspection three were judged to be making good progress and the fourth
was judged to be making satisfactory progress.
 The previous inspection of Knowsleys safeguarding arrangements was in
March 2010. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of Knowsleys services for looked after children was
in March 2010. The local authority was judged to be good.
Other information about this area


 The Director of Peoples Services took up post on 1 October 2013.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since September 2012.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
are inadequate
they need at the time they need them to ensure that they are supported and
protected. This includes those who need early help through to those children
who are recognised as in need of protection and are subject to a child
protection plan. There are significant weaknesses in the core areas of social
work practice including management oversight, assessment and child
protection. This leaves children and young people at risk of harm.
improvement plan. Recently appointed senior managers know what they need
to do to improve the quality of practice and services for children and young
people in Knowsley. However, remedial action is still at an early stage and
significant impact is not yet evident in day to day practice.
early help services. Three of the four childrens centres in Knowsley have been
judged good or outstanding by Ofsted. Parents have told inspectors support
from Stronger Families (Knowsleys troubled families programme) has
improved their self-esteem and confidence and their ability to communicate
with their children. Although some children benefit from early help, services are
not well coordinated or targeted, so not all children and young people receive
the support they need. The local authority currently does not evaluate the
range of support on offer nor does it ensure it is successfully targeting the
greatest need.
particularly for children under school age, due to low completion rates by
partners, especially community health Schools report that many children are
entering education without their needs having been fully addressed, and this
then affects their readiness to learn. CAFs completed are often of poor quality
and in many cases are used as a substitute for a referral for other services
rather than as a tool for the lead professional to coordinate a package of
support
significant number of referrals to social care which proceed to an assessment
then result in step down to a CAF. This means many children and their families
are being escalated into statutory services inappropriately without the
opportunity for timely early help and support. The local authority plans to relaunch the early help strategy in September 2014 and refresh the current
threshold document.


safeguarding hub (MASH) and the local authority is in the process of closing
down the Knowsley Assess Team (KAT) which currently receives contacts and
sends them to the MASH. Early evaluation of the MASH shows it is leading to
more effective information sharing by partners to identify children in need of
help and protection quickly and provide a single point of entry to childrens
social care. The current process whereby the KAT receives and passes on
contacts results in a substantial number of inappropriate contacts being sent to
the MASH, which diverts social workers from safeguarding activity into
signposting children and families to early help. Permission to undertake
enquiries is sort by social workers when appropriate.
by the MASH and strategy discussions are held promptly where appropriate,
although they do not always involve the minimum representation of agencies
required by Working Together. Strategy discussions observed at the MASH
considered risks well. However, the written records did not always demonstrate
that risks had been explored sufficiently or provide a clear direction and
rationale for actions. This is particularly important because the social workers
who carry out child protection enquiries are not based in the MASH and are
unlikely to have attended the strategy meeting. This means that key
information is not always readily available to professionals when determining
risks to children, nor is it always clear how the investigation should be
conducted or by whom.
and too many are conducted by social care as a single agency. Management
oversight of the quality of the enquires is limited and the outcome of enquiries
is not always recorded or shared with key professionals involved with the child.
This means that not all enquiries are robustly considered or supported by
agency partners.
resulted in too many children being unable to develop effective relationships
with their social workers, and parents having to tell their history to new workers
on a number of occasions.
suffered harm. Knowsley has taken positive action in recent months to tackle
the lack of purposeful planning in certain teams. This is beginning to identify
previously unmet needs. There has been a rapid and appropriate rise in the
number of children subject to child protection plans in the borough from 119 in
October 2013 to 195 in March 2014 as this action begins to have impact.
service they require. There has been insufficient consideration and
understanding of risk in a number of assessments, leading to services not
intervening when they should. Childrens needs arising from their ethnicity and


culture are not sufficiently explored or addressed. Children are not seen
routinely as part of assessments and there were few examples of direct work
with children. This means childrens voices are not heard and are not the focus
of social workers interventions.
actions have taken place to safeguard children and how decisions are made.
Chronologies are not used to support assessments and enable social workers to
recognise the cumulative impact of abuse on children, including the impact of
neglect. There is little evidence that the impact of domestic abuse, adult
substance misuse and parental mental health are understood in terms of the
emotional impact on children in the short- and long-term. There is an over
reliance on parental self-reporting and insufficient consultation with other
agencies to verify parents accounts. These omissions were seen across teams
and affected several points in the childs journey where managers have not
provided sufficient levels of supervision and challenge.
child protection plans does not support social workers to focus on risk. Plans
often do not contain parents or childrens views and are difficult to read. Too
many child protection plans do not identify key risks to enable parents and
professionals to be clear about what needs to change and within what
timescale, or the consequences if things do not improve. This results in
statutory visits to children lacking a clear purpose or being capable of
measuring progress.
conferences means they do not all contribute to important discussions and
information sharing needed to keep children safe. Agencies do not consistently
provide written reports or share reports with parents. Parents often hear
information for the first time at the conference and this makes their
participation difficult.
assessments, do not have chronologies and many lack sufficient analysis. This
affects the quality of decision making and results in the full extent of progress
or risks to children not being fully understood. Children and young people are
not routinely invited to their conference. One young person told inspectors she
did not understand why she had a protection plan as her social worker had
changed three times and she had never got to know any of them. In many
cases there was no evidence of direct work with children to promote their
participation in the child protection process. There was a lack of awareness
among social workers of the availability of the advocacy service to assist in this
regard.
social workers and children are not always seen alone.. Little direct work is
carried out with children to ascertain their wishes and feelings. Not all core


groups are held within appropriate timescales and not all agencies routinely
attend, which means information is not shared effectively with key professionals
to measure progress in the protection plan or evaluate the effectiveness of
support.
decisions are made to remove a child from a protection plan, professionals do
not have the benefit of current and relevant assessments offering sufficient
evidence of parents capacity to achieve and sustain change. Over the past year
a quarter of children made subject to a protection plan had previously been on
a plan which is significantly above the rate for comparators.
had sufficient impact on improving outcomes for children and young people.
Insufficient challenge has contributed to further drift and delay in plans being
progressed. The Independent Reviewing Officers (IROs) in Knowsley also act
as independent chairs for child protection case conferences. However, the IRO
Service Annual Report 2014 does not provide any information on child
protection practice and performance to senior managers.. This means that
senior managers do not have access to valuable information to assist their
understanding of the quality of practice or the effectiveness of child protection
processes to safeguard children and improve their outcomes.
multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARAC) are effective, with good
representation and input from partner agencies. The Encompass programme
provides information to schools in the borough within 24 hours when pupils
have been exposed to domestic violence, so that support can be arranged if
needed. Substance misuse services provide an integrated service for young
people and adults. They work closely with childrens social care to identify
children living with parents or carers who misuse substances and they help to
provide early identification of children at risk of misusing substances. However,
not all social workers recognise in their assessments the full potential risks to
children that domestic violence or substance misuse may cause.
from education are effective, with good action taken to reduce the number,
from 65 in 2013 to three in the current academic year. Children who go missing
from care have a return home interview conducted by their allocated social
worker. The system does not, however, collate and analyse data or link it to the
child sexual exploitation (CSE) data. This represents a missed opportunity to
provide support through early help and to identify patterns and trends where
children and young people may be at risk.
sexual exploitation are in place. The development of the multi-agency child
sexual exploitation (MACSE) sub-group is well coordinated by the police and
provides an effective multi-agency forum for identifying and tracking potential


victims of child sexual exploitation and perpetrators. There are good practice
examples of work with universal services to raise awareness through training.
However, this training has not been extended across childrens social care to
front line social work teams where risk assessments are undertaken. Practice
guidance for social workers in relation to CSE has not been implemented and
not all social workers know what action to take as a consequence. This is a
significant gap. The local authority together with the police plan to launch the
guidance in June 2014.
In cases seen, the service offered a robust and well-coordinated out-of-hours
response and maintained good communications with daytime services, so that
information about children was shared effectively.
and the procedures to ensure the safety of children living in private fostering
arrangements are appropriate. Nevertheless the number of children known to
be in private fostering arrangements is very low, which raises the concern that
some children are not recognised and supported when they are living apart
from their immediate family.
seriously. Effective tracking and information sharing processes are in place with
partner agencies and neighbouring authorities. There is good communication
between the Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO) and childrens social
work teams to generate referrals where children may be at risk of harm. The
local authority recognises the need to raise the profile of the LADO role among
partner agencies and the voluntary sector and within its own services.
childrens individuality and needs arising from their disability are understood.
Social workers in the disabled childrens team do not have specific training or
qualifications in communicating with disabled children despite many having
worked there for many years. This means these children are not listened to or
heard as well as they could be independently of their parents or carers.
of services and support for their children and the community. This is not
replicated in children in need or child protection services. Overall there is little
evidence that practice is informed by feedback from children, young people and
their families.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence require improvement
for children who become looked after. This is having some success but as yet
not all children and young people have a permanence plan in place quickly
enough.
children and young people becoming looked after later than would be in their
best interests. This is recognised by the local authority and since December
looked after when it is right for them. This has led to an appropriate rise in the
number of children becoming looked after.
stable relationships with their social workers. These children and young people
are listened to and their wishes and feelings are explored and recorded.
been effective in reducing timescales for care proceedings to within the 26
week deadline. Knowsley now has in place a system to track the progress of
pre-proceedings work under the Public Law Outline. This will enable them to
monitor the length of time this work is taking so they can be confident that
children do not wait too long to have their welfare and safeguarding secured.
becoming looked after has enabled them to stay with their family. However,
although improving, edge-of-care services are not sufficiently coordinated to
ensure that they are targeting all children and families who need this help.
When a child needs to be looked after, clear family finding processes identify
suitable short term placements without delay. Children are supported to live
with siblings where this is in their best interests. Many children and young
people speak positively about their placement and the relationships they have
formed with their carers. Although many children looked after get their needs
met, not all children benefit from stable placements. There has been an
increase in the number of children who have experienced three or more
placement moves in a year, and performance on long term stability has also
declined in the past year and is poorer than comparators. The local authority is
aware of this decline and is currently seeking to understand the reasons.
Disruption meetings are not routinely held for individual placement breakdown,
so the opportunity to learn is missed. Foster carers report a lack of support
services such as respite care at times of emergency.
commissioned in response to robust assessment and planning of their complex
needs. During the past year a new home has been specifically commissioned to


meet the complex needs of three young men who had previously been living
away from the borough.
optical assessments and plans, including assessment of their emotional wellbeing. All have a strengths and difficulties questionnaire (SDQ) completed
which is used to identify potential issues for them in relation to their emotional
health. Assessments result in appropriate referrals to specialist health provision
including mental health services. In a small number of cases social work
records did not contain enough information about the potential impact of health
conditions for the children and their carers.
between year groups. Children in the early years make good progress but by
the end of Key Stage 1 children looked after perform below the level of their
peers. Progress is good for the very large majority of children across Key Stage
the level of progress falls significantly and the gap between children looked
after and all children in Knowsley is too wide. Educational outcomes for looked
after children at Key Stage 4 are not good enough. A very small minority of
children achieved five or more good GCSEs (A*to C including English and
mathematics) in 2013, comparing poorly with the proportion for looked after
children nationally and for others in their age group in Knowsley.
seen. Others did not contain a complete attainment history or targets that were
specific or sufficiently challenging. In these the voice of the child is not always
apparent.
better, both in and outside Knowsley. The virtual school monitors the progress
of Knowsley schools which fall below good in their inspection. Children who are
looked after are not moved unnecessarily and careful consideration is given to
each childs individual needs. Good joint working by the virtual school, inclusion
officer and education support team has improved school attendance and
reduced fixed term exclusions. No looked after children are permanently
excluded. The pupil premium is used well to support children looked after and a
sensitive approach is taken to address individual needs. Good transition
arrangements are in place for looked after children leaving school. Visits to
colleges are undertaken by education staff alongside looked after children as
part of the on-going support. There is a strong partnership between the virtual
school and the learning and skills and employability team.
is now improving systems to collect information from providers on the quality of
education. Lack of information has previously made it difficult for the virtual
head teacher to challenge external providers on progress made and the impact
of any additional funding. Education and health colleagues are not routinely


involved in pre-placement planning and for children who are to be placed out of
the borough. For some children this results in delay in securing appropriate
local educational provision and health services to meet their needs in their new
community.
missing from care, they are seen by their social worker upon return, their voice
is heard and coordinated services are arranged to reduce risk where needed.
There are good working relationships between residential staff and staff in the
youth offending service and a range of commissioned services are available to
meet the needs of children looked after who are misusing drugs or alcohol.
council and the making a difference everywhere (MADE) groups. MADE
groups, involve a good cross section of children looked after in Knowsley.
Supported by a participation officer, they perform a very valuable role in
collecting and representing the views of children and young people to inform
service delivery. MADE groups also act directly to deliver improvements to
services and have, for example, delivered training on equality and diversity to
staff and foster carers. They review and comment on policies, and their work
helps to ensure that social work for children looked after is focused on
childrens needs.
bullying and other forms of discrimination are taken seriously and tackled by
staff. However, some felt that bullying directed specifically at children looked
after is not always addressed effectively within schools; the MADE groups are
developing training to deliver to secondary schools to tackle bullying.
after do not all receive the relevant leaflets explaining how to make a
complaint, so the local authority cannot be confident all children understand the
process. Knowsley does take robust action to investigate and learn from
complaints, and commissions an advocacy and independent visitor service
which is valued by children looked after.
services to secure placements for all children looked after. Currently the internal
recruitment of foster carers and the number of in-house residential placements
is not informed by suitable sufficiency and recruitment strategies that are based
on a robust needs assessment. The authority cannot assure itself that it is
targeting recruitment or securing provision appropriately to meet the needs of
its current and projected looked after population. During the past year the
proportion of children looked after living more than 20 miles from home has
increased.
with their social workers, with one saying she always checks up on me and that


Im happy where Im living, and if there are any issues she sorts them quickly.
Social workers consistently visit children, including those living outside the
borough, at least within statutory timescales and more often in most cases; and
they know the children well. Children speak positively about the relationships
they have with foster carers, childrens home staff and their reviewing officers.
Some older young people and care leavers report they had previously
experienced frequent changes of social worker and poor communication. The
more recent feedback is demonstrating that this is improving.
inspection were both visited regularly by their social workers despite the long
distances involved. Their care plans reflected their current needs, including
health and education, and the choice of home had been carefully considered in
each case. Both were positive about the home where they were living. Neither
had formed a working relationship with their IRO. In one case the contact
arrangements were not satisfactory, with the mother unable to visit regulary
due to the distance from Knowsley.
others engaging with children to help them understand the reasons they are in
care. However not all children looked after benefit from this, particularly where
a childs plan has changed from adoption. Tools and materials to support direct
work are infrequently used by social workers.
meaningfully in their reviews and is achieving some success in this area: for
example, 10 children were supported to chair their own review during the last
year. Additionally a care leaver is currently employed to consult with children
and young people on their views about how reviews can be improved.
example through inviting adoption workers to the first review for the youngest
children and by changing their previously over-optimistic strategy of seeking
adoption for all children under 10 years. The local authority acknowledges that
improvements are still required to ensure that permanence is considered by the
second review for all children looked after. It is also encouraging IROs to offer
more challenge to social workers care plans to tackle drift and reduce delay.
Although witnessed by inspectors, it is too early to evidence the impact of this
new approach by IROs.
meet the childs assessed needs, including their need for permanency. Social
workers know their children well and clear consideration of changes to the
childs experiences and circumstances is evident in care planning meetings.
However, tracking of progress against the written care plans is less robust, with
evidence of drift continuing between meetings. There is also some confusion
amongst workers about Knowsleys standards for the frequency of care
planning meetings.


the plan is for a child to return to the care of parents. In these cases risk is
thoroughly considered, and ongoing sensitive supportive work is provided to
children and their families. However, in a small number of cases, when staff
have to react to older young people moving out without a plan, the Placement
with Parent Regulations are not consistently applied in a timely way.
considered and supported contact with their families. However there are issues
about contact for a small number of children. This is the case where the plan
for the child has significantly changed and the local authority has been slow to
address this. The quality of recording is variable. For some children who have
been looked after for a long time, the records will not help people to
understand their history and experience in care.
includes use of the central youth provision Our Space, which is open to
specialist groups such as disabled children and children looked after while also
being a facility for all young people in Knowsley during the evening.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is inadequate
for adoption when this is in their best interest. This is reflected in the most
recent published adoption scorecard figures. The scorecard shows that over the
last three years to 2013 children in Knowsley took on average 277 days longer
to be adopted from first entering care than the average in other local
authorities.
performance. In a small number of the most recent cases seen, there has been
a significant reduction in the time taken between obtaining a placement order
and matching the child with an adoptive family. However, managers are not yet
confident that by their second review all looked after children have a plan for
adoption when appropriate. As a result children may have already waited too
long to be adopted by the time a placement order is granted.
placement order had been granted. Knowsley now has a high number of
children potentially awaiting adoption, with some 40 children currently subject
to placement orders. Of these, 32 have been looked after for over 20 months,
some since 2008, and they are still not placed for adoption. For many children,
adoption may no longer be in their best interest. At the time of the inspection,
work had commenced to review these cases and alternative plans had been
identified for some of these children. Others were still waiting to have their plan
re-assessed. For these children there has been significant drift in their
permanency planning and the outcome of this is likely to be poor. For example,
some children have had contact with brothers and sisters and parents stopped


in preparation for adoption, yet have no permanent alternative plan ensuring
their stability.
timeliness. These include: alerts to the adoption team manager as children
enter care; legal planning meeting minutes shared with the adoption team; and
an adoption worker attending the first child looked after review; but these have
only been in place since January 2014 and the impact is yet to be seen.
Performance management information is not sufficiently robust to track children
effectively once they enter care and the system designed to achieve this this
has not been implemented as yet.
automatically considering all children under ten years old for adoption. Now
only children under the age of five are considered. Robust action is therefore
not being taken for some children who are over the age of five years who may
benefit from adoption. There is no consistent approach to assessing sibling
groups.
parallel planning. For some children there is the potential for delay with the
care planning processes divided across teams. Fostering for adoption is not
implemented in practice. There is as yet no policy underpinning the use of
fostering for adoption as part of the concurrent and parallel planning process.
For some children whose plan has changed from adoption, life story work has
not been completed. For these, further support will be needed to help them to
understand the changes to their plans.
with more adopters being assessed in the current year than in recent years.
With a rolling programme of training planned throughout the year to support
the adoption recruitment process, no prospective adopters are waiting to
access the training. It is too early to measure the impact that the new twostage adoption assessment process is having in terms of increasing numbers of
adopters available.
medical responses from Health impact on stage 1 of the assessment and this
has resulted in some delays in assessments being completed and social
workers having less time to complete the stage 2 process.
their backgrounds, their experience and values and the reason they felt
adoption was right for them. Reports were of good quality and appropriately
scrutinised by the adoption panel.
with prospective adopters through appropriate challenge. The low number of


disruptions indicates that this process is robust, with only one adoption
disruption reported in 2013 to 2014.
backgrounds. Regular training is offered to panel members. Regular meetings
are held between the agency decision maker and the fostering and adoption
panel chairs to consider trends and patterns of activity at the panel.
feedback from adopters about the service they have received is positive.
of preparation and introduction. Appropriate support is provided to the adoption
placement, including work with the birth children of the adoptive family to aid a
smooth transition for the adoption to take place.
informed of their entitlements to receive an assessment of their adoption
support needs. A variety of support services is available to support adoptive
children and families, with a service level agreement with After Adoption
Yorkshire to support birth families.
look at the package of adoption support services required to meet the needs of
these families.
The graded judgment for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
requires improvement
committed young peoples team with a strong child-centred ethos that delivers
many good outcomes. The service is not yet good because the quality of
assessments and pathway plans is too variable, with some needing more depth
and analysis to ensure that all care leavers needs and risks are fully assessed
as part of their plan. The electronic information system does not facilitate team
workers in devising good quality assessments and pathway plans. Chronologies
do not provide a clear history of significant events in the young persons life to
support assessments and planning.
with the help they receive. CAMHs is available to those who need this support.
Young people do not receive written information on their health history in
preparation for leaving care. Young peoples records do not demonstrate
whether they have been provided with information about their entitlements,
how to complain or how to access advocacy services. This does not ensure that
all care leavers have been provided with the appropriate information, advice
and support.


understood by carers or young people. Both groups expressed concerns about
these arrangements as a basis for enabling care leavers to remain in a stable
supportive environment. Knowsley has a Pledge for looked after children and
care leavers but not all care leavers are aware of it. The local authority plans to
re-launch a new, more user-friendly Pledge developed with the children in care
council.
manager to comply fully with the supervision policy and to quality assure and
audit casework. There are plans for a deputy post but this was not in place at
the time of inspection. The electronic information system does not provide
timely or good quality management information. The young peoples team has
recently introduced reflective practice sessions into monthly team meetings and
this learning is having a positive impact on work with young people. An
example was the prompt recognition of the risks from child sexual exploitation
and an appropriate plan to safeguard the young person.
safe where they live and in their home area. The local authority reports that all
young people are in suitable accommodation and this was confirmed in talking
to young people and in records seen. Applications for tenancies are prioritised
in line with the protocol with the housing provider. Where young people are in
secure accommodation there is good multi-agency planning involving the
probation service and housing provider.
member of the team when they are in crisis or need to talk to someone.
Manageable caseloads mean staff can provide a prompt response. Care leavers
are well prepared for the transfer from a social worker to a personal adviser in
the same team at 18 years of age. Vulnerable young people are helped to
access adult services where needed and the team has the capacity and
commitment to support those over 21 years who come back to ask for help. A
high proportion of young people leaving care after age 16 remain in care until
their 18th birthday.
employment. The proportion of those engaged is improving and is above that
of comparators and the national average. Effective links are in place between
the learning and skills manager, the local college, training providers and
voluntary organisations. Inspectors met with five care leavers who are very
positive about the support they receive, including opportunities for volunteering
as a pathway to work.
young people are currently supported on degree courses at university. Care
leavers enjoy the annual event to celebrate their achievements with senior
officers and the Lead Member. Our Place young peoples centre is a valuable


resource providing opportunities to meet, engage and develop social skills. In
recognition of its commitment to support care leavers in their journey to
employment.


Leadership, management and governance are inadequate
group over the past two years has led to a loss of focus on the maintenance
and development of services in response to need. The recent permanent
appointments to the Director of People post and to other key senior
management positions brings stability and permanency in the most senior
positions. However the secure systems needed to ensure that leaders have a
comprehensive knowledge of how well children and young people are helped,
cared for and protected are not yet in place.
Director of Peoples post has not yet been undertaken. Given the volume of
improvement work that will be required to ensure that services are safe and
effective, the local authority should satisfy itself formally that there is sufficient
senior management capacity to lead and manage Childrens Services effectively.
including identifying some of the key changes necessary to ensure that there is
an improvement pathway for childrens services. The authority has begun to
implement an improvement plan which targets significant areas of weakness in
front line services and support to staff. However, the plan is not comprehensive
as it does not yet include the review and development of services for looked
after children.
clearly defined targets and timescales for achievement. In particular, the local
authority does not collect and analyse information on the needs of children and
young people in Knowsley. It does not have a comprehensive sufficiency
strategy allowing it to link identified need to plans for provision. Fostering
provision is not planned to match the complex needs of children coming into
care. Current fostering resources are not well understood and managed.
on services and service response as most information and data is derived from
On that basis and despite the presence of the DCS on the board, childrens
social care issues are not prioritised as they should be.
of significant deficits in the provision of services to children and families. There
is full support from the Lead Member for the proposed re-structure of childrens
services to be better able to meet needs. This includes more effective access to
early help and a re-design of fieldwork services to address too many children
experiencing poor outcomes as a result of ineffective intervention by social
care. This re-structure is currently underway, but initiatives already taken are
too recent to demonstrate significant impact.


partnership working and information sharing between agencies. This
development is very new, not yet embedded and requires the implementation
of a new approach to early intervention and the common assessment
framework to fully realise a better experience for children and families in need.
management oversight is recent and is not informed by robust performance
management. Currently there is no established quality assurance system. This
has meant that concerns that senior management have about the quality of
services are not systematically examined and results in the local authority not
having a full understanding of the level of its effectiveness. For example, it has
focused on safeguarding in recent months in attempts to identify issues in
performance and has not had a similar focus on care planning and adoption.
including a family support service offering intensive parenting advice and
guidance and one to one work with parents on issues such as managing
behaviour and emotional resilience. Other services include Encompass, freedom
project and services for families and children with disabilities, including a range
of parent support. These services are well used and valued by staff and
families. However, these are not co-ordinated at a strategic level and not all
families in need of a service are effectively identified at an early enough point
to prevent further referral to social care.
effective working board and that it continues to be at a formative stage in
fostering an understanding by all Board members of their role and the function
of the board. Robust oversight is required to ensure that the Board continues to
develop and embodies core processes to ensure that it has an understanding of
each agencys contribution to safeguarding and offers effective challenge.
of poor and irregular supervision of staff, particularly in the safeguarding and
assessment teams, with some better practice seen in the children looked after
team and the young peoples team. While there has been very recent
improvement over the last four months in ensuring that staff have regular
supervision, the quality of supervision remains poor with little or no reflection or
analysis offered. This has meant that decision making on cases is often not
evidenced and supervision is not a learning experience for staff, and does not
lead to improvements in services to children and young people.
for the support of newly qualified social work staff. Despite the training
available, staff do not demonstrate the ability to use tools and research
knowledge to enable them to work effectively with children and families. Many
staff are positive about working in Knowsley and some have been in post for
many years, especially in the children looked after and leaving care teams.


However, the experience of a significant number of newly qualified social
workers has not been positive with a few having left or leaving because of poor
levels of support and late senior management intervention, particularly in
safeguarding and assessment teams.
safeguarding teams, has been of too many changes in social worker making
communication difficult, with one parent saying that he had to tell his (painful)
story too many times. Changes in social worker have in some cases resulted in
delayed intervention and outcomes for children.
social workers. Staff are positive about these recent changes.
through the courts, with timescales reducing and now at 25 weeks. The local
authority has a good working relationship with Cafcass, for example Cafcass
cites Knowsley as an exemplar for responding to safeguarding requests,
assisting Cafcass to report to court effectively in private law cases.
which are well supported by the participation officer. Knowsley has recently set
up a corporate parenting board separate from the previous combined meetings
with the children in care council to provide a greater focus on the strategic
development of the corporate approach to children in care and care leavers.
The board has been too slow in setting up and monitoring a work plan and
current planned meetings are not frequent enough to ensure that clear
direction and a significant work rate are established; on this basis the current
board arrangements are not effective in ensuring good outcomes for children
looked after.
children and young people, permanent arrangements have not been secured
for large number of children. Although an adoption diagnostic was undertaken
in September 2013 the actions arising have not been tackled quickly enough to
ensure that the right plans are being made and drift does not continue. The
pace of change and management urgency to tackle these issues has not been
quick enough.
better than neighbour and national averages, reflecting the investment made
by the local authority in employing two employability officers in leaving care
services.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The effectiveness of the LSCB is inadequate
Priority and immediate action
available to conduct all the LSCBs business.
commitment from all Board members and the managing bodies of each
individual member agency to resource a programme of audits of practice across
the partnership.
statutory obligations under section 11 of the Children Act 2004.
professionals in all partner agencies understand and apply the thresholds for
access to services.
Areas for improvement
agency a renewal of commitment to the role and responsibilities of the Board
and Board members.
a regular basis on local and national lessons from serious case reviews and
management reviews.
delivering services through the CAF model.
particular check that help is delivered to those who most need it.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
requirements of Working Together 2013. In particular the Board does not have
in place a robust means of monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of what
is done by the local authority and its partners individually and collectively to
safeguard and promote the welfare of children. A very small number of cases
have been audited which are insufficient to identify effectively lessons to be
learnt. The Board has not established an ability to assess whether LSCB
partners are fulfilling their statutory obligations.


the performance and effectiveness of local services. For example, the report
does not contain the results of Section 11 audits as none have been completed
in either 201213 or 201314. The report also lacks contributions from member
agencies on developments in their services and the effectiveness of their
safeguarding services.
members, although there has been a significant turnover of the major agency
representatives including health and the local authority throughout 2012 and
exercise its responsibilities.
understanding of members responsibilities. Although the Board has had two
successful development days for members, it is still regarded by some partners
as being in its formative stage. The Chair of the Board continues to seek
members understanding and agreement to Board responsibilities and
agreement on priorities for the Board.
effectiveness of child safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children in
Knowsley in line with local agencies planning and commissioning cycles. The
has not been able to publish in time to influence planning and decision making
in other significant forums.
thematic audits, with only one audit (involving eight cases) being undertaken in
completed since 20089. This is a significant omission in the Boards ability to
assess the effectiveness of its constituent members and whether agencies are
keeping children safe in Knowsley.
framework which clearly outlines the processes by which the Board and its
members review cases of concern, including decision making in serious case
reviews and management reviews on cases which do not meet the
requirements of serious case reviews. The dissemination of lessons learnt from
serious case reviews and management reviews both locally and nationally are
integrated into the body of training made available to multi-agency staff. The
Board does not have a robust way of monitoring the impact of this learning on
practice. Not all staff seen during the inspection where able to describe lessons
learnt from these reviews. Integration of this information into the main body of
training has not allowed for specific consideration of this learning in an effective
manner for staff, and means that some staff are not sufficiently aware of steps
they can take to minimise risk.


a serious incident in December 2013 has resulted in no further action
overview panel (C-DOP), a child sexual exploitation sub-group and a monitoring
and evaluation sub-group. The CDOP has a clear overview of child deaths in
Knowsley and understands its functions including the identification of trends
and lessons to be learnt.
the Board has been active in highlighting issues in relation to CSE and, for
example, in promoting the creation of the multi-agency CSE (MACSE) group.
The impact of this work is evident in how partners have benefited from the
training. The sub-group, while identifying a requirement for a risk assessment
in 201314, has not yet been able to complete this work.
the need for work on Section 11 and Section 175 audits. These audits, the first
for several years, have been initiated but are yet to be completed. The work
plan does not currently include a programme of multi-agency case file audits.
and children being bullied, and has supported the creation of Operation
Encompass to provide support to children and young people in schools who
have had involvement in domestic violence. This has been a positive piece of
work, with the schools now able to monitor more effectively those children who
live in households with domestic violence.
safeguarding training strategy details the range and level of training to be
provided. Attendance at multi-agency training has increased annually.
Evaluations of training take place and are mostly positive, but evaluation does
not clearly establish its contribution to improvements in practice or the
experiences of children and families.
Children and Families Board, defining roles and responsibilities of both boards
in relation to safeguarding. This helps to ensure that partners are clearly aware
of what is expected of them and what they can expect of the Board.
The Boards business plan for 201314 set out a number of appropriate
priorities many of which have been achieved (these included the learning and
improvement framework and a new performance framework). This reflected a
greater focus on a number of key areas for development. Not all priorities were
achieved in a timely manner, including publishing the annual report and an
audit programme, which indicates that the Board, while making some progress,
was still not able to achieve all it set out to do or ensure that core processes
are put in place as quickly as they are required.


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


