London Borough of Lambeth
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 24 February 2015  18 March 2015
Report published: 12 May 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services are inadequate
There are widespread or serious failures in the delivery of services for looked after
children which result in their welfare not being safeguarded and promoted. Leaders
and managers have not been able to demonstrate sufficient understanding of failures
and have been ineffective in prioritising, challenging and making improvements in
relation to looked after children services.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.2
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires improvement

permanence

Inadequate


Inadequate


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Lambeth are inadequate because:
Leadership and management
 A failure of leadership has resulted in the deterioration of almost all safeguarding
services and services for looked after children and their families in Lambeth from
when they were last inspected by Ofsted in 2012.
 Performance information is poor or not available. Leaders and managers at all
levels do not have the information that they need to manage or oversee practice
effectively.
 Significant changes in management and social work staff at all levels in recent
years have resulted in a lack of continuity, poor engagement with some service
users and reduced standards of social work provision and management oversight.
 From the latter part of 2014, leaders and managers have demonstrated an
improved understanding of the failures in key services and have effected
improvements in some areas. However, an over-optimistic evaluation of the
performance of these services, provided for this inspection, does not demonstrate
a realistic understanding of the challenges faced.
 Strategies to tackle child sexual exploitation have been developed with partners,
but these are not consistently underpinned by robust practice. For example,
children missing from care are not routinely interviewed on their return, so risks
are unexplored.

Quality of practice
 Social work practice is not robust and, in too many cases, assessments and plans
are not of a good enough quality.
 Too many changes of social workers and managers mean that plans to reduce
harm and to promote the welfare of children and young people have been subject
to drift and delay.
 Weak management oversight has led to poor practice not being challenged and
childrens needs being unmet. This is particularly the case for children who would
benefit from being adopted.
 The needs of looked after children are not well met as a result of poor
permanency planning, insufficiency of local placements, frequent changes of
social workers and delays in initial health assessments.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Ensure that all young people who go missing from home and care are promptly
and appropriately seen upon their return, and that the resulting information is
used effectively to reduce risk, including risk of sexual exploitation, to them and
to other young people.


Ensure that accurate data and performance management information are
collected, collated and analysed, and that this is used by managers, staff and
elected members to evaluate and improve the quality of services to vulnerable
children and young people.


Ensure that all children who require adoption receive a timely service and that
this is guided by a comprehensive adoption strategy and action plan, with clear
targets to improve the quality of service.


Ensure that all relevant agencies are consulted and contribute to planning
during child protection enquiries.


Ensure that there is no undue delay in children moving to permanent homes.
This includes establishing effective use of the Public Law Outline in achieving
timely outcomes for children and young people.

Areas for improvement

Safeguarding children

Ensure that all child protection plans and child in need plans clearly identify key
actions in order of priority, have clear timescales for their completion and
contain explicit contingency plans to escalate intervention if progress is
insufficient.


Ensure that the progress of child protection and child in need plans when
reviewed in meetings and in supervision is focused on the reduction of risk.


Ensure that the consistency of recording, frequency of visits and quality of
social work practice within the disabled childrens team are of a high standard.

Quality of practice


Ensure that all social work staff and managers are clear about what is expected
in terms of the quality of their practice, so that children and young people
receive a timely and effective service.

to the adoption panel.
people, so that they understand what has happened in their lives.
informed of their rights and entitlements.
focused and are specific and measurable, in particular in relation to their
education, employment and training.

Leadership, management and governance
are able to provide consistent and sustained high quality support and
intervention to improve outcomes for children and young people.
effectively to manage and monitor the progress of children who require
adoption.
all levels, including through undertaking case audits, and that this is effectively
used to improve casework practice and to manage and develop services.
the local authority policy, and that this is regularly monitored.
managers and is acted upon to improve adoption practice.
understood, so that sufficient foster carer and childrens home placements can
be provided to enable looked after children to live near to their home when it is
in their best interest.
all looked after children and care leavers.
child and adolescent mental health services receive a timely service.


The local authoritys strengths
early, targeted support to children and families, including those with complex
needs. The common assessment framework is well established, with wide
engagement from partner organisations.
people from being drawn into gang activity; their success in diverting some
high risk gang members is effectively reducing risk to some children.
victim rates are low.
close collaboration with key partners.
school is working well with a range of education partners to support the
educational needs of looked after children.
development of some of the services that impact on their lives.

Progress since the last inspection
found that there has been significant deterioration in all areas.
May 2012. The local authority was judged to be outstanding. The key
recommendation for the local authority was to extend the positive development
and influence of the virtual school beyond the age of 16 to increase
participation in high-quality education and training opportunities and raise the
achievement of care leavers further. This has been achieved in part, although
education, employment and training opportunities for care leavers remain
limited.
service was judged to be outstanding. The quality of adoption services,
standards of practice, timeliness and management oversight have significantly
deteriorated.
December 2012. The service was judged to be outstanding. The fostering
service has not sufficiently developed or progressed since that inspection.


deteriorated in performance, in the standards of social work practice and in the
robustness of management oversight and direction. This has been in the
context of high numbers of staff changes across all levels of management and
practitioners.
practice and management oversight are evident towards the latter end of 2014.
Corrective action to raise the standards of social work practice is beginning to
have a positive effect in some areas.


Summary for children and young people
 Services that help vulnerable children and young people, including those who are
looked after by the local authority, have deteriorated since they were last
inspected in 2012.
 Services work well together to provide help quickly for children and their families
in Lambeth when problems first arise.
 When there are concerns about children, for example because of gangs or
bullying, social workers work hard to keep them safe. However, children
sometimes have several changes of social worker, and this means that plans may
get delayed. When this happens, not all children get the right support at the right
time.
 When children go missing, everyone works hard to make sure that they are
found. However, when children return they dont always get to talk to an
independent person about the reasons why they ran away. This means that social
workers are not able to assess the risks to children properly.
 Children and young people who need specialist support from mental health
services have to wait too long to be assessed. This means they dont get help
quickly enough with the things that are troubling them.
 Children who cannot live with their own families are found other places to live,
but sometimes it takes a long time to find permanent new homes for them. There
are not enough foster carers in Lambeth, which means that children are often
placed outside the area, although most of them live within 20 miles of their
families.
 Children who are looked after by the local authority get a lot of encouragement to
do well at school. This is very important as it helps them to make good progress
and means that they can make sound choices about what they want to do.
 Most young people who leave care live in suitable housing and they get help to
learn how to live independently. Quite a few care leavers get good support to go
to university. However, if they want to do an apprenticeship or get a job, there is
less help available.
 Young parents in Lambeth get good support from specialist services that help
them to prepare for and care for their baby. They also get help and support to
get back into education and to manage family life.
 Children and young people told inspectors that Lambeth Council listens to them
and takes their views seriously. They also said that they are encouraged to get
involved in deciding what services they need locally.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area
 Approximately 61,900 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Lambeth. This is 19.7% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 31% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 30.6% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 30.8% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 75% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Black African, Black Caribbean and mixed ethnic groups.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 52.1% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 42.9% (the national average is 14%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 December 2014, 1,984 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 December 2014, 307 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 358 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 December 2014, 11 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from 16 at 31 March 2014.
Children looked after in this area
 At December 2014, 482 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 78 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 534 (87 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014. Of this number:


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


authority area
 three live in residential special schools4, of whom 100% live out of the
authority area
 four live with parents, of whom 50% live out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 22 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority does not operate any childrens homes.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since 1 December 2014.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since February 2013.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Children identified as at high levels of risk of child sexual exploitation or gang related
activity are considered regularly at multi-agency meetings. Rigorous scrutiny of
known information is used to make plans and to provide services designed to reduce
their vulnerability. However, responses to children who go missing or absent from
home or care lack rigour. The increased vulnerability to all forms of exploitation for
this group of children is not well addressed by frontline staff and managers. Children
are not visited systematically when they return after going missing. The analysis of
individual triggers and patterns of behaviour is insufficient to be used effectively to
reduce risk. Inconsistency in recording of missing episodes makes it difficult for the
local authority to collate and analyse data in relation to wider patterns and trends.
Children in Lambeth receive good quality early help from a wide range of agencies,
when they need it. This includes targeted support for children and families who have
complex needs. For some, this prevents problems from getting worse; for others, it
ensures that previous problems that necessitated social work support do not recur.
The local authority provides an efficient and timely response when concerns about a
child are first identified. Information sharing between partner agencies is well coordinated through the multi-agency safeguarding hub. This, together with readily
available social work advice through the local authoritys First Response teams, is
helping to reduce the number of children who are inappropriately referred to
childrens social care.
Children who are assessed as requiring a social work service as children in need are
generally visited regularly, offered services, and their plans reviewed at multi-agency
meetings. Meetings do not always consider sufficiently whether intervention has
resulted in positive change for children.
When children are considered to be at risk of significant harm and are made subject
to a child protection plan, social work visits, child protection conferences and core
group meetings do not always focus sufficiently on key issues or whether the level of
risk is reducing. Alternative actions, including pre-proceedings agreements, are not
always considered quickly enough. This means that some children continue to live in
circumstances that are harmful and neglectful for unacceptable periods of time.
Turnover of staff has led to inconsistent and sometimes poor social work practice
with some children, particularly in the disabled childrens team.


intervention staff confidently support families and young people from birth to
young adulthood. Early help interventions are well co-ordinated by two multiagency teams (MATs) which, at the time of the inspection, were supporting 500
families per annum. The MAT panel offers additional oversight and quality
assurance of early help assessments under the common assessment framework
(CAF) and on the application of thresholds.
appropriately. There is a high use of the CAF (699 between April and
September 2013), with 93 children receiving a service stepped down from
childrens social care. The CAF is well used by a wide range of partners
including schools, health visitors, childrens centre outreach workers and MAT
workers. As a result, children with complex needs are offered a range of timely
and effective services that, in many cases, prevent problems escalating or
recurring. The Aspirational Lambeth Families (ALF) project is successful in
helping families with multiple complex problems, with 1080 families turned
around and 238 of these worked with directly by the ALF team. This makes
Lambeth one of the highest performing authorities in London for their work
with troubled families.
families, including those with multiple and complex needs. The family nurse
partnership works alongside the voluntary sector to provide bespoke wraparound care for young teenage parents. This work helps teenagers to become
more confident parents and to improve their housing and living conditions, and
eventually assists them to return to education or secure employment. As one
excited about becoming a dad.
have recently commissioned a range of services to support young people aged
projects, refuges to support children exposed to domestic violence, group
drama sessions, and sports activities, focusing on young people at risk of gang
violence and sexual exploitation. Although this innovative project has much
potential to change young peoples lives, it is too soon to determine its impact.
for perpetrators of domestic violence and male victims of sexual exploitation.
Also, the waiting lists for child and adolescent mental health services of eight
months for initial assessment and treatment are far too long.
when there are concerns about a child. MASH partners have well-established
protocols for information sharing and obtaining consent, which are applied
appropriately. A recently refreshed, draft multi-agency threshold document is
used by childrens social care services to ensure consistency in decision making


and application of thresholds. This, combined with the introduction of a new
multi-agency referral form and readily available advice from the local authoritys
recently established First Response team, is beginning to improve the
effectiveness of information sharing. The number of inappropriate contacts to
childrens social care, while reducing, remains high, although it is difficult to
confidently secure accurate figures from local authority data. According to local
authority data from January 2015, notifications from the police constituted an
average of 30% of all contacts, of which 81% resulted in signposting to other
agencies or no further action.
been made to childrens social care by partner agencies and others that had not
been referred quickly enough. The local authority recognises that more needs
to be done to ensure that thresholds are consistently understood and applied
by all agencies. Targeted work has been undertaken with some groups, such as
general practitioners, to improve the quality of referrals.
referral or to close a contact were proportionate and made at an appropriate
level. In the majority of cases, the rationale for decisions was clearly recorded
and was shared with the referrer. When inappropriate referrals were made by
partner agencies, First Response dealt with them efficiently by signposting
them to more appropriate services.
Signs of Safety model to assist partners to clearly outline their concerns.
However, it is not yet widely used. Partners continue to use two older referral
forms, which demonstrate that they are not fully aware of new processes. First
Response ensures that this confusion does not cause avoidable delay to
children if sufficient information is provided on older forms to enable them to
make decisions on action required.
to early help. Unvalidated data indicate that in 2013 re-referral rates were 13%,
which was significantly better than for statistical neighbours and the England
average of 23% for 201314.
protection enquiries, work is transferred to Children and Families Teams. There
are no unallocated cases within these teams and transfer of work is generally
timely. However, in a small number of cases seen by inspectors, there was
delay in assessing childrens needs, providing them with services, and making
appropriate initial plans.
almost all initial strategy discussions are by telephone between the police Child
Abuse Investigation Team (CAIT) and childrens social care. Although other
agencies were consulted during the child protection enquiries that followed,


opportunities for them to contribute at the planning stages were missed.
Although no cases were seen where children were placed at risk as a result of
this practice, it is not compliant with guidance published in Working Together
authority childrens services and the police or be undertaken by one agency are
based on a sound analysis of potential risk. Child protection enquiries are
thorough and included consultation with other agencies. Children are seen
alone when of an appropriate age, and younger children are observed. In
almost all cases seen, appropriate conclusions to enquiries were reached and
actions taken were proportionate. In cases where the decision was not to
proceed to an initial child protection conference (ICPC), child and family
assessments were completed and efforts were routinely made to engage
families in step-down services, either for children in need or for early help,
albeit with limited success.
qualified and experienced social workers who have access to managerial
guidance and legal support. Changes to the service as a result of lessons learnt
from a recent local serious case review have improved the timeliness of
responses to callers and communication with daytime staff. The service does
not have the capacity to undertake non-urgent work. Current arrangements are
sufficient, due to the priority given to childrens services and the flexibility of
the workforce at periods of high demand.
statement about the reason for the referral; information was appropriately
shared with parents and with partner agencies. A range of appropriate services
is offered during the course of assessments. The quality of assessment,
including those for early help, was variable. Most required improvement, where
the analysis did not sufficiently consider the balance of risk and protective
factors and the significance of the case history. A small number of assessments
showed very strong analysis, with careful and thorough consideration of case
history and relevant research. Managers set initial timescales for the completion
of assessments, based on the complexity of the case. Although some
assessments were completed within shorter timescales, these were not always
linked to the assessed needs of the children and young people. In most of the
cases seen, the resulting plans were not sufficiently clear about changes
required that would make a difference for children, and did not identify the
timescales for change.
senior managers. All requests are submitted to the Head of Service, whose
analysis in cases seen showed a detailed understanding of the cases,
underpinned by reference to research.


relevant agencies. Figures provided by the local authority for April 2014 to
January 2015 indicate that 82% of initial conferences and 100% of review
conferences were held within timescales. Conferences observed by inspectors
were effectively chaired by suitably experienced and knowledgeable staff.
Information sharing was robust and focused on childrens needs, based on the
Signs of Safety model. The quality of child protection plans seen by inspectors
was not robust, often detailing actions without prioritising the key changes
needed to reduce risks to the child. However, some more recent plans seen
were clearer, and explained to parents what needed to change and the likely
consequences if this was not achieved.
protection conferences. Their effectiveness is too variable as they do not
consistently consider if the risk to the child is reducing. Meetings too often
simply update whether actions have been completed, rather than assessing the
difference that work undertaken has made to children. Child protection
conferences remain the main medium for driving plans forward. This has been
recognised by the local authority, who plan to introduce a mid-period review by
chairs to ensure that plans are progressed between conferences.
change, issues are not prioritised, and few contain a rigorous analysis of the
impact of the work undertaken. However, inspectors did see some examples of
effective multi-agency work done with children subject to child protection plans
and children in need plans that assisted parents to make the necessary changes
to improve outcomes for their children.
from a disability receive a service from a dedicated disabled childrens team.
Turnover of social workers and managers in this team has been considerable in
recent years, which has had a negative impact on the continuity and quality of
the support provided. Inspectors saw gaps in the frequency of statutory visits
to children, case records were often incomplete, and a small number of workers
spoken to were struggling to get to know all the children on their caseload. As a
result, contact with those children was ineffective as staff lacked a full
understanding of the family history and had not yet formed a meaningful
relationship with the children, many of whom have communication difficulties.
In cases seen, all children had been visited recently.
alone during assessments and on child protection or child in need visits to their
home or school. Time is spent talking to children about their day-to-day
activities and their wishes and feelings. Some evidence was seen of the use of
direct work tools with younger children, although this was not widespread.
Examples were seen of social workers demonstrating sensitivity and skill in
engaging children in difficult conversations. Interaction with children was not
always sufficiently focused on the causes of concern, and the purpose of visits


was not always clear. In a small minority of cases seen by inspectors, workers
had extensive contact with children without ever discussing the key reasons for
their involvement.
routinely recorded on the local authoritys electronic systems, including input by
senior managers. The quality of this recording is not always sufficiently
analytical or reflective, and reasons for not choosing alternative courses of
action are rarely explained.
due to staffing issues, and this resulted in drift and delay in implementing plans
to support them. In some cases that have been subject to child protection plans
for some time, a lack of parental engagement or disguised compliance, while
recognised, was not acted upon quickly enough. This has resulted in children
remaining subject to child protection plans that were ineffective for
unacceptable periods of time. Recently, managers have taken a more robust
response in these cases, using pre-proceedings agreements under the Public
Law Outline (PLO) if there is continued lack of progress. In a minority of cases,
this has resulted in more effective engagement by families.
show sufficient impact in reducing the number of children who remain subject
to child protection plans for long periods of time. Local authority unvalidated
data for January 2015 indicates that the percentage of children subject to plans
for over two years is 7.5%, a 50% reduction from the 201314 figure of 15%.
However, this remains significantly higher than the England average (2.6%)
and the Inner London average (4.5%) for 201314.
chairs meet them outside the conference to obtain their views. However, few
children attend their conference and their participation in conferences is
underdeveloped. Advocacy is not routinely provided or actively considered for
children subject to child in need or child protection plans and children are not
consistently encouraged to attend reviews. As a result, childrens participation
in these meetings is low.
undermine its ability to have a fully accurate picture of its own performance in
safeguarding children. The local authoritys prevalence data as of January 2015
in relation to child protection plans show that the highest number of children
are subject to plans due to neglect (200), followed by emotional abuse (146),
physical abuse (30) and sexual abuse (7). Domestic abuse is a feature in 70%
of cases, as reported in the LSCB annual report 201314.
cases are strong. Inspectors saw examples of robust risk assessments
completed by commissioned services, which provide support for victims of


domestic violence, using the co-ordinated action against domestic abuse
(CAADA DASH) risk assessment tools.
attended by partner agencies. Actions are clearly recorded and reporting back
on actions taken is timely. Lambeth has a low repeat victimisation rate of 21%,
with a target of 20%, indicating that action taken is effective in reducing risk.
However, CAADA analysis of Lambeths self-assessment identifies potential
under-reporting overall. Data submitted to CAADA between April 2013 and
March 2014 show that the Lambeth MARAC discussed 387 cases; this is 77% of
the projected volume of 500 high risk victims per year and a 2% decrease since
the 2013 self-assessment.
thresholds are in line with other authorities in Inner London.
exploitation, complex strategy meetings are held, chaired by a sexual
exploitation specialist. These meetings are well attended by relevant agencies.
Detailed information is shared to form an holistic view of the known and
suspected risks to the young person, and is used to plan action to reduce the
risk. The process is supported by regular review at the multi-agency sexual
exploitation (MASE) panel.
go missing from home, care or education are well understood at a strategic
level. Recent multi-agency policies and procedures have been strengthened,
based on learning from best practice. For example, recently the police have
agreed that all police missing persons reports and safe and well checks will be
routinely shared with the local authority childrens services. Children not already
receiving a social work service are risk assessed on a case by case basis, and all
children who meet the threshold of two missing episodes in a 90-day period are
referred for a child and family assessment of need. Notifications of missing
episodes on open cases are passed to the allocated worker to complete a return
interview within 72 hours of their return.
workers and managers expressed uncertainty about how to record missing
episodes. In the majority of cases, return home interviews are not carried out
systematically for children and young people who go missing from home and
care following each missing episode, and there is insufficient analysis of
individual triggers and patterns to reduce risk. Inconsistency in recording of
missing episodes makes it difficult for the local authority to collate and analyse
the prevalence. Recent introduction of a child sexual exploitation risk
assessment tool within childrens services, for use with all children over age 10,
has resulted in an increase in referrals to the MASE panel. However, the lack of
timely return interviews in cases seen indicates that workers understanding of
the increased vulnerability to sexual exploitation of children who go missing is


underdeveloped. The local authority has recently commissioned a voluntary
sector organisation to undertake return interviews to improve quality and
timeliness.
The system to monitor children missing from education is well established and
includes clearly defined criteria for: children home educated; school aged
mothers; young people with health needs who require specific arrangements;
young people with poor attendance or persistent absences; and young people
in young offender institutions or being supported by the youth offending
service. The multi-disciplinary Vulnerable Pupil Monitoring Group works
effectively with the most complex cases to resolve issues and ensure that
young people are provided with suitable educational alternatives.
supported by a robust service level agreement. Wherever possible, young
people are supported back into mainstream provision or have a managed move
or transfer. Education welfare officers work alongside their police colleagues in
monthly truancy sweeps, particularly targeting local addresses where young
people are known to congregate. Staff carefully monitor all those pupils who
are known to be home educated and currently they are supporting 62 pupils.
Regular home visits are underpinned by additional advice and guidance to
parents, along with access to educational resources. At least half of home
educated pupils are waiting for admission to particular schools of their choice.
to determine their levels of vulnerability, and those who need it receive
continued support as looked after children. In some cases family mediation is
offered to achieve reconciliation. In a few cases seen by inspectors, children
were not assessed as vulnerable, did not receive a timely service and their
problems increased as a result.
risk gang members. The majority worked with are aged 18 or older, although
currently 20 under-18 year-olds are receiving 1:1 support and intervention.
Data on the effectiveness of intervention with these young people are not
collated from overall figures. Current figures are positive, showing that 82 out
of 133 former gang members are no longer involved in the gangs. Of these, 23
are in custody, leaving 59 who have ceased measurable activity for other
reasons.
through targeted provision offered by a range of commissioned services. Some
innovative work with girls and young women as part of the Expect Respect
project has been successful in increasing the number of vulnerable young
women engaging with the project and increasing opportunities for preventative
work with this often hard to reach group.


gang activity requires a more intensive response than can be provided by
targeted services alone, but who do not yet meet the threshold of high risk.
Junior intervention meetings have recently been introduced with a view to
bridging this gap, but it is too recent to measure their effectiveness.
designated officer (LADO) ensures that appropriate and proportionate action is
taken. This has included challenge to agencies where they have been reluctant
to engage in robust safeguarding practice. Although systems for tracking and
recording of cases need refining in order to provide good quality performance
management, recording by the LADO is sufficient to detail actions taken and
identify and address any issues. Complex strategy meetings are appropriately
recorded, and generally well attended by relevant agencies.
were known to the local authority childrens services. Children are visited by a
social worker within the appropriate timescales, their needs are suitably
assessed and reviewed. They benefit from regular scrutiny by the private
fostering panel. Notifications are low and are estimated by the local authority to
be significantly under-reported, despite good levels of awareness-raising
activity undertaken by the small, dedicated private fostering team.
cultural mix of the local population. However, responses to childrens needs
arising out of diversity are inconsistent. Inspectors saw examples of careful
consideration of diversity needs informed by a sophisticated understanding of
complex issues, but also saw a small number of cases where workers struggled
to meet some most basic needs, such as providing interpreters or translations
of documents for families who required them in order to be able to understand
and engage in what was happening to them and their children.
overseen by the Safer Lambeth Executive. The local authority and partners
have been proactive in their engagement. Training has been provided within
schools and to other frontline workers, and the prevention and identification of
radicalisation are built into strategic plans around child sexual exploitation and
gang activity and as part of a wider safeguarding agenda.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Inadequate

Summary
Looked after children and young people receive an inadequate service from childrens
social care services.
Not all looked after children at risk of sexual exploitation are recognised. Return
home interviews are not being routinely undertaken when a looked after child
returns after a missing episode, indicating a lack of concern about their behaviour
and exposure to potential risks.
Permanency planning is not prioritised; this results in children living in temporary
placements for too long and being uncertain about their future.
The use of the Public Law Outline (PLO) process is not well established, plans and
timescales are not clearly stated, and risks to children and childrens experiences are
not given sufficient focus. Social work reports for court are not of a consistently high
standard and are not robustly overseen by managers.
Too many changes of social worker for some looked after children and care leavers
have resulted in lack of progress and continuity of care planning, and in poor
engagement and relationship building with the young people and their carers. Direct
work with children, such as life story work, is not routinely or consistently
undertaken by social workers or carers.
Care plans vary in quality and some are not consistently up to date, comprehensive
or systematically implemented. Case recording is not sufficiently focused on
addressing the care needs of the child or young person. Information on the system is
hard to find and reasons for decisions are not clearly explained. Independent
reviewing officers are not effectively escalating concerns where standards are not
met.
Initial health assessments as children become looked after are not routinely
completed in a timely manner, so health needs are not known at an early stage.
Children in Lambeth are waiting too long to be adopted. The local authority has not
put in place a sufficiently robust plan to improve the quality of practice or address
the delays that children experience. The recruitment and assessment of prospective
adopters are not timely, which delays adoptions and may deter some applicants.
Not enough foster carers are being recruited to meet the varied needs of looked
after children in the area.
Pathway plans are not sufficiently up to date or outcome focused. Not enough care


leavers are in education, employment and training.
assessed. Independent return interviews are not being routinely undertaken
within 72 hours of when a looked after child returns after being missing.
Further, children are not being routinely seen or contacted by their social
worker following a period of being missing. As a result, potential risk to the
young person and others when young people go missing is not being
consistently assessed or addressed by social workers.
missing from care received a timely return interview. The quality of those
interviews was not robust. In other cases, although some of the young people
had been seen at a later date in scheduled visits, few of them were spoken to
about each missing episode. This included a young person who was at
significant risk, whom the local authority subsequently identified should have
been referred to the MASE panel, and for whom a strategy discussion was
indicated to consider escalation of risk. This lack of rigour results in risk
remaining unaddressed and may give a message to young people that their
going missing is not considered important, or even that workers do not care
what happens to them.
looked after children aged 10 and above, to enable risks to be identified and
taken into account when planning for looked after children.
appropriate threshold. However, a small number of cases were inappropriately
closed following assessment, without further support being provided. These
children were subsequently accommodated within two months of case closure.
recorded. All requests for accommodation are authorised by a senior manager
when a placement is requested from the Access to Resources Team (ART).
However, these documents, which evidence a key decision-making point, were
seldom visible on the local authority electronic case recording system.
appropriate, with children returning home with a plan of support in place.
However, in a small number of cases, the local authority had not worked
proactively with children subject to care orders who wanted to live with their
parents, either to enable a return home or to explain why this could not
happen. For example, in one case, arrangements to assess a father as a carer
for the young person had not been completed, despite being initiated in 2013.
living in temporary placements for too long. Permanency planning processes


are in place but need to be embedded. Contingencies are not explored nor are
parallel plans put in place for these children, who urgently need permanence in
their lives. The placement panel is currently focusing its attention on reviewing
high cost placements, but does not track childrens progress.
quarter 3, as agreed by the South London Care Proceedings Project and
excluding two longstanding legacy cases, is 35 weeks. This is significantly
above the national target of 26 weeks. It has reduced year on year for the last
three years, and is roughly in line with the average for all applications in the
Central Family Court. Senior managers are working with the South London Care
Proceedings Project to improve timescales and to increase effectiveness within
court proceedings.
still arriving in court that are inconsistent in quality and have information
missing. Cafcass also reports cases involving neglect of young children coming
to court after the child has been accommodated voluntarily for some time. This
was confirmed in cases seen by inspectors. Minutes from the pre-proceedings
monitoring panel do not demonstrate robust management of the work being
undertaken. Plans and timescales are not clearly stated and risks to children
and childrens experiences are not the primary focus.
However, the judiciary informed inspectors that Lambeths court work is
frequently disrupted by changes of social worker, and that workers often lack
the skill, experience and confidence required at court to represent childrens
best interests well.
guardianship orders (SGOs). The assessment and support of SGO carers has
recently been moved from the adoption team to the fostering team, to align
with the connected persons process. Seventeen children are currently being
assessed for an SGO.
small number of cases where children were settled in their placements, visiting
by social workers was taking place every three months, but the management
decision authorising this was not evident on the case file. In most cases seen,
social workers were visiting children in their placements in accordance with
statutory guidance, were seeing them alone and were considering and
recording their views.
this negatively impacted on the strength of the relationship that the young
person had with their social worker and on the continuity of care planning.


supervision having taken place. However, systematic recording of key decision
making is not being clearly noted on case files. Looked after children cases are
also allocated within the Family Support and Child Protection Teams, where
caseloads are slightly higher and deficits in recording are more marked.
case files contained life story work undertaken by carers. Little if any evidence
was seen of direct work being undertaken with looked after children, despite
social workers in the children looked after teams having manageable caseloads
of between eight and 13 young people.
Inspectors saw examples where child-friendly arrangements have been
established.
additional support to resolve issues in relation to their care planning. The
internal advocate worked with 14 looked after children in the first quarter of
this year. A commissioned service worked with 27 looked after children
between October and December 2014, with 10 cases remaining open at the
end of the year and 45 issues resolved. Eleven independent visitors are
currently in place and there is no waiting list for this service.
very small minority of cases where this is not the case, virtual school staff
monitor pupil progress extremely carefully and work with the school to ensure
that young people make the progress expected of them. Virtual school teaching
and learning consultants carefully monitor and track the progress of the current
cohort of 292 school-aged children through their Personal Education Plans
(PEPs), making effective interventions when required.
national averages. Virtual school staff reward children for good attendance by
awarding certificates where attendance is above 98%. Overall attendance for
looked after children is good at 96%. From September 2014 to date, 19
children have had fixed term exclusions. In each case, the child was offered
support or alternative provision and carefully monitored until they could return
to full time education. Wherever possible, staff work towards managed moves
rather than exclusions. No looked after child has been permanently excluded in
the last two years.
thoroughly prepared and fit for purpose. Virtual school staff carefully monitor
the quality of PEPs and, if necessary, support social workers and designated
school staff to ensure that these plans effectively capture young peoples
progress and set realistic educational targets to help them improve. Most plans
contain appropriate, and in some cases, ambitious targets to ensure that young


people reach their potential. The use of the pupil premium is carefully
monitored by virtual school staff, and it follows the pupil. It is used to support
young people in a variety of ways, including one-to-one support, additional
learning resources, out of school activities, specialist subject support and
therapeutic interventions where necessary.
progress across all year groups, broadly in line with national rates. At Key Stage
learning opportunities and the letterbox library.
Key Stage 4, the attainment gap is closing. For example, the proportion
achieving five GCSE A*- Cs including English and mathematics has improved
from 23% to 36% in 201314. This compares very favourably to the national
rate of 16%, but it remains lower than the Lambeth average of 57% for all
pupils.
young people, including cyber-bullying, gang violence and sexual exploitation.
Instances of bullying are dealt with swiftly and appropriately, with multi-agency
intervention if necessary, for example from the community police.
resulted in fewer than half of the children entering the care system between
November 2014 and January 2015 receiving a health assessment within 20
working days. While this has been an issue for some time, managers could not
explain why assessments were not undertaken to timescales or how the
situation could be improved.
person becoming looked after, proactive services are provided, with a
contractual agreement to work up to 20 miles outside the local authority.
During 201314, 95% of Lambeths looked after children had had an annual
health assessment, 88% were up to date with their immunisations and 92% of
Lambeths looked after children had a dental check. These figures are roughly
in line with or slightly above national averages.
timescales. However, some social work reports for these meetings are not
received by the independent reviewing officers (IROs) in a timely way to enable
them to be properly prepared. The majority of looked after young people do
attend their reviews, but ways of maximising their engagement and
participation are underdeveloped. Foster carers report that young people are
not being supported to complete their wishes and feelings booklets prior to
reviews.


through review decisions were taking place. However, this was not systematic
and did not demonstrate that all aspects of the care plan were being
implemented. Some care plans seen by inspectors were not comprehensive and
needed to be updated. In two cases seen, the local authoritys own staff could
not find the care plan on the case file. Some care plans seen by inspectors were
of a higher standard but this was not consistent.
discussions with the teams. In too many cases seen by inspectors, this resulted
in delay in ensuring permanent arrangements for the young people. A new
escalation policy has just been approved, but it is too early for it to have an
impact.
were subject to court orders for offending. The local authority reports that
these numbers have been coming down year-on-year because of good
partnership working by the youth offending services to produce credible bail
support packages. Remand cases seen by inspectors were of a good standard,
with reviews taking place as required and young people being visited every two
weeks by their social workers, who are undertaking purposeful work aimed at
reducing re-offending.
During the inspection, local authority staff had difficulty in locating documents
on case files, and the case record does not reflect the journey of the child.
Where there are changes of social worker, this makes it difficult for new
workers to understand what work has been undertaken and to continue with
the care plan for the child. It also undermines the effectiveness of management
oversight. Case records do not provide children and young people with an
explanation of why significant decisions in their lives have been made and what
influence they and their families had over events.
home. At 31 March 2014, only 110 children (21%) were placed within the local
authority boundary, and 420 outside. However, 310 of the 420 placed outside
were placed within 20 miles of their home. The local authority does not collate
information on the children who are placed over 20 miles away home to assure
itself that those young people are not disadvantaged and are able to access the
full range of services to meet their needs. Young people and carers living both
near and far from the authority similarly reported that face-to-face contact with
social workers was good but that they experienced difficulties contacting staff
by telephone, and also that they did not routinely receive information that they
needed, such as information on their entitlements.
with 10 foster carers, who ranged in experience from six months to 21 years
and who had a range of ages of children in placement. The foster carers were


generally very positive about the service they received from their supervising
social workers.
of foster carers to provide local high quality placements capable of meeting the
wide range of childrens needs. Instability in staffing in the fostering team and
uncertainty about whether the local authority intended to outsource this service
have resulted in a lack of progress and development. The team has focused on
trying to retain foster carers rather than recruiting more carers. The number of
foster carers in the service has increased marginally in recent years. In 2012
there were 93 foster carers and 25 connected people. At the time of inspection
there were 107 foster carers and 32 connected people.
number of agency placements to meet the needs of children and young people.
Of 480 young people, 287 are placed in agency placements, 246 with
independent foster carers and 41 in residential settings. The local authority is
currently reviewing the significant cost and staff resource demands of visiting
these placements and the quality of their provision.
stability, based on three or more placements during the year, was 12% across
the three-year average. This was similar to the England average of 11%. The
long-term placement stability average was 70%, which was slightly above the
England average of 67%.
Children in Care Council. This is formed by a group of 25 young people aged 18
to 23 years, called Visions of Success, and a group of 30 children aged 12
years and under, called Young Visions. The children regularly have access to
and are consulted by senior managers. They also interview potential employees
and provide training for new staff. In the past year they have been instrumental
in developing Contact Cards, Entry to Care Packs and the Be Safe booklet,
aimed at alerting young people to the risks of cyber-bullying. The young people
are aware that they are a relatively small proportion of Lambeths looked after
and care leaver populations. They routinely use mailshots and telephone
contact with the wider looked after children population to provide information
and to seek to recruit new members.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is inadequate
scorecard for 2011 to 2014 shows that children in Lambeth waited an average
of 1,081 days between entering care and being placed for adoption. This is 534
days longer than the national target, 453 days longer than the England
average, and 347 days longer than statistical neighbours.
placement order waited to be matched during 2011 to 2014 was 407 days. This
is 255 days longer than the national target, 190 days longer than the England
average, and 165 days longer than statistical neighbours.
more than 18 months from entering care to moving in with adopters. An
average of 29% of children looked after in Lambeth were placed for adoption
within 18 months of coming into care during this period compared with an
average of 51% of children in England, and 41% for statistical neighbours.
A diagnostic assessment of adoption services in March 2014 identified that a
high proportion of children being placed for adoption entered care at a young
age (68% were under three months). However, unlike other local authorities,
these children were, on average, not placed for adoption any more quickly than
older children. This is significant as it indicates systemic deficits in early
permanence planning rather than delay being caused solely by the complexity
of some childrens needs.
practice, but it is too early to demonstrate any impact. There was little evidence
during this inspection of a coherent strategy or policy that had improved
practice or had any direct impact on the delay that children experience. For
example, unless the court requests a statement about family finding during
care proceedings, referrals continue to be made to the adoption team only after
placement orders have been made, creating unnecessary delay for the vast
majority of children. All of the cases seen during inspection demonstrated delay
in family finding, in addition to permanence decisions not being made in a
timely way, and paperwork often taking too long to complete and present to
the adoption panel.
the data available in respect of adoption and the ability of the local authority to
analyse it effectively continue to hamper the understanding and development of
the service. The local authority was unable to provide child-level data during


the inspection that was of a standard that would enable any analysis of the
current cohort by inspectors.
through adoption, which is lower than the England average at 14% and
statistical neighbours at 10%. Of children who left care who were over the age
of five, 4% (25) were placed for adoption, which is just below the England
average of 5%.
and 2014, 6% (40 children) were placed for adoption, which is below the
England average of 8% and statistical neighbours at 7%. This is a significant
under-representation in comparison with the local population, as children from
minority ethnic groups account for 64% of all children living in the area, and
children, particularly boys, and children of dual heritage to place for adoption,
for whom there is less choice of placements. This has an effect upon adoption
performance and has not been fully analysed or addressed by the local
authority.
needs of children who require placements. Despite an increase in the number
of adopters during 20132014, challenges persist in recruiting sufficient
adopters. At the time of inspection, only seven sets of adopters were available
to consider placements. All of these were white British.
finding for children. It is part of the South London Adoption Consortium,
recently expanded to include North London. Staff attend regular meetings and
share information to try to identify adopters for children. The authority routinely
uses Be My Parent to promote profiles of children, and refers children to the
Adoption Register. Lambeth adopters attended a BAAF-facilitated adoption
activity day in August 2014, but the local authority did not feature any of its
children. Recruitment activity during 20142015 has been focused on
partnership with the voluntary sector, to raise awareness and recruit adopters
from the faith communities. This work began in July 2014 but has not yet
resulted in any adopters being assessed or approved. The local authority has
not developed other strategies aimed at reducing delay for children, such as
Fostering to Adopt.
placed for adoption, leaving 38 children not yet placed. This cohort is reported
to include 13 children who are matched to carers and three children waiting
who have no link or match. The remaining children have had a change of plan.
The proportion of children for whom the permanence decision has moved away
from adoption is 13%, which is only 1% above the England average, but this is
likely to be increased by the proposed number of revocations of plans for
adoption.


requirements, with all the required checks being undertaken. In some cases
additional support is given to adopters to enable them to address issues,
develop and go on to be approved. The local authority supports and promotes
well the approval of same gender carers for children who require adoption.
completed the process within six months. Following the adoption diagnostic
assessment in March 2014, some roles in the adoption team were restructured.
Clear guidance about processes and timescales has been provided to staff, and
data and information are being better used to monitor performance. This is
beginning to have a positive effect on improving the timescale for stage two of
the process.
by inspectors as requiring improvement and one seen being good. Managers
recognise the need to improve consistency in the quality of this work. Three
adopters spoken to were positive about their experience of assessment and of
the panel. They thought that the report (PAR) was an accurate reflection of the
work they had done. All felt that adoption support was considered according to
the needs of the child and was realistic.
agreed the plan of adoption. However, these were one line statements and
offered no evidence of the rationale for decisions undertaken or the key
arguments considered. This is required by Adoption Statutory Guidance 2013.
As a result, the rationale to understand how decisions were made is not
available for workers, the adoption panel, adopted young people or adults who
may later read their files. Where the ADM had considered children being
matched for adoption, these records were also brief and did not adequately
reflect full consideration of the individual children.
consistently followed. All children are discussed at matching meetings,
presented to panel, and meetings take place to plan introductions. Adoption
support plans are in place for children at the point of adoption. Support is
considered and is provided to adopters, including financial assistance in many
cases seen.
point of the adoption taking place, to explain the services available. They
support and facilitate direct and indirect contact for children placed for adoption
and those in special guardianship placements. The post-adoption worker has
completed three assessments during 201415 and is currently working with 10
families. Some work seen demonstrated child-centred and effective support
being provided. However, in most cases this was not based on an assessment
of need or an agreed plan. Additional counselling services are provided through
the independent post-adoption contact service. Adopted children who require


psychological support can experience delays in accessing child and adolescent
mental health services (CAMHS), as they are not identified as a priority group.
way. As a result, life story books and later life letters were not available for
children placed for adoption in some cases seen. This results in some children
living in adoptive placements where their adopters do not have material
available to enable them to support their children to understand their life story.
have diverse backgrounds and the majority are independent. Medical and legal
advice is readily available to them, and panel minutes demonstrate careful
consideration of approvals of adopters and matching of children. Quality
assurance of the reports presented to the panel is not consistently effective,
although feedback about areas requiring improvement is regularly given to
social workers and managers.
service and practice issues. The most recent report, in November 2014,
acknowledges some good examples of work, but also provides considerable
detail and clarity about areas that require further improvement. It makes clear
that these issues have been raised in previous reports and have not been
addressed by the local authority. A recent action plan has now been put in
place, but it is too early to demonstrate any impact.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement

safety and well-being, but pathway plans seen do not focus sufficiently on
reducing risk. All care leavers files seen had a sexual exploitation risk
assessment completed. Return interviews are conducted by the care leavers
social workers following a missing incident, although not all case files had a
record of them. In a small number of cases seen, care leavers aged under 18
years who had been missing did not receive a return interview from their social
worker and were not subsequently spoken to about the missing episode.
pathway plans does not focus sufficiently on educational next steps or on
employment. The voice of the young person is not evident and plans are not
sufficiently specific or measurable. Few plans make any meaningful comment
on the culture and identity of care leavers. The local authoritys monthly data
on performance on pathway plans show that 66% were overdue in February


slightly improving trend in timeliness over several months. Young people told
inspectors that they do not find their pathway plans to be helpful. The local
authority is currently reviewing the format of these plans, with help from young
people.
leaving care service is based within a health setting, which enables care leavers
to access health care services immediately, if required. The looked after
childrens nurse is proactive and flexible in her approach to care leavers to
ensure that they know about and can access health advice and treatment. The
nurse will visit care leavers living outside Lambeth if required. The looked after
children medical team also provides weekend and evening clinics and will
undertake home visits, for example with a member of the sexual health team.
general practitioner and a dentist. Care leavers have access to counselling
through a range of services or though their GP. However, at the time of
inspection there was an eight month delay to access CAMHS for assessment.
is not sufficiently clear. The looked after children nurse reports that care leavers
have health passports that enable them to access important information about
their health histories when seeking medical treatment. However, not all care
leavers spoken to said that they had received their health histories.
the care leaving service. For example, the What Happens Next programme
offers pre-tenancy training for young people looked after aged 16 and over.
Care leavers who have fallen into rent arrears can access a two-day accredited
training workshop on tenancy sustainment and money management. Successful
completion of the course provides access to additional support. Feedback from
participants has been positive, but the longer term impact of this course has
not been evaluated.
workshops and training provided by their carers, and to manage safe
relationships through the What Happens Next programme. The leaving care
grant is set at the national recommended level of 2,000. The local authority
provides helpful written materials and a Lambeth care leavers website contains
additional information and practical guidance.
consultant to take responsibility for monitoring the educational progress and
destinations of care leavers, but at the time of inspection the educational
support to care leavers was not well co-ordinated or sufficiently monitored.
leavers not in education, training or employment (NEET). Individual educational


support is available to work with care leavers who are NEET. This has not
resulted in increased numbers of care leavers gaining apprenticeships or
employment. Recently, contact has been made with local employers to explore
work experience opportunities, although it is too early to evaluate its impact.
Staff are not sufficiently proactive in developing local partnerships, for example
with further education colleges, to support young people with significant
barriers to learning or who are not yet ready to undertake work.
paid work experience within the local authority, and has supported 80 care
leavers during the last five years. Nine care leavers went on to secure paid
employment in 2014. Wider opportunities outside the local authority for care
leavers to engage in work-based learning or work experience are underdeveloped, although two care leavers have recently secured internships in the
financial sector.
good package of support, including accommodation during the holidays if
required. The number is similar to levels in statistical neighbours for the local
authority.
Reach for the Stars award event. This is highly valued by those care leavers
who receive awards, who spoke with pride about their experiences. The
authority looks to celebrate a wide range of achievements. However, not all
care leavers are nominated for awards and those who are not nominated are
not invited to such ceremonies and are further marginalised.
accommodation. The care leaving service remains actively involved with the
remaining 13%. Most young people who spoke to inspectors said that they
were given alternative options when they felt the housing offer did not meet
their needs, or if they felt unsafe in their tenancies. Most care leavers seen by
inspectors reported that they felt safe where they lived.
increasingly being considered for young people leaving care, to enable them to
remain with their carers. Seven young people benefit from Staying Put
arrangements with Lambeth foster carers and 13 care leavers with agency
foster carers. The care leavers service ensures that the young people staying
put also secure housing nomination rights. Looked after children spoken to by
inspectors were aware of their entitlement to stay put. The care leavers service
has close working arrangements with the local authority housing department to
ensure that all care leavers are offered either a tenancy from the council
housing stock or from another social housing provider. A private tenancy is only
considered in exceptional circumstances.


living in bed and breakfast accommodation. However, some data provided for
the inspection indicated that a few young people were or had recently been in
bed and breakfast accommodation, so the actual position was unclear.
regularly visited by their social workers. One care leaver was supported into a
semi-independent unit on discharge and is undertaking an apprenticeship in
retail. The Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders team provides
an effective bridge for young care leavers in custody.
care leavers. Staff make efforts to trace all young people and encourage them
to resume contact using texts and telephone calls.
entitlements, but most said that they have an awareness of the complaints
process or knew who to ask if they were unhappy with the service being
provided.
service, and this is not assisted by performance data, which is not fully
accurate. Managers do not have a strong grip on the quality of individual work
or the quality of the care leavers experiences of the services provided. They do
not routinely undertake case audits of the work within the team.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Progress has not been sustained since Ofsted judged the local authority as
outstanding for both safeguarding and services to looked after children in 2012.
Most of the areas of strength identified then have deteriorated significantly. The
absence of an effective performance management and monitoring system means
that local authority senior managers and elected members do not have sufficient
knowledge and understanding of social work practice. Consequently, services for
looked after children and those waiting for adoption are inadequate, and services for
children needing help and protection and for care leavers require improvement.
The local authority self-assessment dated December 2014 and completed in
anticipation of this inspection is over-optimistic. Most services are self-assessed as
good. Shortfalls known to leaders and senior managers were not accurately or
effectively analysed. Supervision by managers is not robust and does not provide
leaders with an accurate understanding of the quality of practice.
The Corporate Parenting Panel does not effectively scrutinise outcomes for all looked
after children and care leavers.
Staff do not systematically record all activity on the local authority childrens
electronic case system. As a result, managers cannot be assured that data and
information about children and young people are accurate.
Risks to children and young people who go missing are not assessed, as return
interviews do not take place in line with regulation.
The local authority has experienced difficulties in recruiting and retaining
experienced social workers and managers. This leads to children and their families
experiencing frequent changes in social worker, and negatively affects the
consistency and quality of practice. All levels in the organisation rely too much on
locum staff.
Leadership has been inconsistent and fragmented. Recent action by the Director of
Childrens Services and senior managers is beginning to make a positive difference,
but it is too soon to evaluate impact in most areas of service.
Partnerships with other statutory and voluntary organisations are strong, although
these have been strained by significant changes of local authority managers and staff
in recent years.


anticipation of this inspection is over-optimistic. Most services are self-assessed
as good. Shortfalls known to senior managers were not accurately or effectively
analysed, despite being identified in late 2014. These included significant
deficits in practice: drift in progressing work for many children, lack of
compliance with statutory visits to vulnerable children within prescribed
timescales, poor management oversight of work, and inadequate performance
and quality assurance processes.
improvement across most service areas, particularly over the past six months.
In some areas this has had a positive impact, for example in the development
of the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) and the First Response Teams
(FRT). However, inspectors found that all services for vulnerable children and
their families either require improvement or are inadequate. Senior leaders,
managers and elected members do not therefore have a realistic understanding
of the quality of frontline practice, management oversight and whether children
and their families are effectively helped, cared for and protected.
services and is not underpinned by accurate performance information.
Throughout the inspection, the authority struggled to provide timely or accurate
data and management information. Operational managers did not demonstrate
a clear or accurate understanding of the effectiveness of the services that they
manage. A monthly performance digest is disseminated to managers. However,
this often contains inaccurate or poor quality information and important
information is unavailable or unreliable. For example, the analysis of children
missing from home and care is not accurate. It is therefore difficult for
managers to monitor and measure improvement for children and young people.
A quality assurance framework linked to learning and development has recently
been launched to strengthen case auditing and management oversight, but it is
too soon to evaluate its impact.
levels do not routinely undertake audits of work for which they are directly
responsible. The local authority commissioned external audits of childrens
services in October 2014 and of supervision in January 2015. The Health
Visiting Service and the School Nursing Services were reviewed in 2013. These
provided an independent analysis of deficiencies in practice across the teams.
They rightly found a range of issues, such as: only a small number of
assessments were child centred; analysis in most instances was lacking and
tended to be descriptive; some children appeared not to have had an updated
assessment for some years. An action plan is in now place that prioritises these
areas for improvement, many of which persist.
accordance with the local authoritys policy. The audit of supervision in January


supervision files seen or sought by inspectors. For example, managers
supervision files were not available in the MASH and FRT teams. In the looked
after children and care leavers services the quality of supervision is mostly
poor. There is a lack of evidence of any management oversight or supervision
taking place within the adoption service. As a result, the quality and timeliness
of the service to children are not being appropriately quality assured or
managed, resulting in unacceptable delay for these children. A revised
supervision policy and tool have been introduced, but it is too early to see their
impact.
priority for the local authority and its partners. However, not all children who
have gone missing received a return interview within 72 hours of their return.
Inspectors sampled cases of children missing from care where social workers
contacted young people by phone and text, but there was no evidence that the
young people had been offered or had had a return interview. Inspectors saw
records of social workers visiting children about two weeks following the
missing episodes, but there was no recorded evidence or risk assessments of
why young people were missing from care. In February 2015, the local
authority commissioned a voluntary sector organisation to offer return
interviews, to enable young people to speak to an independent person.
episodes; this is tracked and cross referenced with children at risk of sexual
exploitation. A critical log of serious incidents is reported to the DCS, senior
managers and the Lead Member. However, performance information is
unreliable as staff do not systematically record activity on the electronic case
system. Trends are not understood, assessed or aggregated by senior
managers. Managers who spoke to inspectors were not able to provide
assurance that the data about children missing from care are accurate. Manual
systems continue to be employed to assist operational managers in managing
services.
exploitation have been reviewed and strengthened in the past six months.
Complex strategy meetings for those young people identified as being at high
risk are effectively chaired by a sexual exploitation specialist worker based in
the MASH. Almost all cases are appropriately escalated to the MASE and multiagency action plans devised to reduce risk and disrupt perpetrators. The use of
a risk assessment tool is being rolled out and is beginning to identify more
young people at risk. The Local Safeguarding Children Boards exploitation subgroup, established in January 2015, is beginning to cross reference young
people who go missing, who are at risk of sexual exploitation, and those at risk
of gang-related issues.
and the draft strategy for 2015, do not offer an effective analysis of the
placement needs of looked after children, nor a plan of how the local authority


will meet this need. The draft strategy lacks critical analysis; for example, it
states that the fostering service has had steady and significant growth,
although overall numbers of carers have only increased from 93 in 2012 to 107
in 2015. This is partially due to a decision to outsource aspects of the fostering
service, which meant that expansion of the service would be put on hold. A
decision to keep the service in house was made in November 2014 but, while
the local authority has identified that the service needs to grow and develop, a
strategic plan has not been put into place to deliver this. Consequently, the
authority is reliant on a high number of high-cost agency placements to meet
the needs of children and young people.
care. About half of these young people live in placements provided by IFAs that
are not part of the local authoritys approved framework arrangements. These
are not subject to the enhanced contractual quality assurance processes that
are in place for preferred providers. During the inspection, the authority was
unable to provide a current analysis of the needs of the children and young
people who are placed more than 20 miles from home. The placement panel,
which was reconfigured in February 2015, is reviewing all of these placements
to ensure that the care provided is of a consistently good quality.
childrens services directors, staff and partner agencies, and demonstrates an
understanding of key issues affecting childrens services. These include poor
performance issues such as in adoption, the number and costs of IFA
placements and the failure to offer, record and analyse return interviews with
missing children. The lead member reads all the MASE minutes, the Directors
critical log and data on missing episode. However, it is too soon to see the
impact of this oversight. The Chair of Overview and Scrutiny was not aware of
these key issues affecting childrens services. Elected members do not always
effectively hold officers to account, and assure themselves that childrens needs
are being identified and met. They do not currently offer consistent and high
quality critical challenge and scrutiny to the work of childrens social care, or act
as effective corporate parents.
regularly attend the panel. Young people from the Children in Care Council told
inspectors that they have regular contact with elected members and senior
managers. Corporate parenting training is mandatory for elected members and
all the cabinet have been briefed on child sexual exploitation. Members of the
panel are committed to improving outcomes for children in care, and there are
cogent examples of them promoting and supporting looked after children and
young people to succeed, including financial support for young people to
progress into higher education, staying put policies and access to social
housing. However, the panels work is underdeveloped. Members of the panel
do not have sufficient detailed knowledge about the deterioration in the quality
of services for looked after children since the last inspection. Members


recognise that they need to do more to fulfil their responsibilities for the
considerable number of looked after children who live more than 20 miles from
Lambeth and they have plans in place to visit young people in residential
homes. The new Lead Member, appointed in November 2014, reads all of the
MASE minutes and looks at the Directors critical log and data on missing
episodes. However, it is too soon to evidence impact of this work.
transfer of the statutory role of Director of Childrens Services (DCS) to the
Strategic Director of Delivery (SDD) in December 2014. Prior to this the SDD
had operational responsibility for childrens social care. In addition to the DCS
role, the SDD is accountable for delivery across extensive key services which
include Adults, Communities, Environment, Housing, Education and Business
Growth. This broad span of responsibilities significantly impacts upon the ability
of the DCS to maintain sufficient oversight and focus on childrens services.
managers left Lambeth. This has reduced the capacity of senior managers to
ensure that the service is effective and that the standards of practice and
management oversight within childrens services are of an acceptable or
required level.
are clear about their respective roles, and clear lines of accountability have now
been established to ensure that they discharge their individual and collective
responsibilities. Senior leaders and members have a weekly Towards
Excellence meeting, which focuses on performance across the directorates.
Matters relating to improving childrens services are regularly discussed, and
the authority is in the process of redesigning childrens social care services.
CFSP enables statutory and non-statutory agencies to work together for
children, young people and their families, both in planning and delivering
services. Commissioning activity is clearly aligned to the strategic planning
process, and is overseen by chief officers. However, governance arrangements
and priorities between key strategic boards and the LSCB are not well
established.
priorities across the CFSP, the Health and Wellbeing Board, and the Early
Intervention and Outcomes panels. The JSNA has driven targets and service
commissioning in some areas, however, further work is needed to ensure that it
links to targets and service commissioning in all priority areas.
retaining strong frontline services. The service has 420 established posts, of
which 315 are filled on a permanent or fixed term basis. The service currently


includes 151 agency workers, a number of whom are in addition to established
posts, including key senior management posts. Staff turnover for the year to
December 2014 was 9.5% for the permanent workforce and significantly
greater amongst agency workers. This lack of stability has negatively affected
the quality and continuity of the social work service received by some children
and their families, and has caused difficulties in communication for some
partner agencies. Over 50% of agency posts are additional to the
establishment. The local authority has committed to retaining additional staff
until a complete service redesign is concluded later in 2015. This is to ensure a
consistent focus on safeguarding children during a period of substantial change.
caseloads are manageable and that all work is allocated. Staffing levels have
been maintained that are significantly above the permanent established
complement. Social work teams are well resourced and social work caseloads,
averaging 15 children and young people, are manageable. Many of the overestablishment posts are filled by agency staff. This has led to some recent
improvements to raise standards of practice to at least a minimum level.
However, inspectors still found some staff and managers failing to comply with
basic social work standards. Recording is poor in too many case files, some
assessments lack sufficient historical analysis, and a number of plans are of a
poor quality. New senior managers are actively intervening to improve practice,
but it is too soon to evaluate whether changes will be sustained.
social workers during their assessed and supported year in employment (ASYE).
This includes comprehensive induction and a range of mandatory training.
Case loads are protected and newly qualified workers report that they feel
supported in their teams.
from complaints is cascaded to managers. The local authority appropriately
made four serious incident notifications to Ofsted in the past three years. Three
serious case reviews have been undertaken, one of which has been completed
and two are yet to be published. Learning from serious case reviews is
disseminated effectively.
remains too variable. Cafcass and the District Family Judge report that neglect
cases are not coming to court soon enough. While they report some examples
of good work, generally social workers from Lambeth are not perceived to be
good at representing their cases. There is inconsistency in work being
undertaken pre-proceedings, with some cases missing key information and
others being of poor quality. Frequent changes in social workers are reported to
negatively affect the quality of work and are causing delay for some children.
This was confirmed in cases seen by inspectors. Lambeth is a high issuing
authority, consistently bringing around 100 cases to court each year. The
average length of proceedings at the time of inspection was 38 weeks, which is


similar to other inner city boroughs. Court outcomes are broadly similar to
statistical neighbours, with 37% of children subject to supervision orders, 28%
of cases with special guardianship orders made and 20% of children subject to
care orders. Guardians spoke positively about Signs of Safety conferences
resulting in increased engagement from families. Lambeth is perceived by
partners as a very active member of the South London Care Proceedings
Project.
maintained in Lambeth, underpinned by an extensive variety of voluntary and
faith sector initiatives. These are supported well by an holistic, multi-agency
early intervention commissioning strategy 201314, which was reviewed in
services. These services effectively help families and children at risk and
contribute to preventing the escalation of concerns to targeted services.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
inadequate.

Summary of findings
The LSCB is inadequate because:
Scrutiny, awareness and challenge
 Throughout 2014 the LSCB has not effectively carried out its statutory functions.
These issues have now been recognised and new LSCB structures, membership
and operational groups have been established in 2015, but it is too early to
identify the impact.
 The LSCB has not been sufficiently independent from its key partners and has not
adequately influenced the prioritisation of safeguarding children amongst other
strategic fora or exerted challenge to other partners or organisations.
 Oversight of multi-agency work to prevent child sexual exploitation was not
effectively maintained through 2014, although this has been revived in 2015.

Quality and evaluation
 The LSCB does not have effective quality assurance information or analysis of the
performance of the board or its partners. It has not systematically assured itself
that all partners have appropriate safeguarding policies, practices and procedures
in place or that these are being followed.
 The Board has not sufficiently assured itself, through multi-agency case audits,
that the standards of safeguarding practice are of required standards.
 The work of the Board has not been effectively progressed through its
operational groups and through the business support provided.
 Multi-agency training has been maintained, but its impact on improving
safeguarding practice has not been rigorously evaluated.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
appropriately represented and effectively carry out the Boards work
programme.
operational plans for the Board.
information required by the Board is agreed, regularly collated and analysed by
partners to enable the Board to evaluate the impact of its work to safeguard
children.
is implemented and the findings are utilised to improve practice and to develop
services.
Areas for improvement

Scrutiny, awareness and challenge
strategic groups, including the Health and Wellbeing Board and the Children
and Families Strategic Partnership, are formalised and influence and inform
each others work.
representatives at the right level regularly attend and contribute to the Boards
working groups.
services.
safeguarding policies, procedures and practices and that these are followed by
staff.
proportional contribution of resources, including financial contributions.

Quality and evaluation
sufficiently resourced and is independent from the work of the local authority
childrens services.


manner.
behalf of the Board and are understood and consistently applied by partners.
of safeguarding within early help services and services for looked after children
and care leavers.
practice are rigorously evaluated.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
operational groups were not sufficiently represented by key partners and most
did not effectively carry out their work programmes. This was recognised in July
LSCB functions undertaken in November 2014. As a result, the LSCB has agreed
major structural and operational changes. Most of these are only beginning to
take shape in early 2015.
LSCB and in the senior staff within key partner agencies, particularly childrens
social care services, have had a negative impact on the continuity and the
consistency of the work of the LSCB and its sub groups. Between July and
December 2014 the work of the LSCB was fragmented. Partners were unclear
how the operational work of the Board was being progressed and whether its
sub-groups and working groups were disbanded or continued to operate. Some
of the work areas tasked to sub-groups were undertaken off line by committed
individuals, instead of being done systematically through established multiagency fora.
appointed LSCB Manager, are committed to facilitating the significant LSCB
structural changes to improve the work and profile of the Board. In recent
months they have met with a wide range of partners at all levels to help to
improve their engagement and to promote the work and profile of the Board,
and this has resulted in increased engagement by partners in the Boards work.
bodies, such as the Health and Wellbeing Board and Lambeth Children and
Families Strategic Partnership (CFSP), are not sufficiently well-established.
While the LSCB Chair is a member of the CFSP, the LSCB has had little direct
input or influence on the work or priorities of these boards. The LSCB has
recognised this and has very recently drafted a protocol with the Health and
Wellbeing Board. Governance arrangements between the LSCB and the Adults


Safeguarding Board are well-established, and are facilitated by having the same
chairperson.
part of the local authoritys childrens services and not sufficiently independent
from the local authority. This has been exacerbated by the business and
administrative support to the LSCB and the Board Manager being managed
through the local authority childrens services. A new Board Manager was
appointed in 2015, and is attempting to rationalise the work of the Board,
although, at the time of the inspection, this remained fragmented and work
was at an early stage of development.
childrens services staff, whereas many of its sub-committees have been
underrepresented by key partners, or not quorate to effectively progress the
work of the Board. The LSCB has reviewed its structure and that of its subgroups. In 2015 the Board implemented new structures and terms of reference
for an LSCB executive and the Board itself, and streamlined sub-groups and
working groups. However, it is too early to assess their effectiveness, as most
have only recently agreed terms of reference, membership and work plans.
to safeguard children. A performance sub-group of the LSCB, primarily tasked
to review and analyse multi-agency performance information, had undertaken
this function sufficiently prior to 2014. It did not, however, sustain regular or
rigorous oversight throughout 2014. A performance information digest, based
largely on the local authoritys performance data, has been regularly produced
and reported to the LSCB. However, in recent years this extensive data set has
not been reviewed by the Board, to ensure that it provides the most relevant
information to enable board partners to oversee the quality of safeguarding
practice. Little supporting analysis has been provided to enable LSCB members
to interrogate the information or to exert challenge to each other. A draft
proposal for a new performance management framework has been developed
within the local authority childrens services, which is to be considered by LSCB
partners.
professional practice. Some partner agencies have undertaken individual case
audits which have been used to improve practice within their own services, and
some of these have been reported to the LSCB. The LSCB only undertook one
multi-agency case audit in 2014, of a few cases relating to children with
disabilities. This was not repeated to establish if the issues resulting from the
audit had been tackled. The LSCB has not implemented a planned schedule of
multi-agency audits, as a result of work pressures and restructuring.
contribute to the development of the Early Help Strategy in 2013. However, the
strategy was further developed in 2014, but the LSCB did not maintain its


overview or contribute to its redevelopment. The LSCB has received annual
reports from the Corporate Parenting Panel, but not from the Independent
Reviewing service. It has not effectively overseen the safeguarding needs of
looked after children and those placed outside the area.
that partners challenge or hold each other to account for their contribution to
the safety and protection of children. No examples were seen where the LSCB
Chair has formally raised challenges or issues of concern on behalf of the LSCB,
although often issues have been raised informally. In LSCB meetings in 2014, a
voluntary sector representative did appropriately raise concerns about the
impact of frequent changes of social workers on children. It is not clear what
action resulted from this.
its commitment to safeguarding children. Partners were required during 2014 to
confirm that they had appropriate safeguarding practices, policies and
procedures under section 11 of the Children Act 2004 and also, specifically, in
relation to domestic violence and female genital mutilation. However, while a
few key agencies did report to the Board, this was not systematically
completed. The LSCB did not monitor or challenge partners who did not
complete this activity. The LSCB recognised in 2014 that there has been
slippage in the programme of section 11 audits, and raised concerns about
whether local schools and voluntary sector organisations had submitted returns.
However, this was not effectively tackled and the Board has not taken action to
ensure that these organisations provide required information.
represented on the Board and relevant sub-groups. The Child Death Overview
Panel has carried out its functions appropriately throughout the period of
structural changes to the Board and has submitted relevant reports. A new
Health Network sub-group of the LSCB was established in January 2015,
appropriately expanding and incorporating the work of the existing health,
safeguarding and looked after children group. Police engagement in the work of
the LSCB has been enhanced in recent months, particularly through joint
chairing of the new Child Exploitation sub-group, to oversee areas where the
police actively engage in multi-agency work to safeguard children.
of the Board, including the significant costs of the serious case reviews
undertaken in the area. A disproportionate amount of the costs has been met
by the local authoritys childrens services. This has exacerbated the dominance
of the local authority on the Board and the issue of the Boards perceived lack
of independence. Proposals to realign the financial contribution of partners
were being considered at the time of this inspection.
commissioned and overseen three serious case reviews (SCRs). Two of these


await publication. These reviews absorbed a significant amount of resources
and time from LSCB partners and from the administrative support to the Board.
Learning from these SCRs has been widely disseminated across staff of partner
organisations and within the community through a series of events and training
seminars. Staff from partner agencies were able to articulate this learning and
apply it to their work. The serious case review sub-committee of the LSCB has
appropriately considered serious incidents and whether to instigate multiagency or individual agency reviews. It has effectively developed and monitored
action plans arising from these and reported to the LSCB on progress. However,
progress on aspects of these plans has been delayed as a result of pressures in
the LSCB business and administrative support, and also where tasks have fallen
to other LSCB groups which have not functioned effectively. For example, multiagency audits of practice related to SCR recommendations have not been
completed as planned.
procedures, with little review or modification for local issues. They are fit for
purpose. The LSCB Chair is a member of the pan-London chairs group and has
contributed to the development of pan-London protocols. Some localised
procedures have been developed, for example on child sexual exploitation and
on youth violence. However, the LSCB has not monitored or evaluated the
effectiveness of local safeguarding policies and procedures or the adherence to
them by its partners.
application, with partners and has not published a thresholds document as
prescribed in Working Together 2013. It has monitored the application of some
thresholds locally, through its oversight of the multi-agency safeguarding hub.
in January 2015 to oversee multi-agency work on child sexual exploitation and
missing children, linked to related issues such as gangs. This group is
developing the work of previous LSCB sub-committees, which established core
policies and processes in early 2014, but whose work programmes were not
systematically progressed through the later part of 2014. In the interim,
oversight of multi-agency performance in these areas was maintained through
operational groups, such as the MASE. The work of the Local Authority
Designated Officer has also been maintained, but not sufficiently monitored
through the LSCB.
Young Lambeth Voice, using their views and experiences to inform the
development of strategies and services, for example on children missing, esafety, bullying and other aspects of the Boards work. However, during mid2014 this group ceased to meet regularly or to be supported, and as a result
the LSCB is not currently informed by young people or service users as it
undertakes a major restructuring of its role and activities.


services for children and young people in Lambeth. Its lack of independence
from the local authority childrens services has meant that its work has largely
been determined by and dependent on issues affecting those services, in
particular the changes to childrens services senior management and to the
administrative support to the Board. This has been recognised by the LSCB and
the local authority and the new LSCB structure and membership has been
designed to increase the engagement of partner agencies at all levels. It is too
early to assess if this will have the intended impact. The LSCB has made limited
use of its scrutiny role or statutory powers to influence priority setting across
strategic partners, although there are areas which overlap, for example in the
extensive gang related work undertaken in the area.
provided through the LSCB to partners and within the local community. This
has been updated to include current local and national issues affecting children
and their families, for example gang related issues and child sexual exploitation.
Training has been expanded into e-learning modules. Staff from partner
agencies report that they are readily able to access a range of training, and that
it has helped to raise awareness of key safeguarding issues. Evaluation of the
impact of training has been basic and primarily based on self-evaluation by
participants, which has been largely positive. The LSCB has begun to pilot more
sophisticated evaluation of the impact of training on safeguarding practice,
based on recently published pan-London guidance.
within childrens social care services for consideration by LSCB partners. This is
still in draft form. Awareness of safeguarding issues across partners and the
local community is supported by a range of information published by the LSCB,
including through its website. Information has not been regularly reviewed or
kept up to date due to pressures on the Boards business and administrative
support, but efforts have been made in recent months to do so.
administration. It provides a brief description of the activities undertaken by the
Board and a synopsis of the key safeguarding issues in the area. It does not
provide sufficient evaluation of what impact the LSCB is having on these issues.
The report does not rigorously assess the performance or effectiveness of local
safeguarding services or identify areas of weakness. It does provide a synopsis
of issues arising and lessons learnt from local serious case reviews. Late
publication of the report enabled it to include areas that were identified in mid2014, such as the imbalance of local authority representatives on the Board,
the variation of seniority across all agencies and the need for structural changes
across the LSCB. These issues have been now been tackled through the LSCB
Chair and reinvigorated commitment from partners. Structural changes have
been agreed and most have been implemented in 2015. However, it is too early


to demonstrate that these are embedded or have improved the effectiveness of
the Board.
business plan has not been revised to incorporate the significant changes to its
structure, operation and work priorities that have been agreed by partners and
have begun to be implemented.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted
and two associate inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Pietro Battista
Deputy lead inspector: Shirley Bailey
Team inspectors: Brenda McLaughlin, Paula Thomson-Jones, Pamela Blackman,
Marcie Taylor, Chris Luke, Dominic Porter-Moore.
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Text phone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


