Lancashire
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 14 September 2015  8 October 2015
Report published: 27 November 2015
Childrens services in Lancashire are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
There are serious failures in the services provided to children who need help and
protection in Lancashire. Services for care leavers are also poor, with few receiving
the level of support they need to enter adult life successfully. Services for looked
after children and children in need of adoption are not yet good. All services have
significantly deteriorated since the last inspection of childrens services published in
March 2012, when the local authority was found to be good overall with some
outstanding features.
During the inspection, three children tragically died in unrelated incidents. Their
families were open cases to childrens social care and they were receiving services as
children in need. Investigations of the childrens circumstances are at an early stage
and it is too soon to establish if their deaths could have been prevented. Inspectors
looked at the social work records of these children with senior managers from the
local authority, who agreed some of the practice was poor. Some of this poor
practice was seen in a much larger number of cases where children had not been
harmed.
Inspectors referred back five cases to the local authority where there were serious
issues of concern and 11 cases where there were concerns that the service offer or
risk assessment may not be appropriate for the childs needs. In 13 of the 16 cases,
inspectors concerns were substantiated. Although this is a small number of children
relative to the population of Lancashire, elements of the poor practices in these
cases were apparent in many others. These widespread concerns included a failure
to involve key agencies in strategy discussions at all stages of child protection
enquiries, resulting in inappropriate decisions in some cases; assessment of risk
without reference to or knowledge of significant history; complex work allocated to
practitioners with insufficient qualifications or experience; and a lack of effective
management oversight, particularly of children in need work. In some cases there
was an over-reliance on parents compliance with written agreements to keep
children safe. A small number of older young people at significant risk of harm were
not recognised as meeting the threshold for a child protection conference.
Services were restructured in April 2015 in line with a corporate vision of providing
lifelong services with as few transition points as possible. Arrangements for
consideration of contact and referrals are efficient and effective. From this point
onwards, generic locality teams cover a full range of services for children from those
in need of help and protection to care leavers. Significant staff turnover, much of it
due to internal promotion, has resulted in an inexperienced workforce covering a
broad range of work requiring more detailed and specialist knowledge than it is often
equipped to offer. This has led to a failure to comply with some statutory guidance,
for example in relation to children who are privately fostered.
Following assessment by qualified social workers, much child in need work, including
some complex cases, is held by family support workers. Inspectors found systemic
weaknesses in management oversight of this work, with no checkpoints or protocols


for qualified workers to regularly review or update families circumstances to ensure
that risk continues to be managed at an appropriate level.
A combination of generic workloads and complex, often demanding, work means
that children and young people whose needs are less immediate or obvious do not
always receive sufficient priority. Care leavers are particularly poorly served. In too
many cases they receive incomplete or conflicting information about their
entitlements, a lack of effective support to engage or re-engage with education or
employment and insufficient support with housing issues until they reach crisis point.
Services for looked after children require improvement, with many benefiting from
stable and secure placements. The quality of practice, however, remains too
variable. A recently renewed focus on promoting the educational attainment of
looked after children has not yet resulted in enough looked after children having the
most basic tools to support educational achievement, such as a personal education
plan. Educational aspirations for them remain too low, particularly once they reach
timely help to understand their past experiences.
Adoption performance is improving and children receive good-quality support postadoption. However, there is no centralised strategic oversight of the service, leading
to delay for some children.
Attention paid to the identity and diversity needs of children in every part of the
service is too often superficial or in some cases absent.
Performance management information is very poor and the local authority struggled
to provide inspectors with basic accurate data such as the number of care leavers it
was in touch with or the number of assessments it had completed. As a result, senior
leaders and elected members cannot be confident that reported changes in
performance are accurate. This reduces the effectiveness of their oversight of the
quality of service that children receive. While senior leaders and elected members
are appropriately ambitious to improve services in Lancashire, a general lack of
target-setting and agreed benchmarks significantly reduces their ability to hold each
other to account or to communicate clear expectations to staff. Poor-quality
information is to an extent mitigated by extensive audit activity undertaken by the
local authority and its partners. Audits had already identified many of the deficits
seen in this inspection but had not resulted in development of effective action plans
or led to improvement in performance.
The local authority has recently responded to these long-standing challenges by
commissioning an external provider to review its current services with a view to
improving outcomes and identifying efficiencies. This work has not yet started.
This executive summary should be read alongside the recommendations in the next
section of this report. Each recommendation is clearly linked to the relevant
paragraph(s) that set out the detailed findings of this inspection.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates 10 childrens homes and seven overnight breaks
units for children and young people with special educational needs and learning
difficulties and/or disabilities. Twelve of these were judged to be good or
outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Lancashires safeguarding arrangements was in
January 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for looked after children
was in January 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since April 2015.
 The Chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since
March 2014.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 244,755 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Lancashire. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 18% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 14% (the national level is 16%)
 in secondary schools is 12% (the national level is 14%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 13% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian (10%) and Mixed (3%).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 12% (the national level is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 9% (the national level is 15%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 August 2015, 9,140 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 31 August 2015, 1,054 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a increase from 936 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 August 2015, 32 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from 28 at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, 24 serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and eight serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at
the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 August 2015, 1,577 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 64.4 per 10,000 children). This is a decrease from 1,610 (a rate of 66.0 per
 Of this number, 277 (or 17.6%) live outside the local authority area.
authority area.
 Four live in residential special schools,3 of whom 75.0% live out of the
authority area.
area.
 There is a very small number of unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children.
 In the last 12 months (between 1 September 2014 and 31 August 2015):
 there have been 112 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
 three children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or fewer per year.


Recommendations

Ensure robust performance information is available to support effective
management scrutiny and challenge to poor performance at all levels of the
organisation (paragraphs 21, 32, 43, 49, 52, 53, 110, 111, 115, 116, 122,


Review the way in which audit work is undertaken and evaluated to ensure it
is used effectively to drive improvement in the quality of front-line social work
practice (paragraphs 125, 126, 127, 136).


Ensure elected members have an accurate understanding of the quality of
service provided to children to enable rigorous challenge to senior managers
to make improvements (paragraphs 121, 123, 132, 133).


Develop and implement a strategy that addresses the specific needs of the
current workforce including ensuring the required levels of support and
supervision for newly qualified staff (paragraphs 37, 111, 135, 136, 137).


Ensure that all child protection investigations are conducted by suitably skilled,
knowledgeable and experienced social workers (paragraph 28).


Ensure that strategy discussions are held when the threshold is reached, are
clearly recorded, and that they always include the police and health
professionals in planning and considering the outcome of child protection
investigations (paragraph 27).


Ensure that assessments and plans are informed by historical information and
diversity factors and that they focus on the experience of the child and
accurately assess risk (paragraphs 23, 28, 29, 33, 54, 56).


Provide all children in need with sufficient oversight from qualified social
workers and managers to ensure robust care planning and on-going effective
analysis of risk (paragraphs 36, 37,121, 136).


Monitor and review the use of written agreements with parents to ensure they
are not relied on to manage risk when a child in need plan, child protection
plan or legal action is required instead. Ensure that managers decisions
recorded on cases files explain what evidence they have considered and on
what basis their decision has been reached (paragraphs 35, 36, 135).


In cases with an additional focus, such as forced marriage or honour-based
violence, ensure that social workers understand the importance of also
initiating child protection procedures when the victim is a child (paragraph



Ensure that children who are privately fostered and their carers are assessed
and visited within required timescales (paragraph 52).


Ensure that the need for permanence for all looked after children is
considered at an early stage and is regularly reviewed (paragraphs 57, 58).


Ensure that all looked after children have regularly updated personal
education plans that are effective in supporting their educational progress and
attainment throughout their childhood (paragraph 75).


Ensure that the independent reviewing service undertakes consistent regular
oversight of practice and care planning in childrens cases in line with the Care
Planning Placement and Case Review Regulations 2010 (paragraphs 57, 60).


Ensure that managers of the service maintain a strategic overview of the
experience of children from the point they enter care to adoption or
permanency that is sufficiently rigorous to prevent drift and delay and assist
with identifying and predicting future placement needs (paragraphs 58, 80,


Ensure that all looked after children who need it receive timely life story work
so they understand their history and what has happened in their lives
(paragraph 105).


Ensure that care leavers receive the level of support and information they
require to successfully make a transition to independence, including accurate
information about their entitlements; effective support in engaging or reengaging with education, employment or training; and that pathway plans
effectively address the key needs of care leavers (paragraphs 84, 107, 111,


Summary for children and young people

 Children who need help and protection in Lancashire do not always get the right
level of support to keep them safe. Social workers do not always understand
important things that have happened to children in the past. Sometimes they do
not talk to all the people who have important information to help them decide the
best thing to do. In a few cases they do not act quickly enough to protect
children.
 Staff work hard and try to give children a good service. Senior managers have
not made sure that all staff have the training they need to do their job well and
sometimes they expect them to do things they do not have the qualifications or
experience to do.
 Senior managers, and people who run the council, want to do a good job but do
not have enough accurate information about how services are doing to make sure
they concentrate on improving the right things.
 Young people who are looked after do not get enough help with their education
or job prospects, particularly after they reach 16. This can give young people the
impression that the local authority does not care what happens to them once
they leave school.
 Some care leavers do not always feel the local authority has been a good parent
to them. They do not receive all the help or information they need to be
successful in their adult lives.
 Looked after children generally live in placements with people who understand
and meet their needs well.
 More children who need it have been adopted, although some still wait too long
for a family. Adopted children and their families receive good support that helps
them settle in well.
 The council is interested in what children have to say. They make sure they
involve them in important decisions about how services are run.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
Widespread failure to follow procedures and inconsistent practice across help and
protection services leaves some children and young people at risk of harm. In a very
small number of cases seen children suffered harm before the correct action was
taken. A high proportion (50%) of social workers undertaking complex child
protection work have less than two years experience. The managerial oversight and
support to workers who lack experience to practice safely is insufficient. Child
protection strategy discussions are not always held when they should be. Many held
do not have the correct minimum representation of agencies and some only involve
social care.
Assessments do not consistently identify or consider all risks to children and young
people. Few sufficiently consider the familys history, and some do not demonstrate a
thorough understanding of the childs experience. Inspectors saw a small number of
cases where poor assessments had led to children receiving services as children in
need when risks were such that a child protection response was needed. Children
who are victims of honour-based violence or forced marriage are supported by the
police and social care, but in cases seen social workers and their managers did not
always recognise they were also children in need of protection.
Childrens plans are often not clear or outcome-focused and frequently contain no
timescales. This makes measuring progress difficult. Family support workers manage
cases of children in need, including even some complex cases where a level of risk is
present. In some cases child protection plans end before professionals could be
satisfied that the level of risk had reduced enough. They step down to child in need
cases, leaving family support workers to oversee continuing reduction of risk. Child in
need cases do not have sufficient managerial or qualified social worker oversight.
Reviews in these cases do not benefit from the attendance of a qualified social work
professional and are not always effective in challenging lack of progress. In a small
number of cases seen, increasing or continuing risk to children was not recognised,
leaving children at risk of harm. Written agreements with parents are relied upon
inappropriately in some cases as the only means of managing risk to children.
Social workers receive regular supervision and value the support they receive from
frontline managers. Management oversight is included on case files but frequently
lacks a rationale for decisions made. This makes it difficult to establish if the
manager considered all known key factors prior to making a decision. The electronic
information system does not support good assessment or planning, or provide good
quality management information to assist managers. Children who are privately
fostered in Lancashire are not sufficiently monitored to ensure their safety and wellbeing.


Inspection findings

In 2015, the local authority completed a major review of the early help offer
across Lancashire, with the aim of improving efficiency and take-up of
services. The first phase of the resultant service restructure has been
implemented, but at the time of the inspection a significant number of the
local authority funded posts in the early help team (around 40%) were not
filled, which has slowed progress.


Since 2012, as the result of effective partnership working between the
authoritys staff and partner organisations, a high proportion of troubled
families (87% of 2,281) has been turned around as of May 2015, with
improvements in economic well-being and their childrens life chances. The
local authority does not have the means to measure the effectiveness of the
help offered to these families over time and therefore does not know how
many have sustained their improved well-being.


In 2014, the authority provided an extensive training programme on the
common assessment framework (CAF), which a significant number of staff in
its partner organisations completed. At least one member of staff in each
organisation, including schools and health, has trained as a CAF champion,
supporting others when completing a CAF. The training included helpful
guidelines on applying thresholds. As a result, an increasing number of early
help assessments and interventions are completed; for example, from
September 2014 to August 2015, 5,048 assessments were initiated, of which
education providers initiated 1,298 and childrens centres 1,523.


Although numbers are increasing, the quality of CAFs is not good enough.
Often they lack clear and detailed action plans and do not always include
childrens views. Basic details of childrens identity needs, such as their
ethnicity, are not always recorded. In recognition of this, managers have
developed a quality improvement system, which includes feedback to
individuals who initiate a CAF, but this is not yet implemented. The plan to
introduce a web-based CAF that can be easily accessed by relevant
professionals is at the early stages.


Schools have a strong focus on safeguarding children. Staff in schools have
had good-quality training in the Prevent agenda, and this has given them
confidence to intervene to reduce the risk of radicalisation. They use CAF
appropriately when there are emerging concerns that children could become
at risk of child sexual exploitation or harm through domestic abuse. However,
not all schools have a clear understanding of the agreed local thresholds for
intervention and some CAFs result in children being referred to childrens
social care for a social work assessment when they do not need one. This can
result in delays in intervention for some children.


Childrens centres contribute well to early help provision in Lancashire. They
know the population in their reach areas well, understanding the challenges


that the parents and their children face. They provide a good range of
relevant services to parents of children in need, including alcohol and
domestic violence awareness programmes. Staff in childrens centres also
offer parents advice and guidance about accessing education, training or
employment, and when required, direct them to other services offered by
partner organisations.

Lancashire has two separate routes for agencies to refer children and young
people who have reached the threshold for social work intervention to the
local authority. When the police identify that a child or young person may
require additional support, cases are managed via Lancashire Multi-agency
Safeguarding Hub (MASH). All other agencies contact Lancashires Contact
and Referral Team (CART), which is co-located with the MASH. Through the
MASH, children and young people benefit from a multi-agency response from
Monday to Friday. At weekends, the police alone deliver the MASH, operating
from the same base as the local authoritys out of hours team, which also
manages urgent referrals that are normally processed by the CART. This
system, though complex, is efficient. Information is shared effectively
between daytime and out of hours services at a management level to ensure
appropriate handover of cases. Decision-making by the CART and MASH is
timely and cases are correctly passed to localities when a social work
assessment is required. When this is not the case, referrers are appropriately
redirected to other services or early help. The co-location of staff at the MASH
supports multi-agency information-gathering and assessment. The authority
plans to simplify current arrangements by expanding the MASH to cover all
referrals.


Referrals, including those where children are potentially at risk of harm, are
reviewed and allocated promptly to social workers on duty in locality teams for
assessment. However, not all cases that meet the threshold requiring a child
protection investigation are correctly identified. In a small number of cases
seen by inspectors, children had suffered harm prior to the correct action
being taken. Strategy discussions to plan and consider outcomes of child
protection investigations are often poorly conducted and recorded. In many
cases, social workers use information from the referral or gather it via phone
calls to other agencies, then agree actions by phone with the police. In others,
the discussion involved only the social worker and their practice manager.
This is contrary to national guidance and fails to ensure that all key
information is gathered and considered to minimise risk to children. In a small
number of cases seen, failure to include key partners, such as health
professionals, in decisions following the outcome of child protection enquiries
led to conclusions that did not give sufficient weight to important information.


Approximately 50% of frontline social workers have less than two years
experience and just under half of those have been qualified for less than one
year. In some teams, these social workers have caseloads that the local
authority recognises are too high. Inspectors saw social workers with limited
experience undertaking child protection investigations. In one case, the


manager was intending to send a social worker with only six weeks postqualification experience to undertake a child protection investigation. Senior
managers within the local authority did not accept that this was an
inappropriate allocation of work. In another set of cases, youth offending
team social workers with no previous experience of the work were required to
undertake assessments of children where the level of risk was unknown due
to work pressures elsewhere in the system. In a number of cases seen, the
social workers ability to assess risk was limited. Key historical information and
wider factors were not appropriately considered.

The local authority is not able to ensure that records are accurate and has
difficulties in retrieving information from the electronic social care record. It
has particular difficulty in ensuring that social workers maintain up-to-date
chronologies other than in cases before the court. This means that social
workers do not routinely consider history when completing assessments,
which limits the value of the work and can mask patterns and long-term risk.
Inspectors considered practice in over 60 cases with recent child protection
concerns or investigations. In around a fifth of these, inspectors identified that
either processes to safeguard children were not correctly followed or an
inadequate identification of risk potentially left children at risk of harm.


Changes in the way locality teams operate mean all social workers now
undertake the full range of social work from duty through to the conclusion of
care proceedings, including planning for adoption and permanence. This
means that even the most experienced social workers are taking on areas of
work that are new to them. Given the range of expertise that is now required,
there is not enough management oversight or support for less experienced
staff to ensure they can safely manage the cases they are allocated.


In order to improve decision-making in relation to child protection
investigations, an independent reviewing officer must agree with the decision
if an investigation does not proceed to a child protection conference.
However, this does not happen in cases where the requirement for a child
protection investigation was not recognised or in those where the
investigation process has not been correctly followed, leaving a gap in the
additional oversight provided.


An increasing number of children are subject to a child protection
investigation. The authoritys data shows an increase of 27% in the last three
months to July 2015. This has not resulted in a corresponding increase in the
number of children subject to a child protection plan. Based on the authoritys
data, this figure increased by just over 4% in the same period. Due to the
unreliability of the authoritys performance data, it is not possible to be
confident in the accuracy of these figures. The local authority cannot know,
for example if the increase in investigations is due to more taking place or
how they are recorded on the system. The local authority recently audited a
sample of child protection investigations that did not result in children
becoming subject to a plan. It found that in a high number of cases children


had become looked after following the investigation and a plan was not
therefore necessary to safeguard their welfare. A small sample of cases seen
by inspectors replicated these findings.

The quality of assessments is variable, something the local authority
recognises from its own practice audits. Over 50% of assessments seen by
inspectors were not good, as they did not sufficiently consider key risk factors,
especially those arising from domestic abuse or the familys history. In poorquality examples, the analysis did no more than list concerns without
consideration of the context to establish risk and protective factors for an
individual child. As a result, opportunities to reduce or manage risk more
effectively were not identified. In the majority of cases, children are seen and
spoken to alone. However, the resulting assessments did not routinely reflect
their wishes and feelings. Assessments generally give poor consideration to
issues of diversity or culture. The majority are completed without reference to
research or how significant factors impact on the day-to-day lives of children
and families. Some assessments did demonstrate good practice relating to a
specific aspect, such as the inclusion of the father in the assessment or the
recognition of factors suggestive of child sexual exploitation.


The local authority does not routinely set timescales for the completion of
assessments that reflect the complexity of the presenting issues in individual
cases or the childs needs. Instead, a standard timescale of 45 working days is
used. Local authority figures for July 2015 (most recent data available) shows
that performance against this measure differs significantly across offices,
ranging from 76% to 97% being completed within 45 days. In July 2015, 322
assessments had taken over 45 days and were not yet completed. Where
inspectors saw delays, social workers identified pressure of work, high
caseloads and a lack of administrative support as contributory factors to the
poor timeliness of assessments. There are long-standing difficulties in
uploading completed assessments onto the electronic recording system,
though this problem is now reducing from 759 outstanding in September 2014
to 419 in September 2015. In cases seen by inspectors, failure to complete
assessments within a childs timescales did not lead to a delay in providing
services. However, poorer-quality assessments that did not cover the childs
full history or identify all risks led to risk not being managed effectively in over
half of the cases tracked in the inspection.


Social workers told inspectors they feel supported by line managers and
receive regular supervision. Line managers routinely record discussions and
decisions regarding individual cases. While supervision and case records
identify future actions, many give no rationale. As a result, in cases where an
inappropriate decision or action had been taken, it was not possible to identify
what the manager had considered in reaching their conclusions.


When risk is identified, this is frequently managed by making a written
agreement or contract of expectations with the family. This is common
practice in both child protection and child in need cases. For children subject


to a child protection plan and managed under the public law outline, social
workers and managers actively monitored how effective these agreements
were in reducing risk in all but one case seen. However, in cases that have
not yet met this threshold or are considered as child in need cases, this was
not the case. This was of particular concern in cases that featured domestic
abuse, where there is an expectation that the partner, who is the victim, will
be able to oversee the safety of the children without sufficient independent
checking and monitoring of this arrangement by childrens social care. In two
cases seen by inspectors this practice led to one child being left at potential
risk and another suffering harm.

Following the completion of an assessment by a qualified social worker
identifying the child as a child in need, cases transfer to a family support
worker (FSW). FSWs undertake their own child in need reviews and meetings
and update the child in need plan, even when there are risk factors that have
been identified. Inspectors saw six cases where the decision to manage the
case at the child in need rather than child protection level was inappropriate.
Social workers do not monitor the effectiveness of the plans or coordinate the
work of FSWs. Inspectors saw examples of good practice by FSWs in engaging
and supporting families. FSW managers are qualified social workers but do
not adequately monitor the volume and quality of work with children in need
as not all FSWs receive regular supervision. In some cases, inappropriate
decision-making led to cases being stepped down from a child in need case or
closed before all risks and needs had been explored.


The vast majority of written child in need and child protection plans are not
robust enough to support good-quality interventions with children and
families. The local authority has identified through its own case audits the
poor quality of plans as an area for improvement. The planning template on
the electronic recording system used by workers is not child- or family-friendly
and many plans lack timescales for actions. This means that actions have to
be monitored by other means, for example through conference
recommendations or in supervision. Plans do not routinely make it clear to
families what needs to change as opposed to what they need to do. This
makes success in reducing risk difficult to measure. The lack of specific,
measurable, realistic targets in plans limits managers ability to monitor
effectively and take timely action to reduce delay. At the end of a child
protection plan, cases are often stepped down and managed at the child in
need level.


Multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARAC) appropriately consider
cases of high-risk domestic abuse. Police act as the lead coordinating agency
for all meetings across Lancashire. Each district has a consistent chair,
ensuring continuity. The local authority fully participates in conferences
identifying children potentially at risk and intervening to protect them.
However, few direct referrals come from childrens social care, less than 1%
since April 2015.



The local authority, supported by the Local Safeguarding Children Board
(LSCB), has a strong focus on identifying and tackling child sexual
exploitation. A range of actions have been taken to ensure that staff
understand its significance and in the majority of assessments where children
are at risk of or have experienced child sexual exploitation, this is identified
and appropriate action taken to reduce risk. Specialist social workers in
localities provide advice and support to social workers. Work has been
successful in supporting victims. The police commented to inspectors that
some cases would never have resulted in a successful prosecution without the
high-quality support social workers gave children and their families.


Police and childrens social care have identified that referral pathways need
reviewing and strengthening in order to ensure there is a full picture of the
extent of child sexual exploitation in Lancashire. Work has begun to consider
this. Lancashire shares some of its dedicated child sexual exploitation services
with two neighbouring local authorities. Data are collected for the whole police
force area, rather than specifically for Lancashire. However, staff across
agencies on the ground know the local hot spots for child sexual exploitation
and the profiles of the children most at risk.


An experienced designated officer, supported by an experienced social
worker, manages allegations against adults working with children. The
designated officer is co-located with social care and the police, which
enhances communications. Effective management systems track the progress
of all cases from the point of initial consultation, ensuring that actions are
completed promptly. While the number of allegations is high  491 during
referral rate of less than 19 cases per 10,000 of population is well within the
range for North West authorities. Cases seen and discussed with inspectors
demonstrated suitable decision-making.


The authority receives a referral from the police for all children reported
missing from home and has commissioned an independent organisation to
undertake return home interviews. Due to the poor quality of its data, the
local authority relies on police data which includes neighbouring authorities.
The local authority does not therefore have an accurate overview of numbers
of children who go missing or trends within its own area. In the period
September 2014 to March 2015, there were 234 episodes requiring a return
home interview referred to the commissioned service that conducts return
interviews for children not already known to social care. Return interviews
were offered in all these cases. For children known to social care the familys
allocated worker follows up a missing episode. The Head of Service is notified
of all children missing for over 24 hours. While the local authority receives
copies of the completed return home interviews, these are not always shared
with the police. This reduces the polices ability to map this data with other
intelligence to form a clearer picture of where children may be at risk of child
sexual exploitation or exploited in other ways.



The authority has a coherent strategy to monitor children who miss education
(CME). It places children who have not taken up a school place on the CME
list and investigates their whereabouts by contacting a range of agencies,
including other local authorities. At the time of the inspection, the authority
was investigating 62 children who have not taken up their school places. It
had identified and was actively monitoring seven children who were missing
education. During the autumn term 201415, 86 children were missing from
education. The figures for the spring and summer terms were 57 and 75
respectively. In all cases, the authority followed up and monitored to ensure
risks were reduced. In the same year, 56 children moved abroad. The
authority has investigated whether any of the children who moved abroad
were at safeguarding risk and established they were not. However, recording
of the details of these investigations is sometimes incomplete and does not
reflect the quality of the work.


At the time of the inspection, 644 children were home educated. Managers do
not analyse well information about the reasons parents educate their children
at home. This means they are unable to identify and respond to any
significant factors and limits their ability to identify any children with
significant additional needs and offer appropriate support.


The local authority actively considers the risk of radicalisation, and gives
regular briefings to social care staff and other agencies to raise awareness.
The pan-Lancashire Channel panel has been in operation since 2012, with
representation from appropriate agencies. A senior manager from Lancashire
who is the strategic lead for Prevent and child sexual exploitation within the
local authority attends the current Channel panel, which meets bi-monthly.
This ensures effective links and information-sharing between childrens
services and Channel in respect of young people at risk of radicalisation.
Agencies report good partnership working across the area and growing
professional confidence. The LSCB e-safety group has advocated self-review in
schools of the Prevent agenda, and online workshops are available to support
British values in the classroom. The local authority provides good support and
guidance for partners on safeguarding, radicalisation and the Prevent agenda.
Its staff respond well to specific enquiries from partners, for example when
schools need advice on complex radicalisation issues.


The local authority has identified prevention and response to neglect as a
priority, based on an understanding of the level of need within the county and
an unexpected decline in the rate of children subject to a child protection plan
under the category of neglect. From March 2014 to March 2015, this fell from
support professionals and identification of neglect is improving, with an
increasing number of children subject to a child protection plan (from 13 to 15
per 10,000 population) by June 2015. This figure is still below comparable
authorities or England averages.



The authority is working to promote understanding of the impact of domestic
abuse, parental substance misuse and parental mental health. The need for
better recognition of these factors featured in the learning from a recent
serious case review that has been shared with staff. How prevalence
information is collected and used to inform and evaluate service provision
varies, but is at an early stage overall. It is collected for those receiving early
help services and considered when looking at impact. Impact for families
referred to childrens social care is monitored at the individual case level.
Information is collected on the number of cases referred to the MASH (505
out of 3,059 last year) involving domestic abuse but not regarding referrals to
the CART, which handles approximately 1,000 referrals per month. The
prevalence of these issues is not known for open cases but is monitored for
those children subject to a child protection plan. At 31 July 2015, this shows
that of children subject to a plan, 40% have a parent with a substance misuse
problem (alcohol or drugs), 42% have a parent with a mental health problem
and 23% (226 children) have a parent with both. Engagement by services to
support parents with domestic abuse, drug abuse or mental health issues was
good when the need for this was clear within the assessment, with agencies
then attending core groups. This was not the case for assessments seen that
did not sufficiently consider the parents needs; in these cases not all key
agencies regularly attended core groups limiting the impact of the plan.


The authority assesses all 16 and 17-year-olds who present as homeless. In
cases seen, young people who cannot return home are informed of their right
to become looked after and suitable accommodation is found for them. The
authority does not hold general data on the number of 1617-year-olds who
present as homeless, only those who then become accommodated. It is
therefore difficult for the authority to know what the need is and to ensure
that sufficient accommodation is available for these young people. Although
only used as a last resort, in the last 12 months three young people have
been placed in bed and breakfast accommodation. This is not appropriate.


The prevalence of children at risk of female genital mutilation is not yet
understood by the local authority and partner agencies. During the inspection,
work was being undertaken based on the release of health data on 1 October
and other agencies are working to raise awareness among professionals. In
the last 12 months no cases were referred to childrens social care where
female genital mutilation was suspected.


The local authority and the police work together to manage cases of forced
marriage and honour-based violence. In two of the three cases seen by
inspectors, the responses were insufficient, with no acknowledgement that the
young people involved were also children who may be in need of protection.
In both cases, clear risk to the young person was identified in the initial
referral. In one case, the polices actions had protected the young person; in
the second, it was unclear if any action had been taken to consider or reduce
risk.



At the time of the inspection, 32 children were identified as living in private
fostering arrangements across Lancashire. The authority has undertaken a
programme of awareness-raising. However, this figure is low, given the
authoritys size. The local authority is aware it has failed to meet basic
statutory requirements for the majority of children in this highly vulnerable
group. Social workers responsible for these cases lack specialist knowledge.
The quality of the assessments undertaken is acknowledged by the authority
to be variable as they do not always sufficiently consider the carers ability to
meet the childs needs. Appropriate checks on adults in households offering
private fostering were often delayed, leaving children in potentially vulnerable
situations. A specific audit conducted by the local authority identified that
first 12 months 91% of cases were visited within the timescales required
under statutory guidance, after this period the only performance reports
available (which may be inaccurate because of the local authoritys poorquality data) suggested that only 33% of children are visited within
requirements.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Services for looked after children are not yet good. Children do not receive up-todate assessments of their needs to inform their plans and ensure that the work that
is done with them is relevant to their current circumstances. Care plans lack clarity
and detail about childrens arrangements, plans for their future and timescales for
completion of agreed actions. Permanence is not promoted consistently for all looked
after children.
Independent Reviewing Officers (IROs) do not consistently monitor childrens cases
to ensure they are receiving the services they need and that their plans are
progressing as agreed.
Children are seen regularly by their social workers, they are listened to, including
when they complain, and their views are recorded. Placement stability is good but
the authority has not achieved its targets to improve the range of placements and
services in the area to ensure children are in the most suitable placements. When
children go missing they receive timely return interviews and there is a good level of
awareness of the risks they face, including child sexual exploitation.
Looked after children do not achieve well in education. Too many have no personal
education plan and this lack of planning for their education and training continues as
they get older. Access to specialist services, such as child and adolescent mental
health services (CAMHS), also varies across the county but generally takes too long.
Services for children in need of adoption are improving and they receive good-quality
support post-adoption. Many still wait too long for permanence and do not receive
timely help to understand their past experiences. There is a lack of strategic
oversight of adoption. Previous targets, rather than the local authoritys analysis of
current need, inform recruitment of both adopters and foster carers.
Care leavers are too often poorly supported by the local authority. Too many are not
in touch with their support workers. Pathway plans do not ensure that important
aspects of young peoples welfare are promoted. The number of care leavers not in
education, employment or training is too high. The local authoritys understanding of
the experience of care leavers is too limited due to poor data.
Inspection findings


The number of children looked after in Lancashire in March 2015 was 1,610,
which was 66 children per 10,000. This is lower than similar local authorities
(67/10,000) but higher than the national average at 60/10,000. The reasons

for this are not well understood by the authority due to poor local data and
information systems. The councils explanation is that a robust response to
neglect and limited success in returning children to their parents care are
likely to be contributing to the relatively high number of looked after children.

In cases seen by inspectors where the decision to look after the child was
taken recently, this decision was appropriate and timely. However, inspectors
found that too many looked after children did not have an up-to-date
assessment of their needs to inform plans and decisions at any stage. The
local authority has introduced a requirement that looked after childrens
assessments should be updated every year, but monitoring shows that this is
achieved in only 55% of cases. Equality and diversity were not addressed well
in childrens plans and records, a small number even lacking a record of the
childs ethnicity.


Social workers visit children regularly, see them alone where appropriate and
record their views in case files. Managers read childrens files regularly and
record when they have discussed cases, but these records are not used well
to improve planning or to focus and direct the involvement of the social
worker. Too many records are descriptive and lack analysis and direction.


The standard of care planning for looked after children is inconsistent and is
not sufficiently robust. In the majority of cases seen during tracking and
sampling, childrens plans did not contain enough detail. In 10 of 15 cases
looked at in detail by inspectors, care plans were found to require
improvement and this was reflected in further cases sampled during the
inspection. Common concerns identified by inspectors included failure to
specify what needed to be done and by whom and a lack of timescales for
elements of the plan to be completed. Plans were also adversely affected by
the lack of chronologies in childrens case files, which meant that the historical
context of the plan was missing.


The authoritys performance in achieving permanence for children looked after
is too variable. The local authority does not monitor this area of practice as
part of its monthly performance reports and the IRO service does not collect
information on how well permanence is being promoted at childrens review
meetings or through wider monitoring by IROs. The authority has introduced
a panel, chaired by a senior manager, to agree permanence arrangements for
looked after children, but this started during the month of the inspection so it
is not possible to measure its impact. In eight of 18 sampled cases,
opportunities to meet childrens longer-term needs and achieve permanence
through robust care planning were missed.


Lancashire cannot be confident that there is timely consideration of adoption
for all children who are unable to return home to their birth families because
the strategic oversight of the service is not effective. Senior managers are not
easily able to identify or address drift, due to the absence of a centralised
permanence monitoring system to track children from the moment they enter


care until they are adopted. Inspectors saw good practice for some children
but in other cases decisions for a child to become looked after had not been
taken early enough. Independent reviewing officers do not always consider
permanence for children at their second looked after children review.

The local authority promotes and supports special guardianship orders (SGOs)
well as a mechanism for achieving permanence for children. During 201415,
which is considerably higher than the England average at 11% and more than
the number of children in Lancashire who left care as a result of adoption
(16%).


IROs do not monitor childrens cases frequently enough or in sufficient detail.
Inspectors saw evidence of oversight and challenge in some childrens cases
and the authoritys own monitoring shows that there has been more activity in
this area recently: there were 500 IRO recordings in childrens files made in
May 2015. Childrens review meetings were held on time in 97% of cases in
July 2015 but the authoritys performance in this area has fluctuated and the
annual rate for 201415 was 86%. The local authority acknowledges that
IROs caseloads are too high: some IROs in Lancashire hold more than 130
cases compared with the recommended national level of between 50 and 70.
Three IRO posts were vacant at the time of the inspection and the authority
was having difficulty recruiting to them. Overall performance in this service
has improved but is still not meeting the authoritys own targets and
improvement is further hampered by the lack of timely information available
to IRO managers.


Social workers consider placement with family members in appropriate cases.
The consistency and quality of viability assessments has improved as a result
of oversight from the principal social worker. This was confirmed in feedback
from the the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service
(Cafcass) and the courts. Placement with parents and returning children to
their parents care while still looked after are also considered in appropriate
cases. In the eight cases seen by inspectors where children had either
remained with or returned to parents during or following care proceedings,
inspectors found that the placements were appropriate and in line with the
childrens needs. However, in too many cases there was insufficient evidence
that a thorough assessment had been undertaken to inform the decision. All
case files seen included references to home placement agreements (HPA), but
these were not evident in the majority of the files (six out of eight) and the
plan had not been subject to robust enough review. In one case, the IRO
raised a starred recommendation because there had been delay in progressing
the discharge of the care order and the parents had never signed the
agreement. The HPAs which were seen by inspectors (two) were suitably
detailed and informed and supported the plan well.


In three of four sampled cases where children remained with their parents
during court proceedings, inspectors found that social workers had not


completed the authoritys home placement agreement. In all four cases the
agreements had not been subject to robust review.

An effective duty process identifies foster care or childrens home placements
for children who need them, taking into account factors such as the childs
assessed needs, contact, proximity to the childs school and family and the
needs of any other children and young people in the placement. Placement
requests seen during sampling were of variable quality but the majority were
good and the children and young people placed appropriately. In 2014-15, 19
children who the local authority had identified should have been placed
together with brothers or sisters were separated. This represents more than
that the authority does not yet have sufficient placements available to meet all
childrens needs.


The geographical area covered by the local authority is large but it does not
measure its performance in ensuring that children are placed close to their
homes and schools within the county. It cannot be certain how many have
had to change school or are placed at a distance from their family and friends.


Young people who are placed in other local authority areas receive regular
visits and telephone contact from their social workers, and their contact
arrangements and leisure activities are supported. Young people placed out of
area were thriving in their placements, although some had experienced initial
delays in their health or educational needs being met.


Placement stability is promoted well by the authority. Only 9% of children
looked after for 12 months or more moved more than three times in 201415,
compared with 11% for comparable authorities and 11% for England. The
proportion who remained in the same placement for over two years was 73%
compared with 65% and 67% respectively.


Childrens contact with their parents and siblings was considered well and
supported by the local authority in the cases seen by inspectors. Children and
young people were also helped to enjoy a range of interests and activities.
This was confirmed in sampled cases and by foster carers who receive help
and encouragement to support children in their interests and activities and are
also supported to promote and contribute to contact arrangements.


In childrens cases which are subject to court proceedings or to the pre
proceedings process, planning is more timely and thorough than care planning
and practice in other cases. A care planning protocol sets out the process and
timescales to be followed by social workers and managers in these cases. This
supports effective planning and includes prompt completion of assessments to
ensure childrens cases progress through the court process. Data from Cafcass
at the time of the inspection show that timescales for court proceedings were


weeks, this represents significant improvement compared with an average of

The authority has positive relationships with both Cafcass and the courts
based on good levels of communication and cooperation. Cases which come
to court are well prepared and the authority ensures that social work and
other assessments are completed promptly. Communication between the IROs
and Cafcass has improved over recent months so that care planning and court
proceedings are better informed and more aligned. The local authority is
responsive and constructive in its engagement with the courts and local court
users forums.


However, the local authority does not have a mechanism for county-wide
management oversight of cases subject to the Public Law Outline. A panel
which served this purpose and a specific post to ensure these cases were
managed effectively from the outset were discontinued in September 2015.
The authority now records the progress of individual cases but there is no
overall mechanism to co-ordinate and promote consistent standards of
practice, consistent thresholds and timeliness.


According to the local authoritys own unvalidated data it has narrowed the
attainment gap between looked after children and all children in Lancashire. If
the data are accurate, the attainments of looked after children at Key Stage 1
in reading, writing and mathematics at level 2 improved in 201415 from the
previous year by 10 percentage points. The attainment of looked after
children remains 15 percentage points lower than the attainment of all
children in the authority.


The local authoritys own unvalidated data for 2014 indicate that the
proportion of looked after children who attained level 4 at Key Stage 2 in
reading, writing and mathematics combined was low at 49%. This is around


In 201415, 14% of looked after children successfully gaining at least five A*
to C GCSE grades including English and mathematics, which was an
improvement from the previous year. The proportion that succeeds is poor at
over 40 percentage points below the rate for all children in Lancashire.


Local authority figures indicate last years attendance rate for looked after
children at primary school was high at 97% Attendance of secondary school
pupils at 86% is significantly lower and requires improvement. Persistent
absenteeism at 4% in 201314 is marginally below the average rate for
looked after children in England, but is reported by the local authority to be
increasing.


Too many looked after children lack an up-to-date personal education plan
(PEP) The quality of completed PEPs is poor overall. Targets are too broad,
not measurable and do not monitor childrens progress. The head of the


virtual school has introduced a provision map which includes a better set of
educational and attendance targets, but this is not yet in place for all children.
The views of children are often not recorded in the PEPs or provision maps.

Approximately 75% of looked after children attend good or better schools.
The others attend schools which meet their circumstances. For example, they
attend schools close to their foster carers. Around 10% of children (117) are
placed in schools outside the local authority. The authoritys systems for
monitoring the relative performance of children looked after in different
schools are under-developed. As a result, the authority does not know
whether there are any performance gaps.


Virtual school staff monitor the performance of looked after children through a
well-considered risk-based system that identifies some children who are at risk
of poor performance and triggers intervention when low performance is
identified. However, the pace of interventions is not always fast enough. Staff
do not have a reliable system to compare the performance of the looked after
children who study within and outside the authority. The virtual school does
not monitor or support the educational progress of looked after children post16. This is a significant gap in provision.


There are strong indications that as a result of good partnership working,
including a number of social workers being based in schools, the attendance
rates and behaviour of vulnerable children, including looked after children,
have improved. Within the last two years no looked after children have been
permanently excluded from schools, and a smaller proportion of looked after
children have had at least one fixed-term exclusion than similar groups in
England.


All 298 children receiving alternative provision receive effective support from
pupil referral units and are progressing in line with individual targets. The 17
children who receive less than 15 hours of education per week due to physical
or mental health issues, or extreme views, have clear plans to increase their
educational hours.


According to the local authoritys unvalidated data at the time of the
inspection, over three quarters (79%) of looked after children and young
people are placed within the local authority. Plans to make further
improvements to ensure that provision and commissioning offer maximum
choice of placements and the best possible match to childrens assessed
needs have not made sufficient progress. The councils sufficiency strategy is
not supported by accurate and up-to-date information about current and
future needs. In addition, too many targets and deadlines for the
development of the strategy have been missed. This means that children and
young people cannot be satisfied that the authority has worked effectively to
deliver the maximum choice of high-quality placements to meet their needs.



Foster carer and adopter recruitment are not ambitious and targets have been
generated based on the councils estimate of what it can achieve rather than
the level of need. The current target of 75 new foster carers to be recruited in
into account the net loss of 32 foster carers during 201415.


Foster carers spoken to by inspectors are positive about the supervision,
training and support they receive from the local authority. Known information
about children is shared with them before children are placed and they are
fully involved and consulted about childrens plans. This means that they feel
valued. Foster carers are reviewed regularly but some of the reviews seen by
inspectors lacked detail and rigour.


The authority has a number of specialist foster carers who work with young
people with mental health or substance misuse problems or provide mother
and baby placements. These carers also provide help and advice to other
carers. Inspectors saw two cases where mother and baby foster carers had
worked effectively and skilfully to help assess risk, encourage parenting skills
and develop appropriate plans for children.


Looked after children and care leavers are not well informed about their rights
and entitlements. However, through its formal mechanisms, the local authority
ensures looked after children have a voice. There is an active and well
established children in care council (CICC) which is well integrated into the
Corporate Parenting Board. The CICC was instrumental in the design of
consultation documents for looked after children reviews and has contributed
to the recruitment and selection of senior staff in the authority and the
development of a young inspectors scheme.


Looked after children are supported by an advocacy service from an
independent provider. This is available to all children who wish to raise a
specific issue but was previously routinely offered to all looked after children.
Inspectors saw a small number of cases where children had been effectively
supported by an advocate to raise issues that were important to them.


The authoritys promotion of the health of looked after children varies across
the county and is not consistently good. Inspectors found that it was difficult,
and in some cases impossible, to locate health information on childrens case
files even when accompanied by the case-holding social worker. At the time of
the inspection the percentage of children who had received a health
assessment in time was 84% and this improved for children who have been
looked after for 12 months to 89%. Timeliness of dental visits for all looked
after children is 78% and for children looked after for over 12 months declines
to 72%. The rate of up-to-date immunisations for all looked after children is
the three areas in the authority provides trained community paediatricians to
undertake health assessments.



For children who require more specialist help, access to clinical psychologists
and CAMHS varies too widely across the county, which means that where a
child lives affects their access to services. Children in East Lancashire wait on
average less than six weeks between referral to CAMHS and assessment in
comparison with an average of: 30 weeks in Chorley and South Ribble; 22
weeks in West Lancashire; 20 weeks in Preston; 18 weeks in Lancaster and
Morecambe and 16 weeks in Wyre and Fylde. As a result of these historical
problems, the council has developed Supporting Carers and Young People
Together (SCAYT+), a specialist team of two clinical psychologists and 11
specialist workers to promote the emotional health and well-being of looked
after children. In tracked and sampled cases inspectors found that this service
was accessible, timely and valued by staff, parents and carers who benefited
from the support and consultation they received.


Social workers and managers are aware of the potential risks involved when
young people go missing. Children and young people who had been missing
from care were offered return interviews within 72 hours of their return in the
majority of cases seen. However, these interviews were of variable quality and
the authority does not systematically monitor their quality. When young
people go missing repeatedly, their cases are reviewed by managers, which is
positive, but the authority does not collate the information gained to inform
future improvements in practice.


In most cases seen, risks to children and young people from child sexual
exploitation, alcohol and substance misuse were appropriately identified and
relevant help offered. Children have access to a range of services, which
include the SCAYT+ service, CAMHS and commissioned services. Inspectors
saw evidence of the effective use and accessibility of these services in
sampled and tracked cases. If there is no relevant service or a risk of
unreasonable delay, senior managers approve bespoke services from a
devolved budget.

The graded judgment for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement

The number of children adopted has risen significantly over the last three
years, with 121 adoptions in 201415 compared with 85 the previous year.
The data shows that there are fewer children waiting for adoption than a year
ago and the trend for 2015 is set to continue. In 2014, Lancashire had 16% of
children leave care as a result of adoption. This was below the national
average of 17%. A targeted focus on children who had waited a long time for
permanency due to the complexity of their circumstances led to 36 children
placed for adoption or in permanent placements during 201415. The local
authority has not undertaken an analysis of the process, which is a missed
opportunity to identify what lessons could be learned to prevent future delays
for children.



It takes too long for children in Lancashire to move in with an adoptive family
after becoming looked after. The latest published figures (201114) show the
average time between a child entering care and moving in with their adoptive
family was 779 days. Although this was a slight improvement on the figure for
days) and the national target of 547 days. Local, unvalidated, data suggest
that there is an improving trend, with the single-year figure reducing from 875
days in 201213 to 609 days in 201415.


The most recent published data for 201114 showed the average number of
days between receiving court authority to place a child for adoption and the
authority deciding on a match to an adoptive family was 272 days, an increase
of 18 days when compared with the 201013 period (254 days). Local data
for 201215 show a further increase of 17 days to 289. Local year-on-year
data show a slight improvement from 315 days in 201314 to 266 days for
deterioration to 289 days, the in-year performance for children where the
should be placed for adoption decisions have been made since April 2015 is


The proportion of children from Lancashire who wait less than 18 months
between entering care and moving in with their adoptive family is also
improving, from 36% in 201114 to 46% in 201215.


The local authority does not have an up-to-date adoption recruitment strategy
based on the current profile of children needing adoption or an analysis of
predicted need. A planned media campaign aims to recruit 75 adopters, based
on previous recruitment figures. There has been no analysis of or targets set
for the number of placements required for children who need to live with their
brothers and sisters, are older or who have complex needs. The absence of an
effective permanence monitoring system hampers the local authoritys ability
to focus on targeted recruitment to meet the needs of Lancashire children.


Prospective adopter reports (PARs) seen were comprehensive and thorough,
with all relevant checks being completed prior to an assessment commencing.
Effective quality assurance by the agency decision-maker (ADM) and panel
adviser ensures the vast majority of cases have sufficient information for the
panel to make a decision when they are first presented.


Some 20 children have benefited from concurrent placements which have
provided them with continuity during court proceedings and resulted in an
outcome of adoption. A further seven concurrent carers are either at the
assessment or approval stage. Although not quite as advanced, a more recent
focus on fostering to adopt has led to one adoption placement. Training and
preparation sessions now present additional information about fostering to
adopt, in order to stimulate additional interest. This has led to the
commencement of a further three assessments.



Lancashire refers adopters appropriately to the National Adoption Register and
the decision to do so was timely in cases seen by inspectors. Of 34 adopters
without a placement, 32 have potential matches identified. At the time of the
inspection, 48 children with an adoption plan had not yet been matched and
sufficiency of placements remains significantly outstripped by need.


Placement and permanence coordinators offer additional support to social
workers and managers in locality teams to assist with the identification of
children where there could be a potential adoption plan. Family-finding
commences as soon as the case transfers to the Children Awaiting Adoption
Team, following the ADM decision. There is a coordinated use of in-house
placements, a regional consortium, Adoption 22 and voluntary agencies. The
authority has taken part in three adoption activity days. These actions, while
resulting in positive outcomes for some individual children, have not yet
significantly improved performance overall.


The data show a rise in the numbers of sibling groups placed for adoption
together from 15 in 201314 to 19 in 201415 and 11 so far this year.
Formal together or apart assessments are only undertaken, however, when
separation of siblings is being considered. This is a missed opportunity to
ensure that all siblings have their needs met and promoted within their
placements. The quality of the assessments seen was inconsistent, with the
majority not offering an evaluation of childrens individual needs and views.


Child permanence reports (CPRs) are on the whole comprehensive, child
focused and with a detailed understanding of the childs journey. Before
making a decision that children should be placed for adoption, the ADM
robustly considers all alternatives through face-to-face recorded meetings with
the social worker and the local authority legal adviser. These meetings ensure
a thorough exploration of the care planning. Feedback to staff from the ADM
and the panel adviser has assisted in improving the quality of the reports
presented.


IROs appropriately review childrens plans to consider if adoption remains the
right plan for them. When the decision is changed, revocations of placement
orders are given appropriate priority and this is scrutinised effectively by the
ADM. At the time of the inspection 51 children had had their plan changed
and were in various stages of the process of having their placement orders
revoked. Although in a small number of cases seen there was delay in
progressing these plans, the decision to change the plan was appropriate in all
cases.


The Adoption Panel chair is suitably qualified and experienced for the role.
There is a central list of panel members made up of social workers and
independent people. Further work is in progress, to develop the diversity of
the panel and to include the voice of the child. There are three adoption
panels per month, which reflects the significant activity level. Panel minutes
are thorough and produced promptly. They do not always indicate reasons for


delay when assessments do not meet identified time targets, making it
difficult for the service to identify and address any recurring issues.

The adoption panel annual report process does not meet National Minimum
Standards, with only one produced in the last 18 months. The panel has not
formally approved the recently completed 201415 report. The report does
not provide an overview of current practice issues and focuses mainly on data
and performance information from previous years. This limits its usefulness in
driving up performance. The service recognises that this is a deficit that
requires addressing.


Lancashire successfully challenged a courts decision, which led to a legal
finding in relation to the expedient filing of adoption applications where
children are in concurrent placements. It has paved the way for swifter
adoption for children who are already benefiting from concurrency and
demonstrates the local authoritys commitment to challenging barriers to
ensuring adoption is achieved without unnecessary delay.


Previous inspections and reviews have identified life story work as an area for
improvement. Practice remains variable, both in ensuring children receive
sensitive help to understand their pasts at a time that is right for them and in
ensuring they have a life story book. Lancashire has recently targeted a
backlog in providing children with life story books, but at the time of the
inspection 18 children who have already been adopted (some from 2010) still
did not have one. A recently developed tracking system will assist children
with an adoption plan to receive timely life story work and books when this is
an identified need. Looked after children for whom adoption is not the plan do
not yet benefit from the same level of scrutiny. Life story books seen were of
good quality for the most part, although a small number were not sufficiently
personalised to the individual child. Later-life letters were not available on the
files of two out of three recently adopted children. This does not meet the
local authoritys own standards or ensure that children have access to them in
the future.


Post-adoption support is a strength, with 206 families receiving assessment
support packages in 201415. In addition, there are 774 adoptive families
who access the service on an informal basis via support groups, training,
activities and events. A duty system and advice line along with a good range
of support services were highly regarded by the adopters spoken to by
inspectors. The authority has used the post-adoption support fund
appropriately to secure funding for more specialist and bespoke support
packages such as play therapy, psychological assessments and parenting
programmes. The service has good links with the emotional and mental health
service, which offers timely input for adopted children and their families who
need assistance with emotional or behavioural issues. The numbers of
adoption disruptions are low.


The graded judgment about the experience and progress of care leavers is
that it is inadequate

Care leavers spoken to by inspectors lack confidence in the local authority as
a corporate parent. The local authority has not consistently implemented
procedures and policies regarding entitlements. As a result, care leavers see
themselves as subject to arbitrary and inconsistent decisions from social
workers, personal advisors and managers regarding their financial
entitlements, including when these are received. One care leaver said: if
Lancashire is our parent we should all be in care. Care leavers report the
quality and quantity of support offered to them by personal advisors as highly
variable, from very good to minimal, with many personal advisors offering too
little support in achieving independence. Inspectors saw too many cases
which supported this view and where support to care leavers is untimely or
insufficient. There was no evidence in any of 17 care leavers records seen of
a systematic approach to preparation for independence. Where this is referred
to in pathway plans, the need is sometimes noted but without a plan to
address it.


According to data supplied to inspectors, the local authority was not in touch
with 40 care leavers. Some of these are likely to be highly vulnerable. While
some personal advisers make strenuous efforts to establish and maintain
contact with care leavers, too often they do not receive effective support until
they reach crisis point. A commissioned service offering 24/7 support in the
Preston area recently alerted the local authority to the increasing numbers of
young people being evicted due to financial difficulties.


In cases seen, efforts to keep in touch with care leavers who had disengaged
were insufficiently rigorous, often relying on them responding to text
messages from staff whom they had never met. In some cases the local
authority assessed the care leaver as being in touch when in reality this
contact was insufficient to meet the needs of the young person.


In many other cases seen by inspectors, where the care leaver is in contact
with the local authority there is an over-reliance on staff in accommodation
settings fulfilling the role of local authority staff. Inspectors saw examples of a
lack of responsiveness to requests from accommodation providers where care
leavers were having difficulties or needed a personal advisor allocated. The
workload of personal advisers who support care leavers is broad; they have
mixed caseloads, including children in need and child protection. Support staff
and managers reported that this breadth of workload is a barrier to prioritising
the needs of care leavers. Personal advisors and social workers do not always
have the specialist knowledge needed to ensure they record data accurately
or fulfil all of their statutory responsibilities. It is highly unlikely, for example,
that none of the care leavers reported as attending university live in houses of
multiple occupancy. Some young people recorded as not in touch were active


cases to adult services and inspectors saw one case where a worker intended
to close a case of a relevant care leaver contrary to her legal entitlements.

Personal advisors and social workers do not sufficiently engage young people
in drawing up their pathway plans and care leavers spoken to by inspectors
place little value on them. They are too often statements of the care leavers
situation rather than a key tool in planning their future. Plans lack reference to
some key issues for care leavers, such as whether they have a curriculum
vitae. Inspectors saw examples where pathway plans were over-optimistic
about whether care leavers emotional needs were being met. Plans usually
lack timescales. Reviews are not always timely and there is insufficient
rigorous review of the progress of care leavers towards the aims. Personal
advisors carry out some pathway plan reviews which do not benefit from
external independent challenge. Pathway plans are not referred to in
supervision other than that they need completing, so there is insufficient
evidence of managerial oversight of the plan. The local authority has no data
on Pathway plan completion, indicating a lack of focus on ensuring plans for
care leavers progress as they should.


Preparation for independence is unsystematic and dependent on the setting
where the young person is living. Too often, pathway plans do not include
evidence-based analysis of the individual care leavers strengths and areas for
development to achieve independence, such as budgeting. Care leavers
described how plans would often note a problem but not provide a solution.
Inspectors saw examples of plans which exemplified this deficit. Plans for
future moves, for example towards greater independence, are therefore often
not based on thorough analysis of individual needs and strengths.


At the time of the inspection, of 754 care leavers, 11 were homeless, there
were five whose residence was not known, eight were in foyers and one was
in emergency accommodation. There were 24 relevant and former relevant
young people in custody and 18 in other accommodation. According to the
data supplied by the local authority, it places a low number of care leavers in
bed and breakfast accommodation when in need of emergency
accommodation. When the local authority places care leavers in emergency
accommodation there are, in some cases, practice deficits, such as in the
frequency of visits by local authority staff. No risk assessments were seen for
care leavers moving into foyers and other provision where there are older
adults. One case showed a lack of response to reports of threats to, and theft
from, a care leaver in a foyer. When care leavers then move on to long-term
accommodation, they said that they generally felt safe and that, when they
moved in, properties were well maintained.


The authority plans to join a regional collaborative arrangement for care
leaver accommodation in the near future and is aware that the current
arrangements are unsatisfactory. Staying Put agreements are formalised too
late in some cases, including after care leavers have turned 18, causing
unnecessary anxiety and uncertainty for the young person and their carers.


Some foster carers report financial concerns if they enter Staying Put
arrangements and inspectors were told by several sources that this was a
disincentive. Care leavers living in Staying Put arrangements were clearly
benefiting, and their outcomes were good. One care leaver was able to return
to a Staying Put placement when it became apparent that greater
independence was not right at that time. For another care leaver who was
with the same foster carers for six years, and remained with them after 18
through Staying Put, education and leisure progress and outcomes are very
positive.

According to the local authority, 94% of young people in care at 16 go on to
appropriate education, employment and training options. However, of care
leavers aged 1921, only 47% are still in education, employment or training,
which is too low. Based on the local authoritys data, at the time of the
inspection there were 42 care leavers studying in universities and who were
supported with the cost of their education, but the local authority does not
collect data on how many successfully complete their courses each year. The
local authority does not, at this time, have sufficient analysis of the reasons
why so many young people are no longer in education, employment or
training post-19, such as the drop-out rate from further or higher education.
The virtual school does not offer young people any support to remain in or reengage with education or training post-16, which is a vital time of transition
for many young people. The local authority does not keep records of the
numbers of apprenticeships it provides to care leavers or know how many
care leavers it employs. This lack of knowledge and rigour does not
demonstrate committed corporate parenting to young people and can give
them the impression that the local authority does not care what happens to
them after they leave school. Care leavers who do remain in higher education
receive appropriate support with accommodation during vacations.


The local authority does not have the essential up-to-date data it needs
regarding the location and suitability of care leavers accommodation, whether
personal advisors are in touch with them, and whether care leavers are in
education, employment or training. As a result, it cannot measure its
performance nor assure itself that care leavers needs are being met. Data
supplied by the local authority in this inspection showed numerous
inaccuracies and contradictions. For instance, the local authority states that it
does not know the residence of five care leavers but has graded this
accommodation as suitable. Case sampling showed that the local authority
was too often over-optimistic in judging itself in touch with care leavers when
contact was too irregular for the young persons needs. The local authority
does not, on a regular basis, monitor the data that it does have to gain an
overview of the quality of provision. In June 2015, the Corporate Parenting
Board was supplied with some data regarding care leavers but this related to
the period up to September 2014 and so was not timely.


Almost all care leavers are registered with a doctor and most are registered
with a dentist. Where care leavers are not registered with a dentist, there is


insufficient action to promote this. Looked after children nurses have helpfully
negotiated that non-attendance for dental appointments does not result in
immediate strike off by the practice. There are a low number of cases seen
where child sexual exploitation was identified as an issue for care leavers. In
those cases, practice was effective in ensuring young peoples safety.

The local authority addresses the diversity needs of care leavers with complex
health needs well. Transition plans are appropriately structured around a
county-wide pathway, which is implemented in a timely way. Planning was
thorough in cases sampled. The local authority and partners attempt to offer
care leavers accommodation in the areas of Lancashire they identify most
strongly with, but are not always successful due to a limited range of
accommodation in some parts of the county.


The local authority has provided the resources for some much needed service
provision and is intending through new programmes to address key needs
regarding accommodation, employment, education and training. These
programmes are too recent to assess their impact but at this stage show
evidence of good multi-agency working.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Leadership, management and governance are inadequate. Senior leaders have failed
to take effective action to address weaknesses in systems and social work practice.
This has led to shortfalls in services to vulnerable children and left some children and
young people at risk. An inspection of safeguarding and looked after children in 2012
judged services to be good with some outstanding features. Since then, the standard
of service has declined in all areas. Senior leaders have not been successful in
maintaining the quality of services to children through periods of planned change
and have failed to address shortfalls effectively where these have been identified.
Elected members and senior managers in the local authority have not rigorously
challenged the poor performance management information they receive. Longstanding issues with data reliability have not yet been sufficiently addressed for them
to be confident they have an accurate understanding of the services strengths and
weaknesses or to assure themselves children are safe. This lack of accurate data,
combined with an absence of target-setting or rigorous analysis, means that the local
authority does not fully understand its current performance and does not clearly
communicate expectations of practice to staff. Senior leaders have not analysed
findings from the local authoritys audit activity effectively or developed clear plans to
drive improvement.
Many staff undertaking complex work are newly qualified or have limited experience.
Social workers feel supported by their line managers and receive regular supervision,
but management oversight of casework is not effective in ensuring continuous
improvement.
Senior leaders have failed to effectively scrutinise the provision for significant groups
of vulnerable children. Children in need are not subject to sufficiently robust
management oversight by qualified social work staff to ensure risk is identified and
addressed. Care leavers do not consistently have access to support from staff with
sufficient knowledge and experience, creating variability in the quality of service they
receive.
The local authority has formed effective working relationships with partners on
strategic boards, including the Local Safeguarding Children Board, Childrens Trust,
and Health and Wellbeing Board. Childrens needs are duly considered and priorities
across boards are appropriate and well aligned.
Participation of young people in a wide range of strategic and quality assurance
activities is a strength.


Inspection findings

Senior leaders of childrens social care in Lancashire have not provided the
service with sufficiently clear or robust leadership following a period of
planned and significant change. They have not addressed deficiencies in a
new electronic record system introduced in February 2014 that required
significant additional inputting for staff. They did not ensure that all staff have
the required skills to cover a generic caseload prior to the restructuring of
social work teams in April 2015 or fully risk-assess any potential impact of the
restructure. They have failed to understand fully the subsequent negative
effects on the quality of service provided to children and young people. As a
result, they have not ensured that the service delivered to children remains
consistently safe and effective. Despite a wide range of activity by senior
leaders to engage with staff, most workers in teams were unclear about the
leadership structure beyond their locality area.


Key areas of the social work service delivered to children and young people
are not subject to sufficient oversight by senior leaders to ensure the effective
management of risk and assurance of quality. The arrangement for children in
need to be allocated to support workers has not been supported by robust
and effective arrangements to ensure oversight by qualified social workers or
front-line managers and no regular scrutiny is undertaken by senior managers
or leaders. As a result, inspectors saw many children in need who had
ineffective care planning, with little oversight from qualified practitioners,
which led in some cases to insufficient recognition and assessment of risk.
The impact of decisions to allocate all care leavers to the same support
workers across localities has also not been understood or addressed
sufficiently by senior managers and has resulted in delivery of a poor-quality
service to this group of young people. The local authority has commissioned
an external agency to evaluate outcomes of current service delivery and
identify any efficiencies. This work had not started at the time of the
inspection.


The lack of effective and systematic performance monitoring is a significant
weakness in Lancashire. The quality of performance information is poor as a
result of the lack of accurate data contained within the electronic system. The
performance information provided to inspectors was in many cases incomplete
and inaccurate. Senior leaders were aware of the data problems but have not
responded robustly enough to ensure they can manage services effectively.
Despite on-going work since the implementation of the new system in
February 2014, the issue has not yet been resolved.


The scrutiny and challenge undertaken by senior and political leaders are
limited by the poor information they receive. They have not effectively
ensured they have all the information they need to formulate an accurate
understanding of the childrens social work service or to enable them to
assure themselves that children are safe. In the data they consider
Lancashires performance is compared with some national and regional


indicators, but the local authority does not set itself targets. It does not
routinely analyse data to identify risk, nor includes commentaries that assist
effective challenge and inform improvement.

Leaders supplement the data they receive by collecting soft information
through an open door policy, walking the floor, observations of practice and
staff forums. While this information is important, it is not sufficient in itself.
Middle and front-line managers have developed their own individual systems
for monitoring performance in their locality. Although this enables some local
management of performance, it does not compensate for the overall lack of
accurate corporate data.


Lancashire completes substantial amounts of audit as part of its performance
management framework, with over 600 children having their cases considered
over the last 12 months. This is effective at identifying aspects of front-line
social work practice that do not meet the required standards or require further
improvement but does not analyse the impact of the poor practice seen nor
consider sufficiently the risk this presents to children and young people.


Some poorer practice seen during inspection had also been identified through
these audits. This had not resulted in clear action plans to drive improvement
in the quality of the service that children and young people receive. While
some learning from audits is communicated to staff through regular briefings
provided to locality managers, this has not yet been effective in driving up
performance. Presentation of the findings from audit work is not sufficiently
clear or detailed, with judgements about good and adequate work often
combined, preventing easy identification of practice where little evidence of
good has been seen. This grading system sets too low a benchmark and is
not congruent with the local authoritys aspiration to ensure all children
receive a consistently good service.


Many of the deficits in practice identified in the local authoritys audits and
seen in this inspection, such as poor-quality planning or lack of consideration
of history, are not included as areas for improvement in the local authoritys
self-assessment. As a stand-alone document, the self-assessment does not
show that the local authority clearly understands its performance or that
senior managers are sufficiently focused on all areas of concern.


The local authority has appropriate arrangements to discharge its statutory
responsibilities. The roles of Director of Childrens Services (DCS) and Deputy
DCS are within the newly formed Startwell service, which brings together a
range of childrens services including social work, education and preventative
and early help provision. The DCS and deputy regularly attend strategic
groups such as the Local Safeguarding Children Board, Health and Wellbeing
Board, Childrens Trust and Corporate Parenting Board. They have effective
working relationships with partners on these boards, which are well aligned in
their strategic priorities.



The county council Childrens Trust, revised in late 2014, has effective links
with other strategic bodies, and appropriate representation from all partner
agencies and the Local Safeguarding Children Board. The Childrens Trust is
the overarching board for the five local partnership boards that operate within
Lancashire. The local boards provide an effective structure for partners to
consider the priorities of the Children and Young Peoples Plan and how these
relate to young people in their area. Since being formed approximately 12
months ago, local boards have established effective membership and have
developed action plans to identify and respond to the needs of young people
in their area, although it is as yet too early for them to demonstrate the
impact of their work.


The Health and WellBeing Board (HWB) has gone through a period of
significant review and development over the last 12 months, resulting in
improvements in its ability to act as an effective strategic forum. Development
sessions during early 2015 led to a revision of the terms of reference,
membership and governance arrangements, in addition to the leader of the
council taking over as chair of the Board. The chair of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board has also joined the HWB, as has the Corporate Director, and
these partnerships are proving effective in supporting change and
improvement. Changes were in recognition of the challenges faced by the
Board in eliciting full engagement by key partners to ensure sufficient impact
and progress of the work required. At the time of the inspection, the Board
was in the middle of a review of the provision of emotional health and wellbeing services in response to feedback from young people. Outcomes from
the review, to be implemented in April 2016, will include changes to
commissioning arrangements for these services based on an improved
understanding of need.


The local authority has knowledge of local communities via the information
gathered and collated in the online Joint Strategic Needs Analysis (JSNA)and a
good range of general data informs commissioning of services well. Where
this information is not sufficiently detailed, additional work, including
consultation with young people, is undertaken. Priorities for current
commissioning, such as placements for looked after children and care leavers,
emotional health and well-being and the provision of advocacy, reflect key
issues identified by young people.


The lead member for childrens services is experienced and committed and
demonstrated a sound understanding of progress against current priorities,
including radicalisation and child sexual exploitation. He exercises his
challenge function robustly within the limitations of the accuracy of the
information he receives. He holds the DCS, Local Safeguarding Children Board
chair, Corporate Director and Chief Executive to account through regular oneto-one meetings and group performance meetings, which consider data and
findings of case audit activity of front-line practice.



Scrutiny by the wider political leadership of childrens social work that does
not fall under the remit of the health or education scrutiny committees, takes
place as part of the much broader agenda of the bi-monthly scrutiny
committee. There are no arrangements for regular reporting of childrens
social care issues to the committee and, as a result of the wide-ranging remit,
an item relating to childrens social work is discussed only four times per year.


Political leaders demonstrate commitment to their role as corporate parents
and display knowledge and understanding of the needs of young people
looked after and the issues that are significant to them. Representation of
young people is a strength in the Corporate Parenting Board and minutes
clearly demonstrated their participation and engagement. The Board is limited
in its ability to scrutinise key areas of performance, such as the completion of
personal education plans, by a lack of robust performance information. The
Board has challenged the local authority in respect of some issues, but these
are often verbal discussions and a lack of robust recording does not support
further monitoring of any progress made.


Practice standards published in June 2015 are not widely understood and have
not yet resulted in consistent quality of practice. As a result, the quality of
social work practice experienced by children is too variable and widespread
weaknesses exist in some areas. Many staff feel well supported by their line
managers through informal conversations and report easy access to senior
managers and the head of service. Management oversight of front-line
practice through case discussion and formal supervision is often present on
childrens files but is not of sufficient quality to be effective in ensuring the
meeting of these standards or in demonstrating any continuous improvement.


The local authority has a detailed supervision policy that sets out clearly the
purpose and content of effective supervision, including the requirement for
reflective practice. Inspectors review of supervision found huge variations in
frequency from regular recorded monthly meetings for some staff to support
workers holding caseloads of child in need work who had not had formal
supervision for up to four months. Where supervision had taken place, the
quality of records seen was not consistently good. Despite some audit work
taking place and senior managers being aware that supervision was
inconsistent, there has not been any systematic evaluation of supervision
across the county nor of its impact on practice.


The local authority has not analysed the impact of the current workforce
profile on the quality of services provided for children and young people. The
local authority recognises staff retention as an issue, exacerbated by the
restructure in April 2015 when a number of vacancies were created due to
internal promotion. As a result, the local authority has recruited large numbers
of newly qualified social workers (NQSW). At the time of the inspection, over
years. This group of staff sometimes undertakes complex child protection
work and often holds higher caseloads than the local authority considers


appropriate. The local authority has failed in some cases to meet national
standards in the supervision of social workers during their assessed and
supported year in employment (ASYE). Senior managers, while acknowledging
these issues, have not yet taken authoritative action to address them. A
recently developed recruitment and retention strategy includes staff feedback
regarding work-life balance but does not evaluate or address other concerns.


An appropriate range of training is available to staff in childrens social work
and the training plan for the year is easily accessible to all staff. Social
workers in Lancashire receive some induction support during their ASYE and
have access to appropriate training. However, the local authority has no
written policy in relation to the support offered to newly qualified social
workers who are part of the ASYE programme in childrens social care. As a
result, new workers are not clear about the support they can expect, and
there is variation in support across locality areas. The local authority does not
evaluate attendance or impact of training attended to inform its effectiveness.

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good

Executive summary
Lancashire Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is meeting its statutory
responsibilities and has formed clear protocols and shared priorities across all
strategic partnership. Working relationships and cooperation across the partnership
are strong with appropriate focus on children and families.
The Board is influential and has initiated a programme of improvements in key areas
of safeguarding and child protection, for example early help, children missing from
home and care, and children at risk of sexual exploitation.
The Board engages in a variety of meaningful ways with children and young people
to enable their views and opinions to influence and shape priorities and
improvements. It prioritises the needs of looked after children and is working jointly
with the Corporate Parenting Board to improve the quality of placements across the
area. It has challenged partners and can demonstrate its impact in a number of
important areas for children and families
The multi-agency training programme is diverse, well evaluated and is starting to be
measured for its impact on frontline practice.
The Board facilitates a comprehensive multi-agency auditing programme to test the
quality of practice and services to inform improvements. Audits have examined
thresholds for early help but have not yet focused on testing out that thresholds
have been appropriately applied at every stage in the childs journey.
The Board has identified female genital mutilation as a priority in the business plan.
A lack of information about prevalence makes it difficult for the Board to effectively
hold agencies to account for the safeguarding of children and young women who are
at risk of or have experienced female genital mutilation.
The Boards annual report does not include findings from its analysis of changing
patterns and trends in child protection categories. This is a missed opportunity to
share what has been learnt across the wider partnership and with the public.


Recommendations

The LSCB should analyse and report on the prevalence of female genital
mutilation to hold agencies to account for their practice in protecting girls at
risk or in need of services (paragraph 160).


Ensure the LSCB annual report fully reflects the analysis and conclusions the
Board has reached, particularly any changing trends in the categories of child
protection plans, and what this means for understanding the effectiveness of
performance and the quality of frontline practice (paragraph 163).


The LSCB should further support and challenge the local authority in making
the necessary improvements to its help and protection provision and its
services to care leavers (paragraphs 139, 146 149,150,158,159).


The LSCB should take action extend its understanding of the application of
thresholds beyond early help to every stage of the childs journey (paragraph

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

Lancashire Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is meeting its statutory
responsibilities and has agreed clear protocols with all key strategic boards
with responsibilities for children and families. These set out cross-board
memberships, information-sharing and reporting arrangements on the agreed
shared priorities to safeguard children.


The LSCB is chaired by an independent chair that is well respected by partner
agencies in Lancashire, and is well- supported by effective business
arrangements. The interim business manager ensures the business of the
Board runs effectively. Partners at all levels consistently report strong
leadership from the Board, with positive but appropriately challenging working
relationships. The focus is to improve the quality of services and the
experience for children and families.


Board members are of appropriate levels of seniority in their organisations to
influence change, for example they agreed compulsory child sexual
exploitation training for all those working with or in direct contact with
children and families across the workforce.


The independent chair has been influential during her term from March 2014,
and has led the Board in a number of areas that benefit children and families.
The Board has given strong challenge to shortfalls in responses to childrens
health needs. It has influenced actions to reform mental health services for
children in response to suicide rates. It has robustly challenged the slow pace
of these reforms increasing progress. The Board has challenged health
partners about the poor timeliness of health assessments for looked after
children and ensured key posts such as health professionals and qualified


social workers are located within the MASH. Presentation of the Boards
diagnostic of child sexual exploitation to the police and crime commissioner
resulted in the offer of interim funding to source therapeutic support for
children who are victims of sexual exploitation. The chair also ensured that
the Board considered the impact of organisational restructure of the local
authority on safeguarding and other front-line practice.The Board, supported
by the chairs leadership, has robustly challenged the shortfall in the number
of children with personal education plans and monitored the number of cases
held by front-line practitioners. All challenges made have been based on the
best information available, robust, frank, open and persistent.

The recent annual report for April 201415 reports some slippage in
attendance during the restructuring of services, and there has been challenge
from the chair to improve this to the very few agencies involved. Attendance
this year has improved and is closely monitored to ensure it is sustained. The
appointment of lay members is underway, resulting in a period with no
independent lay perspective on the Board. The financial arrangements are
agreed and sufficient to progress business priorities.


The LSCBs priorities are in line with local needs and progressed through wellestablished sub groups with clear terms of reference, action plans and
reporting arrangements. Partners share responsibilities for lead roles although
consistent representation from schools and colleges is a shortfall. The e-safety
sub-group, in conjunction with young people, has introduced some innovative
practices to combat the challenges of online risks.


The Board has led on a range of key safeguarding areas as a result of
identifying responses for children that are not good enough. These are early
help, child sexual exploitation and missing children. The Board has undertaken
detailed reviews of arrangements and formed action plans that challenge all
responsible agencies to improve. Reviewing progress sits with sub-groups with
regular reporting arrangements. A review of the strategic and operational
arrangements for the investigation and prevention of child sexual exploitation
across Lancashire has been undertaken in conjunction with neighbouring
Boards. This is in response to learning from influential reports on practice
such as the Jay report on safeguarding practices in Rotherham. The Board has
received written responses from all the relevant agencies on the progress they
are making against the action plan. The chair of the Board also chairs the
pan-Lancashire child sexual exploitation sub-group to further facilitate the
improvements and consistency across the three local authorities.


In 2014 the Board challenged partners to improve the early help support that
children and families receive as a result of findings from a Board-led
comprehensive thematic inspection that effectively identified the scope of
necessary reform. The oversight and monitoring of early help and the
progress with reform sits with the Childrens Trust boards with oversight by
the LSCB. The local authority lead for early help reports progress and shares
performance information through the monthly quality assurance sub-group.


The Board had challenged the delay in implementing the improved common
assessment framework in 2013. According to the Boards figures, this is now
having an impact, with the number of children and families receiving
assessments and support for early help increasing by 50%. The multi-agency
early help scorecard developed as a result of findings from the inspection is in
the early stages of development and the Board will receive the first quarterly
report by March 2016.

The Board focuses on children looked after and there are a number of areas
of activity. It has completed an audit to understand better the experiences
and equity for children placed by other local authorities in Lancashire. This
was completed at the time of the inspection and its findings were due to be
reported at the next Board meeting. Of particular concern is the quality of
arrangements for other local authorities to visit their children after episodes of
going missing. As a result of the audit, the Board is using its influence to
ensure providers include details of how return interviews will be conducted as
part of placement agreements for young people placed in Lancashire out of
their home area. It is the intention to repeat this audit for Lancashire children
placed in other areas.


The Board is actively engaging with the private sector and has facilitated a
conference for independent providers to discuss safeguarding, including their
responsibilities for children looked after under the local missing from care and
child sexual exploitation procedures. The Board has developed, in partnership
with the Corporate Parenting Board, arrangements to engage and challenge
providers to improve the quality of their care. This is in the early stages, with
one pilot panel undertaken. Children looked after are part of the panel and
can form and ask questions of the independent sector representatives based
on their own experiences.


The Board, through the learning and development sub-group, facilitates a
varied programme of training and e-learning in line with priorities and local
needs. There is a diverse pool of trainers from different disciplines,
demonstrating partners commitment to ensuring good quality training that is
specific to Lancashire. The Board routinely evaluates training for its
effectiveness, including external scrutiny. Responsible managers are asked to
evaluate the impact of training on staff after three months. There are some
positive examples of impact, such as a practitioner recognising disguised
parental compliance and changing the approach to the case, and another
reporting more confidence in working with drug-using parents.


The Board values the contributions of young people and is creative in
engaging with young people in as many areas as possible. Young people are
involved in multi-agency mock inspections and report on the quality of
childrens homes. Young advisors facilitate e-safety training in primary
schools, which has led to very positive feedback from the children and young
people and they are involved in selecting and recruiting social work staff.
Other examples of how young people have influenced developments include


supporting and facilitating sessions at conferences for professionals; children
looked after presented the Corporate Parenting Board annual report to the
LSCB; and young people contributed to training and developing guidance to
improve responses to child sexual exploitation and e-safety initiatives. The
Board has formed partnership arrangements with two neighbouring Local
Safeguarding Children Boards to develop and maintain consistent policies and
procedures. Good arrangements ensure timely reviews and updates to
procedures in response to national and local changes and to incorporate
learning from a wide range of activities. This includes local and national
serious case reviews (SCRs) and recommendations from the Child Death
Review Panel (CDOP). Action plans clearly track the progress of updates and
these are completed promptly.

There are effective arrangements for ensuring consideration of lessons to be
learned from the deaths of children (CDOP) and SCRs, which are shared with
two neighbouring authorities.


The LSCB, through the SCR sub-group, makes timely recommendations to
initiate serious case reviews. The rationale for recommendations is clearly
recorded and in line with the criteria. Opportunities to learn from cases that
do not progress to formal review are initiated through management reviews.
All activity is focused on facilitating learning and making a difference to the
experiences of children. The Board circulates regular learning briefings across
the partnership, though a small number of the social workers spoken to by
inspectors were not able to make a link between the learning and their own
practice.


The CDOP sub-group has effective rapid response protocols and is able to
draw on specialist expertise to inform its recommendations. Themes and
trends, including lessons from other areas, are scrutinised to consider how to
reduce deaths. For example, CDOP undertook a review to determine themes
from an increase in suicides for young people. This led to a review of health
pathways through the Health and Wellbeing Board. There are close links with
the SCR sub-group, with the chair a member of CDOP. There are examples of
both groups communicating and testing each others recommendations.


The Board oversees an extensive auditing programme, which has been
increased to both mitigate the shortfalls in performance data and better
understand themes identified in SCRs, thematic inspections or multi-agency
mock inspections of districts. The audits identify areas where practice is not
good enough, for example the quality and analysis in assessments and lack of
supervision. The Board has persistently challenged the areas where there are
shortfalls in data and is routinely robustly monitoring the progress to improve
intelligence and consistently understand prevalence and patterns at a strategic
level. Front-line practitioners are not sufficiently involved in all aspects of audit
activity undertaken. The Board is aware of this and is considering how it could
increase their involvement in multi-agency mock inspections.



The Board has published a clear threshold guidance known as the Continuum
of Need and tests out the application of thresholds through all auditing and
mock inspection activity. The findings of a sample of audits undertaken during
the business year 2014-15 reported that in the majority of cases thresholds
were well understood. The more recent child sexual exploitation diagnostic
has identified some inconsistency across districts with applying thresholds for
children experiencing or at risk of child sexual exploitation. The Board has
challenged all services through the robust child sexual exploitation action plan.
Some immediate actions were taken to secure key posts in teams and ensure
risk assessments were completed by qualified workers. There has as yet been
less focus on testing thresholds across the childs journey, for example at the
point of becoming looked after or when a permanence plan is agreed.


The Board identifies female genital mutilation as a priority in the business
plan. The prevalence of female genital mutilation is not well understood
across all agencies, with very little intelligence known or shared. The Board
has facilitated a female genital mutilation conference, facilitated training and
produced a briefing for all agencies. A strategic group chaired by the police
representative is responsible for progress with the action plan.


The LSCB publishes a timely report on progress against the key priorities. A
lack of quality performance data has hampered the Boards oversight,
particularly for early help, child sexual exploitation and return home
interviews. The Board has continually challenged the position and identified
areas to improve over the last year in all the key areas within its
responsibilities.


A task and finish group is progressing actions to improve data quality and the
ability to share the multi-agency data and intelligence for missing children.
This is to support the reliable data from the police. The Board requests
specific reports from each organisation to mitigate poor quality data, which
results in agencies presenting more accurate information to the Board, but
this is not yet sufficient. The shortfalls have been identified and improvements
are underway, but it is too early for accurate and comparable analysis to be
available for the Board in respect of these areas.


The Board has analysed the reasons for changing patterns and trends in child
protection categories, for example the number of plans for emotional harm is
now higher than plans for neglect. The annual report does not reflect this
analysis, which is a missed opportunity to share the Boards understanding of
trends and changing needs across the partnership and with the public.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 12 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Shirley Bailey
Deputy lead inspector: Paula Thomson- Jones
Team inspectors: Simone White, Ali Mekki, Cath McEvoy, Dick OBrien, Lisa
Summers, Judith Nelson, Fiona Parker, Gary Lamb, Shahram Safavi, Tony Gallagher
Senior data analyst: Hywel Benbow
Quality assurance manager: Simon Rushall


The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.

If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


