Manchester City Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 25 June 2014  16 July 2014
Report published: 01 September 2014
The overall judgement is that childrens services are
inadequate.2
The authority is not yet delivering good protection, help or care for children, young
people and families. It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and
young people receive good help, care and protection.
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Inadequate


Requires
improvement


Inadequate


Requires
improvement


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


The LSCBs strengths


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about the inspection and the review



The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Manchester are inadequate because:

Inspectors found a large number of cases (486) that had waited a
considerable time for a social work assessment, resulting in a significant
number of children not having been seen or their needs assessed or
recorded. This potentially left children at risk. The authority was aware of
this issue but had taken insufficient action to address the problem.


Quality assurance and management oversight is not robust. It has been
ineffective in dealing with serious drift in the completion of assessments.


Across all social work services, high social work caseloads mean that staff
are often unable to prioritise and address childrens needs effectively. This
means that some children and families are not receiving good quality or
timely services. Children and families have experienced too many changes
of social worker, making it difficult to effect change. These weaknesses
were identified at the last full inspection in 2010.


Poor understanding of thresholds by some of the statutory partners,
together with poor engagement of agencies in early help, are contributing
to high demand, which is not being effectively addressed.


Independent Reviewing Officers and conference chairs do not challenge
poor social work practice effectively. Some conferences and reviews do not
receive social work reports and the allocated worker does not attend. These
meetings, and consequently the outcomes, are compromised as a result.


Too many children, particularly Black ethnic minority children, are waiting to
be adopted in Manchester. Some children have not been adopted despite a
plan for adoption. The pace of improvement in this service is too slow.


figure rises to 52% of secondary school children looked after in Manchester
and means that their future outcomes are likely to be adversely affected.


The adoption panel and agency decision makers do not challenge poor work
effectively and fail to ensure that necessary amendments to work are made,
resulting in compromised decision making.


The local authority was unable to provide accurate data in relation to the
number of care leavers in employment, education or training during the
inspection. Data gathered did not support the local authoritys view that
there has been an improvement in performance in 201314.

embedded, meaning that the local authority does not learn effectively from


these episodes.

What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Workforce
to ensure that caseloads are manageable and that staff have sufficient time
to plan and action their work. Ensure that there is a sufficient number of
suitably experienced and qualified staff to deal effectively with current
demand.

Quality of practice
both first tier and senior management level, to ensure that children and
families are seen and risks evaluated in a timescale that meets need. Ensure
timeliness in completing assessments by reviewing at set points to ensure
that children are seen promptly and that all work is recorded to an
appropriate standard.
after children reviews and other relevant meetings and provides a report that
allows parents and carers and young people sufficient time to see,
understand and comment on the report.

Children who are looked after
made and the reasons for those decisions.
conducted by an independent person in accordance with statutory guidance.
and the role of the adoption panel in quality assurance.
Areas for improvement

Quality of practice
with their social workers.
understanding of the importance of accurate and timely recording is
understood across the workforce to ensure that decision making is based on
all available information.


services, including children with complex needs, to ensure that it is carried
out in a timescale that meets the needs of the young people and their
carers.
attainment, particularly at secondary level, in order to close the gap between
their performance and that of all children locally and nationally, ensuring that
all looked after children have up-to-date and high quality personal education
plans (PEPs).
employment, education and training.
complaints.

The provision of help
and coordinated effectively, so that families receive support when need is
first identified and the number of referrals to childrens social care are
reduced as a result.
troubled families programme through family intervention and the new
children in need service, to ensure that help and support for families who
struggle are timely and effective.
a timely and appropriate response in line with demand.

Services for looked after children and care leavers
outside the city, to ensure that their voices are heard and they are able to
collectively influence decisions and policy.
improve engagement with higher education and outcomes for care leavers.
particularly in relation to listening to the views of children, the rigour of
challenge that is given to care plans and the process of escalation where
there are continuing concerns about practice and progress of plans.


mismatch of carers available to children waiting, particularly to meet the
needs of Black ethnic minority children.
use of voluntary adoption agencies.

Management and leadership
sufficient management oversight on all cases, and that social work staff are
receiving appropriate support, including time for reflection and help in
achieving timescales and planning progression.
information to ensure that the most up-to-date data are available across
childrens social care and are used to drive service improvements across all
areas.


The local authoritys strengths
enhance with its partners early help services across Manchester in order to
be able to help solve problems and prevent dependency at an early stage for
children and families.
stable, and it has a workforce strategy that has delivered some
improvements in staff turnover and reduced the use of agency staff.
placements close to where they lived.
young people to go through care proceedings.
with their foster parents, and many do so.
through the use of a free leisure pass, enabling them to develop skills and
friendships in activities outside school.
front-line social work services and additional funding to address the
overspend resulting from the rising cost of placements for children.
improvements to reduce the volume of work entering social care and to
closer front-line partnership work between agencies to ensure that families
and children get the right services at the right time.


Progress since the last inspection
Since this time, there have been improvements in some areas, but overall,
the standard of practice and management oversight has resulted in a
reduction in the quality of social work services to children and young people.
arise. The troubled families service has worked with almost 3,000 families,
and there is some evidence that parents and children value this help and
that it is making a difference to their lives.
and, where such action has been taken, there is evidence of impact in
addressing weaknesses. For example, a workforce strategy has been
developed and progress has been made in significantly reducing reliance on
agency staff. Cafcass has reported improvement in the assessments for court
and notable improvement over the last year in the quality of evidence
presented at court, which they now report to be good.
provision from residential to foster care. There are some recent examples of
innovative approaches, such as use of the Social Impact Bond to develop the
multi-dimensional foster care team to support young people with complex
needs to move from residential care into foster placements.
quality of health assessments of looked after children and improvements in
ensuring that the voice of the child is recorded. The local authority is
encouraging young people to have a greater say in their reviews by
introducing joint chairing. Some 120 young people have participated in this
way over the last year.
proportion of children whose carers have a special guardianship order has
increased from 7% to 11% in 201213.
in practice. Front-line social work posts have been protected from budget
cuts and funding has been provided to meet the rising spend on placements
for children in care and to develop services for children in care and on the
edge of care.
issues; for example offering appropriate scrutiny, including a task and finish
group to monitor the progress of each young person moving out of
residential accommodation into foster care as a result of the integrated
looked after children strategy. There are well established links between the
Corporate Parenting Panel and Care to Change Council.


Summary for children and young people

 When children and families have problems, it sometimes takes too
long to give them help. This means that some children and their
families have to ask for help too many times. For some, this means
that their problems have become worse before they get the help
they need.
 Your social worker may change, and this means that you might have
to keep telling your story, which can be difficult. Your social worker
may have too much work to do, and this means that you and your
family may not get the help you need quickly.
 If your family cannot look after you and you are being cared for by
Manchester City Council, they will make plans for your future and
will ask you for your views. For a lot of children and young people
this means that the right decisions are made at the right time about
where you will live and who you live with. The time it takes to make
those decisions is getting shorter, but for some young people who
need to be adopted, the time they wait for this to happen is still too
long.
 Too many young people in care from Manchester do not go to a
school that is good or better. It is important that you get the best
education possible, and the council needs to make sure that you do
as well as you can at school. At the moment, young people in care
at secondary school do not do as well as they should.
 When you are leaving care at 18 it is important that you are able to
be in education, training or employment. Manchester City Council
tries to help you to do this, but too many young people are not
getting this opportunity and the council needs to provide more help
to ensure that young people are supported into work.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area
 this is 21.5% of the total population in the area (source: data annex table
table 2.5.2.)
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 35.4% (the national average is 18.1%) (source: data
annex table 2.8.1)
 in secondary schools is 33.8% (the national average is 15.1%) (source: data
annex table 2.8.2).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 49.3% of all
children living in the area compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole
(source: data annex table 2.2.1).
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British: 22%; and Black or Black British: 13.1% (source: data
annex table 2.2.1).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 37.8% (the national average is 18.1%) (source: data
annex table 2.3.1)
 in secondary schools is 31.2% (the national average is 13.6%) (source: data
annex table).
 Additional contextual statement: Manchesters child population has been growing
by around 2% annually over the last decade. The growth in Manchesters child
population has, however, not been equally spread across the age groups: the 0
to 4 age band has risen substantially in number almost 11,882 children or 46%
between 2001 and 2013.
Child protection in this area
 Provisionally at 31 March 2014, 5,349 children had been identified through
assessment as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an
increase from 5,263 at 31 March 2013 (source: data annex table 5.3.51).
 At 31 March 2014, 920 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 736 at 31 March 2013 (source: data
annex table 5.3.47).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 At 31 March 2014, 29 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from 24 at 31 March 2013 (source: data annex table 5.3.61).
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 1,373 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 122 per 10,000 children, which is an increase from 1,302 (119 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2013 (in June 2014, this had risen to 1,406 children 128
per 10,000) (source: data annex tables 5.2.1 and 5.2.2).
 Of this number:
area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 63 adoptions
returned to be looked after
to independent living
living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. Three were judged to be good
or outstanding and two as adequate in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Manchesters safeguarding arrangements was in
December 2010. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of Manchesters services for looked after children was in
December 2010. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of Manchesters fostering service was in March 2013. The
local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of Manchesters adoption service was in April 2011. The
local authority was judged to be good.


Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since April 2011 and is
responsible for both childrens social care provision and education services. The
Director is also responsible for social work services for adults, but not for adult
commissioning and placement provision.
 The Chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB), who had been in post
since January 2009, left in June 2014. An interim appointment has been made.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
The inspection found a large number of cases (486) where the assessment of need
had not been undertaken within a reasonable timescale and a significant number
of children and families who have not been seen, leaving them potentially at risk.
The local authority receives high rates of contact and referrals. Although the early
help offer was agreed with partners in December 2013, not all partners are ready
to work with lower risk but complex situations. This resulted in a large number of
referrals continuing to be sent to social care for assessment. As a result, social
workers have high caseloads and are not always able to complete and record their
work or visit children within acceptable timescales.
The local authority has taken steps, including the introduction of a family
intervention service, to reduce caseloads and ensure effective and early work to
prevent children and families from requiring more significant intervention. This has
not yet had an impact on reducing the number of children subject to protection
plans or the numbers of children coming into care.
The quality of practice overall is too variable, and assessments and reports are not
always of an acceptable quality and lack sufficient analysis. Management oversight
of work and case progression is not robust.
Child sexual exploitation processes are not well embedded in social care teams,
and the authority does not gather sufficient information to offer good analysis of
activity in this area. Responses to children missing from home and care and private
fostering are not sufficiently managed or evaluated to ensure that interventions are
timely and effective.
assessment framework (CAF) was not fully embedded across the city. A wide
range of training has been undertaken and there is now engagement by schools
and health in the CAF process. There has been an increase in the number of
CAFs undertaken (from 1,069 in the year to May 2013 to 1,417 as at May
be sure that all children who need early help are receiving appropriate services.
The quality of CAF assessments seen was too variable and expectations and
outcomes were not always clear. Parents seen at a childrens centre reported
variable experiences of CAF, with one saying that they had been helped
significantly and another that, apart from the centre, other agencies had not
engaged. Childrens wishes and feelings were recorded in most cases, but
timescales were not clearly recorded, which means that families and
professionals may not be clear as to when actions need to be completed.


launched in December 2013. Childrens centres are now delivering a range of
services, including services to promote school readiness. Some initiatives, such
as the Stage Assessment model for 05-year-olds, are resulting in some good
outcomes, such as increased numbers of immunisations and improved
attendance at health appointments. Currently, 75.2% of two-year-olds are
accessing nursery provision, which demonstrates better performance than
neighbouring local authorities. The local authority is on target to reach 80% by
September 2014.
are fully informed about what early help services are available to families. An
early help directory remains in the development stage. The partnership has not
yet agreed a performance management framework to measure the
effectiveness of early help. Without this, the local authority cannot know
whether the early help they provide makes a difference in the long term. A
small number of cases were seen during this inspection where childrens needs
should have been met at an earlier stage to prevent problems escalating.
interventions through the Troubled Families initiative. Since 2009, nearly 3,000
families have been supported through the programme. An evaluation in
February 2014 of 294 families who had just completed the programme
indicated that 73% of families who have accessed the service had stopped
offending. There was some evidence of some good quality SMART (specific,
measurable, attainable, realistic, timely) plans in family intervention project
teams in cases sampled. Child protection enquiries are timely and conducted by
suitably qualified workers. Strategy meetings are well attended by a range of
agencies and are mostly face to face meetings, helping to ensure that
information-sharing is timely and effective. Strategy meetings are not always
clearly recorded and a small number seen had a scanned, hand-written entry
that had not subsequently been corrected. Children are seen, and seen alone,
and their wishes and views are recorded in the majority of cases seen.
some of which are not appropriate. These result in contact officers and social
workers in the First Response Team wasting valuable time processing
unnecessary work. The lack of a shared protocol between the police and
childrens social care for the screening and management of domestic violence
results in a very high volume of domestic violence notifications being passed to
childrens social care. A working group has been established to address this and
a MASH (multi agency safeguarding hub) is planned for 2015, but current
demand for services remains very high and the service is struggling to cope
with the volume of work.
to childrens social care and are doing so particularly where immediate
safeguarding concerns are identified. However, not all partners fully understand
or accept the thresholds of need that have been agreed. The LSCB has


identified that more needs to be done to provide confidence and skills to the
early help workforce to manage more complex, but low risk, cases.
allocation. Remaining contacts are passed to the First Response Team, where
effective information gathering and background checks are undertaken by
qualified social workers to determine whether the contact should be progressed
to a referral. Verbal consent is obtained from parents where possible to
undertake background checks. However, where consent has not been obtained,
checks are undertaken without consent. Decisions about contacts are not
always made within 24 hours, which sometimes means a delay in children being
seen by a social worker and assessments being started. In one case seen, this
was five days.
opportunities to intervene earlier with children and families were missed,
resulting in repeat referrals about children. None of these cases involved
immediate risk of harm, but they indicated a volume of work response rather
than considered decision making from managers. This is adding to the capacity
problems in the social work teams.
in a timely manner, including a small number that had drifted for almost a year
(from August 2013). In many of these cases, although work had been
undertaken, it had not been recorded or recorded well. Of these, 97 children
had not been visited, including 44 for a period of six months, meaning that
some children had been left in situations of unassessed risk. The local authority
has now reviewed all of these cases to ensure that work has been undertaken
and any outstanding actions have been progressed. The local authority review
indicated that no child had been left at risk and no safeguarding action had to
be taken as a result. Inspectors also undertook an audit of an additional sample
of these cases and found that no child had been left at risk of significant harm.
However, this backlog of unactioned and poorly recorded cases was widespread
across all localities and indicated a systemic weakness in capacity and process
that left some children at potential risk. The local authority and senior
managers had been aware of this backlog and, although some action to reduce
it had been taken, this intervention was insufficient to assess risk effectively,
identify delay and to reduce known delay quickly.
prescription of 45 days to complete all assessments. A number of less complex
cases would benefit from a briefer assessment period and could then be closed;
other more complex cases may need longer to fully assess all aspects.
Managers have recognised this and are planning further training to support
social workers understanding of the need for proportionate assessment.
demonstrated focus on the child and management of risk, including examples
of the voice of the child and analysis of cultural issues, others did not


demonstrate either sufficient analysis, including taking account of historical
factors, or timely completion of work.
social workers had over 40 cases each and two workers had 50 cases. High
caseloads mean that social workers do not have time to spend establishing
meaningful relationships with all children on their caseload and are not able to
effectively prioritise all their work.
following an assessment to implement children in need, child protection and
children in care planning. The quality of child protection and children in need
plans seen overall was variable, although almost all seen had evidence recorded
of the voice of the child and plans that addressed support issues. Some seen
lacked a contingency plan. Assessments for court demonstrated analysis and an
awareness of the needs of and timescales for the child.
protection conferences and reviews. The quality of reports is variable, with
some good examples of assessments of risk and inclusion of cultural factors. In
a small number of cases, these reports have been brought to conference by a
duty social worker. This has an impact on the quality of information and
analysis that is shared and means that the family may not have met the worker
before. Not all social workers routinely share reports with families in a separate
visit but will share reports just before the review. This gives families too little
time to take in information and ask questions.
locality, has been developed to reduce demand on the statutory social work
service by targeting children and families in need. The service had been
operational for five weeks and was supporting 72 families at the time of the
inspection. Families are being involved in time-limited work designed to
improve their situation enough to be managed at a universal level. This service
has been developed to complement existing work in the Family Recovery
Service, which has brought together families first, systemic therapy, family
intervention project and troubled families teams. The Family Recovery Service
has worked with 339 children on the edge of care over the last two years.
Eighty one per cent of these children did not enter care and this had been
sustained 52 weeks later in August 2013. The systemic family therapy team has
been commissioned since 2013 to work with a small number of children at risk
of becoming looked after. It is too early to look at long-term outcomes, but of
the 11 children who have completed the programme none has become looked
after. Despite some promising work, the overall impact of these interventions
has not been sufficient to prevent a rise in overall numbers of young people
either entering care or being subject to child protection plans.
agencies, who made positive contributions to the support and planning process.
There was evidence of extensive support packages being in place for children
and their families. Many of those attending, particularly the schools involved,


demonstrated that they knew children well and were able to both articulate the
concerns they had and identify the impact on the children.
examples where supervision had not been on a regular basis. Recording of
supervision does not evidence reflective practice. Training and development
issues are recorded.
working on a rota basis. They work effectively with the daytime teams and with
the police. They have access to appropriate systems and support from senior
managers on a 24-hour basis. With current arrangements providing one worker
on duty for the city, the service can only respond to the most urgent situation
at any one time. There are a high number of police protection orders  191 in
the last year  and, although the examples seen were appropriate, current
limited capacity in the emergency response service is not likely to have an
impact on reducing these.
attended by partner agencies, which means that there is good informationsharing to help plan effective actions to reduce risk. There is a range of
domestic abuse services available to children and their families, including a
commissioned service for perpetrators and a therapeutic service provided by
the Childrens Society. Work with troubled families where domestic abuse is a
factor has demonstrated that there has been a 64% reduction in incidents since
families completed the intervention (201314). There is currently a review of
services involving all stakeholders to ensure that services are available at the
earliest stage of problems being identified. There is evidence of some creative
approaches being used by the police to prevent domestic abuse, such as a
project in schools to promote healthy family relationships.
were discussed at level 2 multi-agency public protection arrangements
(MAPPA). In 60% of these cases, there was some form of safeguarding action
taken. The multi-agency Protect team, which includes police, social care and
health, is providing effective services for young people at risk or potential risk
of gang involvement and child sexual exploitation, together with training and
awareness-raising across agencies. The co-location of the team with the
Integrated Gang Management Unit and cross-borough work is leading to a wellcoordinated response when risks are identified. The social care contribution is
valued by agencies. There are robust assessments of need for children referred
to the service and a range of bespoke interventions are currently provided for
over 90 children and young people. Consultation and support is provided by the
Protect team to agencies working with this vulnerable group. There has been
some very effective work to target hot spots and tackle offenders, and to
provide a range of support to young people through street-based outreach
work.
designated officer (LADO) to reduce risk, and there is evidence that allegations


are dealt with in a timely manner. Of 54 referrals in the last quarter of 2013, 15
proceeded to a formal LADO strategy meeting and 27% of these have resulted
in a criminal investigation, the remainder being offered advice.
to improve the quality of safeguarding practice for disabled children. There has
been dilution of the role of the specialist workers and in specialist knowledge,
and a number of these workers have left the authority and are not being
replaced. This means that some disabled children have social workers who are
not trained to understand their particular needs and some transition
arrangements for children into adult services are not being planned early
enough, including some that are not initiated until after a young person has
reached 17.
form stable trusting relationships with their social workers because of a legacy
of a high number of changes in social workers. Where there was continuity of
worker then inspectors saw some evidence of effective relationships being
developed and of social workers doing direct work with children. The workforce
has begun to stabilise in recent months and the number of agency staff have
reduced, with 25 agency staff currently covering vacancies (out of 260 social
work posts) and a further 17 covering maternity and sickness. Families seen
said that they did have stable relationships with family intervention project
workers and this had helped them to improve their circumstances.
the holding of strategy meetings. Evidence of adherence to this policy is
variable. The Greater Manchester Police report positive multi-agency action on
child sexual exploitation and children missing from care, with good use of
strategy meetings to intervene and reduce behaviours. However, when children
go missing from home, there is not always a coordinated response from the
police and social care, and young people do not routinely have a return
interview conducted by an independent person. Information on children missing
from home does not show the length of time for which the young person was
missing, whether a return interview was conducted, whether a strategy meeting
was convened or where the child is currently missing from. This means that
practice in this area is poorly monitored and there are insufficient links being
made with children who may be sexually exploited.
being privately fostered. Over the past 12 months, the authority has not fully
discharged its statutory responsibilities towards this group of children and visits
and assessments have not been conducted within timescales. Only 52% were
seen within seven days of referral, which means that children were not being
seen and spoken to about their circumstances in a timely manner. Since May
this year, the authority has taken a more proactive approach, with regular
monthly audits, which has resulted in improvements to practice in this area.
project for assessment unless they meet the threshold for child protection. Of


plan that included accommodation and nine were considered as children in
need. Very few are brought into care  only one in the last nine months. All of
the cases sampled received an appropriate response.
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
The local authority is challenged by high and increasing numbers of children
entering its care. This has meant that caseloads for its social workers are too high
and the authority is struggling to maintain and improve standards of practice. The
quality of the service that children receive is too variable.
The authority has not been able to ensure that there is sufficient placement
choice, particularly for children with an adoption plan, some of whom wait too
long to be adopted. However, the authority is succeeding in reducing the time
taken for children to go through care proceedings and in keeping most children in
care as close to where they lived as possible.
Care planning for children is variable and, although regularly reviewed, there is
insufficient challenge from independent reviewing officers to address drift in plans
and the lack of reports to reviews.
There are a range of services to help support foster carers with managing
childrens emotional and behavioural needs.
Some of the systems to ensure that work is of high quality are not as effective as
they should be, for example the independent reviewing officer escalation process
and adoption panel feedback.
While looked after children in primary schools have seen the attainment gap
between them and their peers narrow, progress for secondary school children in
care is not as good.
Pathway planning for young people leaving care is of good quality, but more
needs to be done to ensure that young people leaving care have access to and
take up employment, training and educational opportunities. Young people who
wish to stay on with their foster carers at the age of 18 are encouraged to do so,
but not all young people who leave care are in suitable accommodation.
on entry to care being made by a senior manager, alongside a Family Resource
Panel. This ensures that all children have a full assessment of need before
becoming looked after or, in an emergency, soon afterwards. New entrants to
care are also reviewed by the resource panel to consider whether alternatives
may be more appropriate.
teams have up to 30 cases while in court and locality teams dealing with a


range of work including care proceedings, workers have up to 40 each. There is
a legacy of too many changes of social worker and a lack of robust
management oversight resulting in permanency not being addressed with
urgency in some cases.
March 2013 to March 2014 has not been met, although placements have
increased by 67, mostly through increased use of independent fostering
agencies. The authority has been successful in reducing the number of
placements of children in residential care, which is part of a long-term strategy
that includes investment in specialist foster carers. However, there has been an
increase of 101 children becoming looked after between June 2013 and 24 June
particular, a lack of availability for sibling groups, which has resulted in some
brothers and sisters having separate placements. Where separations have
occurred, there have been efforts to ensure that children are placed close by
and in some cases with foster carers in the same family.
legal planning meetings has led to childrens circumstances improving so that
they can remain at home with their families. The average duration of care
proceedings has reduced to 33 weeks and continues to show an improving
trend, thus enabling permanence options to be achieved more quickly for some
children. The rate of Special Guardianship Orders to carers has increased from
permanence with carers they already know. There are positive relationships
with Cafcass, who report an improved quality of assessments and plans from
the local authority despite an increase in proceedings.
less than the England and statistical neighbour figures (15.9% and 12.3%,
respectively). This means that children can more readily maintain their local
contacts and friendships. The authority has a strategic aim to reduce the use of
residential accommodation and is undertaking planned closures of its own
residential provision, with young people being moved to appropriate foster care
placements in a planned way. Two thirds of residential accommodation
providers (including in-house provision) have good or better judgements, with
only one young person placed in inadequate residential provision at the point of
inspection. The vast majority of independent fostering providers used have
inspection outcomes of good or better.
management oversight have meant that in some cases, achieving permanence
for looked after children has not been addressed with due urgency and this is
one of the main reasons for independent reviewing officers escalating concerns
to team managers. This issue has been recognised and a dedicated process to
improve timescales in achieving permanence has been very recently established
alongside a specialist independent reviewing officer for 05-year-olds, with the
aim of ensuring that delays in the system are minimised. However, it is too
early to assess the impact of these changes.


was insufficient evidence of work being undertaken to ensure that risks had
been reduced and to address how children and young peoples needs could be
met by parents and carers. Management oversight in these instances was not
sufficiently robust to ensure that work was completed and recorded to support
successful rehabilitation.
them well or that their complaints would be listened to. This is reflected in the
findings from the complaints service, which identify the main reason for
complaints as issues of poor communication by social work practitioners to
young people, carers and other professionals. The childrens rights service has
been involved in active learning from complaints, and now supports an early
resolution process by ensuring that social work managers speak to children and
young people when a complaint is received to try and resolve them informally.
This has been successful and has had the effect of reducing the number of
complaints.
This is higher than the England average of 3.5%. There is a dedicated service
to support under-19s in reducing their substance misuse (Eclypse). During
that the vast majority of young people start intervention within three weeks of
referral.
that improvements have been made in ensuring that children looked after have
up-to-date dental checks, from 90% in 201213 to 98.4% in 201314. There
has been an increase in looked after children having up-to-date immunisations,
from 90.1% in 201213 to 91.9% in 201314. The capacity of the looked after
team within health services has been increased to improve compliance with
statutory timescales and address the quality of health assessments.
childrens emotional and behavioural needs, such as TOPS (Treatments Offering
Placement Stability) for three- to six-year-olds and the KEEPS (Keeping foster
parents and carers supported) programme, which supports carers of children
between five and 12. There is also a referral panel for Children and Adolescent
Mental Health Services (CAMHS), which offers consultation to social workers
and foster carers to help them care for children with emotional and behavioural
needs. These services are part of the overall CAMHS looked after children
service, which also includes provision of therapeutic intervention through
integrated CAMHS provision in looked after teams.
three placements in a year) has improved substantially to 8% in 201314 and
now compares favourably with statistical neighbours at 10% and England 11%
rates for 201213.


children mostly reflect their current arrangements and are regularly reviewed at
looked after children reviews to ensure that they meet the childs changing
needs. However, in most examples seen, these were brief documents and it
was not clear how the young person and people caring for them had been
involved in their development. Health, education, contact and well-being needs
were not always clearly set out. Levels of contact with families were frequently
commented on by children and this is reflected in case records, but not always
in care plans. There were some good examples in casework of children being
helped to understand the reasons for contact being set at specific levels.
visits not always on the electronic file system (MiCare), reports to looked after
children reviews not provided in many cases, reviewing officers reports from
looked after children reviews not being uploaded for some weeks or months
and documents not uploaded with the correct dates. This makes it difficult to
understand why decisions have been made, who made the decisions and how
children can be helped to understand them. Independent reviewing officers are
not always able to meet with children between reviews and their quality
assurance processes are not used effectively to drive up collective performance.
who are going missing from care and are at risk of child sexual exploitation that
have been effectively safeguarded. However, overall, this is not consistent, with
the majority of cases sampled identifying that the reasons for young people
going missing and the continued risks from child sexual exploitation are not
fully understood or explored, potentially leaving children at continued risk. New
processes to improve collation of data so that trends and patterns can be
collected are not yet in place, although the LSCB has recognised this and
commissioned a multi-agency suite of performance information to be in place in
August 2014.
school. A youth offending service inspection in July 2013 noted a significantly
improved working relationship with social workers where children were looked
after. Evidence in case files supported this. Offending rates of looked after
children have been higher than England and statistical neighbours for the last
three years, but over this time there has been a reducing trend: 7.1% of
children offended in 201314, a decrease from 8.1% in 201213.
looked after children in primary school. Last year, they performed better than
looked after children across the country but less well than all children locally
and nationally. In 2013, the proportion of 16-year-old looked after children
gaining five GCSEs grades A*C (including mathematics and English) declined.
This figure was in line with the national average, but well below the results for
all Manchester pupils and for all pupils across the country. The gap between the
performance of looked after children and that of all children has narrowed at
primary level. At secondary level it has fluctuated, and in 2013 was wider than


in 2009. Eighty per cent of primary school children attend a good or better
school, but this falls to 48% at secondary level.
plan (PEP). Most of those without a PEP are placed out of authority. The quality
of the random selection of PEPs seen required improvement. The local authority
does not monitor whether all looked after children have at least 25 hours of
education each week. These are omissions in ensuring successful outcomes for
looked after children. There are systems in place to track children missing from
education and a demonstrable reduction in fixed and permanent exclusions.
There are currently 172 children educated at home. Suitability of provision is
appropriately monitored and acted on. Parents are informed of options available
and offered advice and guidance. There are processes in place for managed
moves of children between schools and a service level agreement between the
local authority and pupil referral units (PRUs) to provide education for those
children excluded. The quality of alternative provision is monitored by the PRUs,
with other providers visited twice a year.
opportunities through the use of a free leisure pass. This increases their
resilience. Foster carers were supportive of extra-curricular activities, but not all
were aware that they could have access to the pupil premium funding for
activities such as music lessons, as this funding is currently channelled through
schools. From September 2014, the funding will be allocated through the virtual
head teacher, and all foster carers will be advised how they can access it and
how it can be used. Some foster carers spoken to stated that they did not have
delegated authority for children they cared for. Most young people spoken to
were aware of their entitlements.
component as well as young people who are care leavers. The group has
undertaken a variety of activities and consults with a wider group of looked
after young people and care leavers, but the authority was unable to provide an
overall figure of those involved. Some recent activities have included delivering
Total Respect training and Voice of the Child training to independent reviewing
officers, helping them to consider how their meetings can be more childfocused. There has been a recent successful pilot for older children being
supported to co-chair their reviews, with 120 young people doing so over the
last year.
schools and foster carers supported children with communication needs to
contribute to their reviews, and that foster carers are good advocates for
children in meetings. Other methods of supporting young peoples participation
in looked after children reviews, through attendance, formal advocacy and
leaflets such as have your say, are used, but these are not collated and used
to inform practice.
children from Black or ethnic minority backgrounds to respond appropriately to


racism from other children at school, and had promoted positive self-image.
This illustrated how children are supported by carers when bullied or face
discrimination. There is both a telephone and a face-to-face translation service
available for children whose first language is not English are placed with carers
who do not speak their language (usually as an emergency short term
measure).
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is inadequate
placed for adoption in current published data is higher than statistical
neighbours, at 740 days. This means that children in Manchester wait 203 days
longer than the government threshold to be adopted (local authority 201314
data) and 56 days more than statistical neighbours (201213 data). More
recent unpublished and unvalidated data collated by the authority indicates
there have been some recent improvements. This performance is improving as
a result of swifter processing of care proceedings following the implementation
of the Family Justice Review reforms.
performance in achieving permanence. These include a very recent additional
resource to the independent reviewing officer service to track cases involving
children aged 05 years. In addition, Permanency Planning meetings are held
before the second LAC review, and a Connected Carers Team is in place that
focuses on speeding up assessments of family and friends. This is having an
impact on the speed with which care proceedings are completed, but these
measures are relatively recent and this means that overall performance remains
poor.
previous year. Now, 11% of the looked after population achieve permanency
through adoption in Manchester (67 in 201314). This figure is commensurate
with national averages but lower than statistical neighbours.
comparison with statistical neighbours (7% 201314, 9% in statistical
neighbours 201013). Renewed focus on this group has found some new
adopters, and this has helped improve performance, with a rise, from 16
children successfully placed in 2013 to 23 in 2014. The 201314 Annual
Adoption Report says: These children (BME) wait much longer to be matched,
even if they are under the age of 2 years. The 201213 adoption data set
indicated that, while there where 47 Black minority ethnic children waiting to be
adopted, there were only nine Black minority ethnic adopters available.
days. This means that children in Manchester wait 73 days longer than the
government threshold and 16 days longer than statistical neighbours (based on
last years performance). The length of time that children wait to be adopted


has an impact on how well they settle into their adoptive placement. In a small
number of cases, inspectors found that children had waited for three, five,
seven and nine years to be placed, indicating that management of these cases
had not been robust and these children had waited far too long for an
achievable permanency plan.
reduce the time spent waiting to be placed, is at a very early stage of
development and implementation and is not yet making an impact. The local
authority has approved one foster to adopt placement very recently and signed
an agreement with Caritas, an independent provider, to provide concurrent
placements while in-house provision is built up. Because these steps are very
recent, children in Manchester have not yet been able to benefit from this
service.
authority for a number of years has obscured the real performance around
matching and the number of decisions to change plans away from adoption.
This has reduced the authoritys capacity to understand its true performance
and has meant that the authority has not recognised deficits in adoption
performance quickly enough to implement improvements.
adoptive placement have been put in place since the end of 2013, and a
number of plans for children who have been waiting some time have been
changed from adoption. However, the vast majority of these (56 out of 63)
have moved to long-term fostering, which is potentially a less secure and less
stable long-term outcome for these children.
the original plan of adoption is 16%. This is considerably higher than statistical
neighbours and indicates that some children have waited too long for a
permanent solution.
Manchester. This means that it is difficult to find suitable placements for the
children waiting for families and this causes delay.
increased the use of voluntary adoption agencies. Manchester has attended six
events around the country and it uses a range of places to advertise children
needing a family, including the Adoption Register and its local consortium,
Adoption 22. This has succeeded in finding and approving 12 more adopters
than last year, but more needs to be done to make up the shortfall.
process. Although the adopters spoke highly of the support and training that
they had received from the service, two had experienced a delay of a year in
being assessed and one had had a delay of several months.


independent members and an adoption advisor. It is chaired by an experienced
independent chair and provides a six-monthly report to the Scrutiny Committee
about performance. It meets weekly to consider cases, which is sufficient to
process the work load. The minutes are of good quality and are produced
promptly within timescale.
approximately half of childrens permanency reports to panel were of poor
quality. They lacked sufficient analysis about the child or the match, were
inaccurate, were not up to date, did not record parents views accurately and/or
read like a court statement. In one example of a poor case report seen by an
inspector, the report contained inappropriate commentary about the childs
mother. The quality of the reports causes delay to the process because the
panel rejects some of them. In addition to delaying the progress of the case,
this causes inconvenience and distress to adopters. Poor quality reports also
mean that the childs record for later life contains potentially important
inaccuracies or flaws in the official record of their history and family.
reports have not been effective, and some reports have not been amended
after being criticised by the Panel and the agency decision maker.
been accessed by over 200 adoptive families last year. In addition to the
statutory Adoption Support Services Advisor, there is a service level agreement
with the Manchester After Adoption Service to provide a range of support,
including two family days for adoptive families, counselling and groups for
adopted children. There is also support from the Post Adoption Psychology
Service provided through CAMHS; a 16-week accredited parenting course and a
new pilot called Wrap around Adoption, which currently provides an intensive
support package to one family. Adopters spoke highly of the support that they
receive.
reports, matching and post-adoption support is effective.
quality, helping children to understand the reasons for their adoption in a childfocused way. It was valued by the adopters spoken to.
The graded judgement about the experiences and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
and delivered through The Curve, run by Barnardos (since 1995), who provide
the pathway planning and a personal advisor to young people leaving care. The
work of The Curve is evaluated and overseen by the Multi-agency Leaving Care
Group, who report to the looked after children Improvement Group.


the transition to independence. The service runs a drop-in centre once a week
that provides one-to-one support to access accommodation, apply for jobs or
access training, complete CVs and apply for benefits or privately rented
housing.
Appropriately qualified and supported personal advisors assess the needs of
young people moving into independence and develop plans with them that put
them in touch with services that can help them. The pathway plans seen gave a
clear indication of the educational achievements and aspirations of the young
people concerned.
reviewed, including their emotional well-being and sexual health. Support was
offered through a range of services, including CAMHS, the My Time counselling
service, the befriending service, sexual health clinics, psychological support and
other community resources. The looked after children nurse provides care
leavers with advice and support around their health and the young people were
registered with GPs. In all cases seen, young people received effective, timely
support from their personal advisor to make the transition to independence.
Curve highly and thought that their Pathway Plans were helpful tools to assist
them towards achieving independence.
and comprehensive risk assessments on file that were reviewed regularly.
Appropriate steps were put in place to reduce the risk of harm to young people.
However, in one case, while the direct work with the young person had reduced
risk, concerns had not been escalated appropriately to childrens social care.
This meant that the effectiveness of the work to address harm to this particular
young person was reduced.
in line with statistical neighbours. In cases seen, personal advisors
demonstrated engagement with vulnerable or hard to reach young people, and
this was helping to achieve some positive outcomes. Young people reported
being well supported by their personal advisors, who knew them well.
when they join the service in an information pack. Although this sets out care
leavers entitlements, including the financial policy and the complaints
procedure, the material given to care leavers needs to be updated. There is no
health passport in Manchester, so care leavers do not leave care with all their
health history available to them.
people spoken to said that services were not responsive to complaints when
they were made (e.g. Housing, Childrens Social Care). One young person had


made a complaint which they felt had been responded to well, while another
young person said that they had been the victim of racial harassment where
they lived for a number of years and had complained about this, but no action
had been taken.
strategy to address youth unemployment and skills across the city. The city has
an apprenticeship scheme that has benefited 14 care leavers, 12 of whom are
still engaged in level 2 or 3 apprenticeships. Barnardos also provide short work
experience for 12 young people through an apprenticeship scheme in the
hospitality industry. This has led to some employment opportunities for seven
care leavers.
are in years one to three of a university course, which is higher than the
national average. In 2013, the proportion of 19-year-old looked after students
entering higher education overall was 7%, with 12% of all care leavers in
higher education.
over the age of 16 or during their time at university. This limits the local
authoritys capacity to track and promote achievement.
training was 59%. During the inspection, the percentage of care leaves who are
in education, employment or training was not consistently and accurately
recorded or reported by the local authority. This made it difficult for inspectors
to gather a true picture of the numbers care leavers in education, employment
or training at the age of 19. Senior managers reported that there had been an
improvement in the number in education, employment or training in the last 12
months. However, conflicting data presented at the time of the inspection did
not support this.
supported lodgings to a variety of supported hostels, supported living and
rented accommodation. Care leavers are encouraged to make use of the
Staying Put offer, and over 64% of the young people in foster care turning 18
in 201314 stayed with their carers. There were no care leavers in bed and
breakfast at the time of the inspection and the local authority has agreement
from councillors that no care leavers will be considered intentionally homeless.
The local authority is seeking to further develop provision in this area. The
authority does not run a care leavers survey to inform itself about care leavers
experience of their accommodation.
were in suitable accommodation in 2013, below statistical neighbours at 91%.
Data from the local authority for 2014 indicate that 83% of care leavers up to
the age of 21 are living in suitable accommodation. Thirty young people are
recorded as living with friends and 32 are in multiple occupancy, indicating that,


for some young people, Manchester is not yet meeting their accommodation
needs.
adult service at the age of 18. A transitions panel is held to review and plan for
post-18 care, and a joint assessment is carried out of the care leavers needs by
both adults and childrens social workers. The timeliness of this work is
variable, with these referrals usually being made after the young person had
turned 17. This means that young people may not know what their plans are
until they are nearly 18, which is unsettling and does not give vulnerable young
people security about their future.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and governance

Inadequate

Summary
The senior leadership of the local authority was unaware of some of the
weaknesses in services to children and families identified through this inspection.
Management oversight, performance management and quality assurance processes
are not robust.
Despite a commitment to driving improvements, the authority has been slow in
many areas to respond in a timely and effective manner both to reviews of service
and to changing demographic demands. Some of the recommendations from the
previous inspection (December 2010) have not yet been actioned.
The local authority and its partners have not yet succeeded in ensuring that early
help is making a difference in reducing demand, despite good examples of
innovative work. High caseloads for social workers mean that they are not able to
deliver good enough services in a consistent manner. Some families and children
have not had their needs assessed and have been left at potential risk.
While some work has been undertaken to strengthen management oversight, more
work needs to be done through performance management to ensure that it is
consistently robust and effective across all areas of the service, and that it clearly
identifies weakness and takes prompt action.
Partnership working is well established, but there remain real challenges across the
partnership, including the local safeguarding board, for example a coherent
application of thresholds and engagement of all partners in the delivery of early
help.
There is a political consensus and commitment to budget protection for front-line
social work services and to additional funding to meet the rising costs of
placements for children. The local authority understands its corporate parenting
responsibilities and the need to listen to and hear children in care and their
experiences, but it needs to be more challenging about the quality of services to
children and young people.
are committed to driving improvement in the quality of services to children
young people and their families, and have made efforts to respond to the peer
review and independent safeguarding review in 2013. However, progress in
some areas has been too slow to meet changing demands and high levels of
need within the city, and many of the initiatives are either too new to show
impact or are only just beginning to have an impact.
children do not always provide a timely and consistent response. Some children
have not had their needs assessed and many have waited too long to be seen,


leaving some at potential risk. The quality of service provision is too variable. A
legacy of poor practice in a small number of teams has resulted in some
children having to wait too long for an adoptive placement. Over 50 children
thought suitable for adoption have had their plans changed to long-term
fostering. Senior managers have recognised this and have recently recruited
new managers in the fostering and adoption teams, undertaken targeted work
to address historic drift and delay, and sought to increase the recruitment of
foster carers and adoptive parents. However, action to address deficits has
been too slow.
high levels of deprivation and domestic abuse, mean that many families in
Manchester have complex needs. There has been a significant increase in the
numbers of contacts and referrals in 201314 and an increase in the number of
looked after children. Many agencies, including childrens social care, are
struggling to manage the current level of demand, and this is putting pressure
on many aspects of the service.
of services are available to families through the Family recovery initiative,
many of which are showing impact, the early help offer is not yet fully
coordinated and targeted, so not all children and families in need of help at an
early stage of problems arising have access to the support they need. There is
some evidence of early help providers offering good, targeted help to children
with disabilities that reduced the need for referral to statutory childrens
services. However, overall, there is no evidence of impact of early help in
reducing the number of referrals to children social care. The local authority
recognises the need for its partners to be fully committed to engagement in
provision of early help if this is to be effective in reducing the demands on child
protection services, but progress on this has been slow. This is one of the most
significant challenges that the partnership needs to address.
This is affecting the ability of workers to complete assessments in a timely
manner and, in some cases, reduces opportunities for social workers to
undertake direct work with children. The authority has taken some steps to
address caseloads; for example, there has been significant investment in the
north locality to reduce social work caseloads through the establishment of the
new child in need team, which is currently working with 90 child in need cases
with a target of 420 over the next 12 months. This work is very recent and is
only beginning to have an impact.
practice and has effectively tackled some poor performance, including the
capability of a small number of managers. A number of new team managers
have been recruited, and training and mentoring is in place to support their
professional development. A range of systems for tracking and monitoring
children and young people in need of help and protection and those who are
looked after has been introduced. This includes the recent establishment of a


dedicated team to track all 05-year-olds coming into the system. Examples
were seen during this inspection of where this is improving practice in ensuring
that timely decisions are made about how to respond to childrens needs. The
Principal Social Worker is playing a key role in driving up practice standards
through increasing professional development opportunities and training for
team managers.
oversight is not yet sufficiently robust and effective across all areas of the
service. Supervision is mostly task-centred, with little evidence of reflective
supervision. Newly qualified social workers receive regular reflective supervision
from social work consultants, but this is not routinely available to all staff.
and there is evidence of impact as a result of actions taken to address
weaknesses in a number of areas. For example, the need to ensure the stability
of the workforce is underpinned by a workforce strategy and considerable
progress has been made in significantly reducing reliance on agency staff by
recruiting over 50 social workers into permanent posts since the autumn of
teams, but it is too early to see evidence of impact for children and families. In
addition, Cafcass reports a significant improvement in the quality of evidence
presented at court over the last nine months, which they now report to be
good, including improvements in assessments, chronologies and care plans.
This is resulting in more timely decision making for some children to ensure
that their need for stability is met.
of audit activity are leading to improvement in the authoritys understanding of
performance, with some evidence of impact, but performance management is
not yet sufficiently comprehensive and robust. There is routine reporting of
performance information to the Childrens Board, the Manchester Safeguarding
Children Board (MSCB) and the multi-agency improvement board. The
Performance Improvement Board, chaired by the Director of Childrens Services
(DCS) and attended by the Assistant Chief Executives (People) and (Business
and Finance), receives a range of performance reports and audits and provides
evidence of robust challenge from the DCS and Assistant Chief Executives to
performance and quality of practice. Performance in some areas has improved
as a result of oversight, for example improved tracking of children who are
voluntarily accommodated under section 20 of the Children Act 1989. There is
some evidence that audit activity is driving improvement; for example, the
quality of information being sent as a referral from the First Response Team to
the assessment teams has improved and was seen in many cases sampled by
inspectors in the assessment teams.
monitoring is limited, as many of the arrangements to support this are relatively
new. The Childrens Board does not receive performance data across all areas,
and this means that they cannot be assured of robust oversight of all areas of
practice. Some of the audits of individual cases undertaken by the local


authority for this inspection were not sufficiently robust or focused on the
quality of practice.
Board are closely aligned with the Health and Well-being Board. There are clear
lines of accountability and responsibility between senior officers, the lead
member and the chair of the MSCB. There is some evidence of partnership
working at a strategic level, with a range of initiatives, including the proposed
development of the Multi Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH) and the eight
stages of assessment model delivered by health visitors and outreach workers
to 05-year-olds in some areas of the city. Despite this, there remain real
challenges across the partnership, including the MSCB, for example in
addressing the high number of children subject to police powers of protection
and in a coherent application of thresholds together with full engagement of all
partners in the delivery of early help.
practice. Social work posts have been protected from budget cuts and funding
has been provided to meet the rising spend on placements for increased
numbers of children in care. The authority is meeting increasing demand by
managing demand differently, through analysis of the cohorts of children and
young people in need of help and protection and care and investing in
evidence-based interventions to meet identified needs, including recruitment of
a wider range of foster parents. Learning from the Troubled Families initiative,
which has shown positive outcomes, has been used to develop a range of
services to meet demand through effective commissioning and in-house
provision. There are some recent examples of innovative approaches, such as
use of the Social Impact Bond to develop the multi-dimensional foster care
team to support young people with complex needs to move from residential
care into foster placements.
children and young people in the city, and meets regularly with the Director of
Childrens Services and Lead Member and Chair of the MSCB to jointly consider
a range of reports and ensure that he understands the service. However, the
rigour of challenge over some aspects of service delivery, including the quality
of social work practice with looked after children, has not been effective in
driving improvement.
about most key issues, and there are examples of corporate parents fulfilling
their responsibilities well. For example, a task and finish group was established
by the Corporate Parenting Panel to monitor the progress of each young person
moving out of residential accommodation into foster care as a result of the
integrated looked after children strategy. There are well established links
between the Corporate Parenting Panel and Care to Change Council, and
regular visits to front-line teams to meet workers. The Lead Member played a
key role in ensuring that all looked after young people have direct access to
social workers by the introduction of a policy to this effect, and in ensuring
consistency on the policy of pocket money. Elected members express high


ambitions for children, but there are some areas where the panel could be
more robust, for example in ensuring improvement in the quality of social work
practice for all looked after children and in challenging the quality of
educational provision and outcomes for those looked after children who are not
benefiting from schools judged to be good or better.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board
The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is inadequate.
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
inadequate.

Summary of findings
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate because:
children and families are being effectively safeguarded in Manchester, including
the impact of high caseloads in social care and the overall quality of practice.
understanding and practice in relation to early help and its impact on contacts
and referrals to social care.
including leading key areas of the Boards business.
its priorities or give sufficient time to the Board to ensure that all work is
completed in a timely manner.
case reviews and management reviews have been fully completed within
timescale.
areas of safeguarding, such as an evaluation of private fostering and a report
on the work of the local authority designated officer (LADO).
practice.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Board operation and structure
services to children and families, particularly in social care, and takes effective
steps to monitor and evaluate progress in ensuring that children are safe in
Manchester.
is facilitated. Provide clear terms of reference for both the executive board and
main board and for sub-groups of the Board in line with business priorities.
Board and their impact on improving the safety and outcomes for children. This
should include an evaluation of private fostering arrangements and LADO
activity.

Work programme
with the core priority safeguarding issues identified and agreed by all Board
members.
management reviews are actioned or reviewed for current relevance.
of partner agency contributions and the impact on social care contacts and
referrals.
Areas for improvement

Understanding the quality of practice
multi-agency and single agency audits are submitted on time to the Board and
that Board members understand their responsibility for ensuring timely
responses.
future training needs, including lessons learned by staff and impact on practice.
reflects changes in statutory guidance, and ensure that all Board members
understand and agree to the standard.


The LSCBs strengths
Childrens Board and ensures that safeguarding issues and priorities are
appropriately represented.
local authority. The recommendations from the review, including the
development of a MASH, have been accepted by the authority, which is helping
to re-shape service delivery.
monitored and evaluated for their effectiveness. These include safeguarding
and gangs guidance, a child sexual exploitation strategy, a domestic abuse
protocol and the one chance strategy on forced marriage.
a comprehensive overview and analysis of child deaths and recommendations
for action monitored by the board.
from serious case reviews, including parents who misuse alcohol and troubled
teens. Learning points from these have been the subject of training events,
and have resulted in: the development of assessment tools to assist
practitioners in identifying child sexual exploitation and neglect; implementation
of the alcohol use disorders tool; and improving information sharing by the
introduction of electronic flagging systems.
case reviews, including appropriate liaison with the national panel of
independent experts on serious case reviews.
has been extended to community groups and organisations such as Madrasahs.
There has also been a safeguarding conference involving 92 Madrasah
representatives in October 2013.
using young people as part of case conference training, and a campaign in
relation to online risk and sexting. Plans are in place to recruit a young advisor
to the Board.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
children and families are being effectively safeguarded in Manchester, including
the impact of high caseloads in social care and the overall quality of practice.
submission of single agency audits and section 11 audits in order that it can
satisfy itself that individual services are monitoring safeguarding practice


appropriately, and that the Board is appropriately aware of safeguarding issues
and weaknesses.
and whether all partners understand and promote good early help practice and
how that can lead to better outcomes for children and families and reduced
referrals to social care.
timely manner and that it is able to deal with a high number of serious case
and management reviews as well as other board business. This has led to
delays in completing some key areas of work, such as a review of the
functioning of the Board.
serious case reviews published in 2013. The Board has not ensured that
changes of personnel do not adversely affect the completion of these, and
escalation of these issues to appropriate agencies has been ineffective in
ensuring a solution.
areas and too focused on business process and functionality of the Board. This
means that the Board is not identifying through its business plan all the actions
required to improve safeguarding in Manchester.
too few are chaired by partner agencies. This has resulted in poor coordination
between groups, duplication of work and, in some groups, inconsistent
attendance, leading to delays in completing work on time.
is not up to date on Working together 2013, and the remits of the executive
board and the main board are not defined well enough for all members to
understand their separate but related functions.
mostly from the local authority and the Board lacks a wider set of multi-agency
data. This limits the Boards wider understanding of safeguarding issues.
on practice has not been effectively evaluated over time, with a low agency
response to an evaluation pilot. This means that the Board does not have an
overview of the effectiveness of all of its training and whether outcomes for
children and families are improving as a result.
insufficient analysis of work undertaken. This means that it does not provide
sufficient information to help determine priorities for the future.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place. However, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about the inspection and the review
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff worked with families and each other and discussed the
effectiveness of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever
possible, they talked to children, young people and their families. In addition, the
inspectors have tried to understand what the local authority knows about how well it
is performing, how well it is doing and what difference it is making for the people it
is trying to help, protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Peter McEntee
Deputy lead inspector: Wendy Ghaffar
Team inspectors: Susan Myers, Debora Barazetti-Scott, Aelwyn Pugh, Sarah Urding,
Deane Jennings, Graham Tilby.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


