Norfolk County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 6 July 2015  30 July 2015
Report published: 19 October 2015
Childrens services in Norfolk are inadequate
There are widespread or serious failures that mean the welfare of looked after
children is not safeguarded and promoted.
It is Ofsteds expectation that all children and young people receive the level of help,
care and protection that will ensure their safety and help prepare them for adult life.


Requires improvement

permanence

Inadequate


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Requires improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Executive summary


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates nine childrens homes. Seven were good or
outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection. Two were found to require
improvement.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in January 2013. The local authority was inadequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for looked after children
was in July 2013. The local authority was inadequate.
Local leadership
 The interim Director of Childrens Services (DCS) has been in post since July
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
February 2014.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 166,507 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Norfolk. This is 19% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 17 % of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 16% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 12% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 6% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Mixed and Asian or Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 8% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 6% (the national average is 14%).

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 A large Traveller and Eastern European population seek seasonal work in the
agricultural parts of the county, but are not resident. Estimates show that
between 1,000 and 1,200 Traveller children of school age either visit or live in
Norfolk per year. This makes them one of the largest ethnic minority groups in
Norfolk. Norfolks non-white population is predominantly urban although migrant
workers and Travellers are more likely to live in rural areas.
Child protection in this area
 At 30 June 2015, 4,534 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from 7,361 at
 At 30 June 2015, 522 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 537 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 March 2015, 17 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from 20 at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection, seven serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and eight serious case reviews have been completed or were on-going
at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 30 June 2015, 1,052 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 63.2 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 1,150 (69 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014. Of this number:
authority area
authority area
 nine are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 103 adoptions
returned to be looked after


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or fewer per year.


to independent living
living in houses of multiple occupation.


Executive summary
Following previous inspections, where services for the protection of children and
looked after children were judged inadequate, the local authority implemented a
wide-ranging series of improvements across the service for children and families. The
systemic failures identified in these inspections led to the establishment of an
improvement board in early 2013 and the appointment of a new interim Director of
Childrens Services in July 2013. A directions notice and the scope of improvements
required were issued by the Secretary of State in December 2013.
The impact of the current senior leadership team and elected members has led to
improvements in some parts of the service, most notably for children in need of early
help and for those children at risk of harm and in need of protection. However,
despite these efforts, widespread failings for looked after children and care leavers
means that services in Norfolk remain inadequate.
Looked after children and care leavers do not receive a good enough service. Sixteen
looked after children do not have an allocated social worker. Foster carers working
hard on behalf of the children they look after spoke of their frustration at how hard it
is to get a response to queries from some social workers. Delays and drift in planning
for children are frequently seen in casework, with little evidence of challenge by the
independent reviewing service. Planning for permanence, placement choice, health
assessments, educational outcomes and access to advocacy services for looked after
children remain weak and, while there is some evidence of progress, this has not
been fast enough to secure improved outcomes for most children.
Support for care leavers is inadequate. At the time of the inspection the local
authority had lost contact with 25% of its care leavers, including 26 of its most
vulnerable children aged 16 and 17. The quality of pathway plans is poor and this
contributes to difficulties the local authority has in supporting vulnerable young
people leaving care. Health, educational and employment needs are not always
adequately addressed.
The pace of improvement in services and outcomes for these children and young
people has been too slow and, as a consequence, looked after children and care
leavers do not consistently benefit from a range of services that meet their needs.
This lack of progress remains a significant detriment to them. The authority
recognises the need to drive improvements for looked after children and care leavers
at a much swifter pace.
While improvements have been made in some parts of the service, the senior
leadership team know that these are constrained by the scale of the work still
required to do. The application of thresholds across the service, while improved,
continues to be inconsistent and a critical area of concern. The quality of practice is
too variable and ranges from inadequate to good. Assessments for children in need
of help are not consistently completed and recorded promptly. Contingency
arrangements to ensure children are safeguarded while child protection enquiries are
underway are weak. Some child protection plans end too early with a higher number


of plans ceasing after three months; consequently, there is an increasing number of
children needing further help and a plan for a second time. Return interviews when
children go missing are not always completed promptly. Minutes from multi-agency
sexual exploitation meetings are not always used effectively to inform planning.
A multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH), including a dedicated child sexual
exploitation team, has provided a single point of entry for all contacts and referrals.
Co-location of partners and effective information-sharing provide a joined-up
approach to children who go missing and child sexual exploitation, female genital
mutilation and radicalisation. Management oversight is not sufficient to ensure
assessments are consistently completed on time.
The Signs of Safety approach to child protection practice is providing an established
framework to help identify risk and protective factors and is beginning to achieve
improvements in social work practice. Most children are seen and seen alone, and
benefit from direct work by skilled practitioners. Children are engaged effectively in
the child protection process and are supported to attend case conferences. Edge of
care services are reducing the need for children to come into care.
An effective and innovative range of local-authority-run projects are in place across
the county and are highly valued by those who use them. These include Look
Forward, a project to support mothers who have had children removed from their
care, and the successful NIPE project (Norfolk Institute for Professional Excellence),
which is a dedicated service to recruit and develop newly qualified social workers.
Performance data remains unreliable. Outcomes from audits are not always used
well to help identify and address training needs. Supervision and the rationale for
decisions are not consistently recorded. However, better oversight and scrutiny by
senior leaders and elected members and substantial financial investment in services
have been made. Re-defining the councils priorities for children, organisational and
workforce changes, improving partnership arrangements, prioritising early help and
frontline social work are all examples of where sustained improvements can be
demonstrated. The authority is more outward-looking; leaders and managers are
learning from good practice in other local authorities.
The scale of the task and the journey towards improvement is illustrated well in the
childrens services improvement plan 201416. The local authority is able to chart
the progress it is making and can demonstrate an upward trajectory for some parts
of the service. The improvement board ceased in September 2014, and a joint
venture between the Department of Education (DfE) and Norfolk County Council saw
an improvement advisor appointed to further monitor progress.
Notwithstanding the improvements made since the last inspections and the progress
achieved, widespread weaknesses remain in key parts of the service and, as a
consequence, the overall effectiveness of the service remains inadequate.


Recommendations

Strengthen management oversight in the MASH to improve the quality of
decisions being made, so that children who require a social work intervention
are assessed quickly and assessment findings are recorded promptly
(paragraph 25).


Ensure strategy discussions include a comprehensive interim plan and
contingency arrangements so that children are safeguarded while section 47
enquiries are underway (paragraph 28).


Ensure that managers regularly review child in need and child protection plans
to monitor the progress families and children are making and that risk is being
reduced effectively (paragraphs 33, 34).


Ensure robust arrangements are in place when decisions are being made to
step down childrens cases from child in need and child protection plans at the
early stages of intervention (paragraph 33).


Ensure that all children and young people who go missing from home and care
have a return home interview and that the interview is recorded and used to
inform subsequent risk assessment and planning (paragraphs 40, 41, 64).


Ensure that child sexual exploitation risk assessments and minutes from multiagency sexual exploitation meetings (MASE) inform subsequent planning for
children and young people (paragraphs 43, 63).


Develop robust arrangements to track the Public Law Outline process for
individual children and ensure that work is timely and reviewed effectively
(paragraph 51).


Implement the following areas for improvement from the previous looked after
children inspection:
 improve capacity within the Independent Reviewing Service so that
caseloads are reduced and social work practice is better scrutinised to
prevent drift and delay for children (paragraphs 58, 59, 127)
 improve the timeliness and quality of health assessments for looked after
children (paragraph 54)
 improve the quality of personal education plans for looked after children
(paragraph 55)
 encourage more looked after children to take up advocacy to enable them
to fully participate in their reviews (paragraph 60).



Ensure that permanence plans are identified by childrens second reviews and
that, where children need long-term foster placements, they are formally
matched with carers (paragraphs 59, 66).

records and undertake together or apart assessments for brothers and sisters
earlier in the permanence process, to ensure the right decisions are made for
individual children (paragraphs 86, 89).
the earliest opportunity for children (paragraph 91).
addressed and that plans appropriately monitor progress and are reviewed
(paragraph 102).
information and history (paragraph 103).
choice (paragraph 117, 120).
development needs of the workforce (paragraph 125, 128).
rationale for decisions that affect individual childrens lives is consistently
recorded and explained in their records (paragraph 128).
and for staff, to share learning and continue to embed the culture of supported
and reflective practice (paragraph 131).


Summary for children and young people
 Senior managers in Norfolk have worked hard to improve services for children
and young people. Some parts of the service have improved since the last time
the county was inspected in 2013, but services for looked after children and care
leavers are still not good enough.
 Children and families can now get help from services when they first get into
difficulties. This means that families are getting support more quickly, which
stops problems getting worse and means that children do not need a social
worker.
 Some social workers do really good work which children and young people say
has helped them. This is an improvement, but there are still too many families
who do not get the right help at the right time.
 Children and young people are not always taken into care quickly enough, so that
some stay in neglectful situations for too long. Sometimes the council tries to
keep children with their families when this is not the right thing for them. Once
the council makes the decision to take children into care, it does this quickly.
 When children need to become looked after by the council, they go to live with
carers who support them. However, there are not enough foster families from
ethnic minority families for all the children who need them. This means that
sometimes children and young people have to live with families from a different
cultural background from their own.
 Children and young people who are looked after by the council usually go to good
schools but their personal education plans are not good enough.
 Although carers look after young people and children well, the council is not quick
enough at finding lasting families for children who cannot live with their own
families any more. This means that children can be unsettled while they are
waiting for a new, permanent family.
 The Norfolk In-care Council (NICC) has helped to organise celebration events for
children and young people who are looked after and has helped the council to
start improving services. This means inspectors are confident that children and
young people are listened to.
 The council does not keep in touch with enough of the young people who have
left care. This means that they might not be getting the support that they need
and are entitled to.
 Nearly all of the care leavers who are in touch with the service live in safe places
and have a choice of places to live. Young people who go to university are well
supported, but the same level of support is not offered to people going to
college. This might put some people off going to college.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Early help services in Norfolk are becoming increasingly effective in supporting
children and families before their needs reach the point of requiring social work
intervention. The local authority is working closely with health visitors, school
nursing, and the Family Nurse Partnership to provide a coordinated response to early
help support for vulnerable families and children. Children requiring early help
receive appropriate support; however, interventions and help are not always
recorded in a family support plan.
Decision-making in the MASH for early help services or children requiring social work
support is not yet consistently good and, as a result, some children do not receive
intervention when their needs indicate this is required.
When children and young people are identified as being at immediate risk of harm,
the response is timely and proportionate. However, some strategy discussions do not
give sufficient consideration to interim protection arrangements or contingencies.
Child protection enquiries are carried out by social workers who see children on their
own. Most result in a timely decision to progress to a child protection conference if
unresolved risks are identified. Partner agencies participate in child protection
conferences and core groups, which ensures that progress is regularly reviewed.
Children and young people are effectively engaged in the child protection process
and supported to attend meetings where appropriate.
Children in need are assessed and receive appropriate services, but their
assessments take too long to complete. For some children, child protection plans are
ended too soon, before sustained changes to reduce risk can be evidenced. In some
circumstances, children in need and child protection plans have not been sufficiently
robust in identifying or responding to the cumulative impact of neglect.
Children and young people are seen and seen alone and benefit from direct work in
response to identified need or risk.
Risk of child sexual exploitation is identified well, but there are some inconsistencies
in how risk assessment processes inform subsequent planning and intervention.
Return interviews are taking place where children go missing, but they are not
consistently recorded and are not always used to influence subsequent planning and
risk management.

Inspection findings
county. Early help hubs in each locality have effectively engaged a wide range


of partner agencies in delivering the early help offer. The co-location of local
services is improving multi-agency working and providing a more diverse
network of professionals who have oversight of childrens welfare. The number
of families who receive early help increased by 364 between June 2014 and
June 2015 to 2,564.
framework (CAF). In most FSP cases sampled by inspectors, there is good
oversight of childrens welfare and improved access to support services for
children and their families. When childrens needs become more acute, family
support workers rightly escalate these cases through to the MASH. The local
authority has put in place processes to transfer cases between childrens social
care and early help as childrens needs reduce or escalate but these processes
are not consistently applied. Meetings prior to transfer do not always take place
and as a consequence information-sharing is too variable. Current management
information systems do not provide sufficient insight into the effectiveness of
early help in universal services such as schools and childrens centres. A new
management information system is being introduced to ensure better recording
and information-sharing between all those involved in delivering and supporting
early help across the county.
(Norfolk Family Focus Service) over the last year. To date, approximately 1,700
families have been supported and helped out of the 2,200 engaged. Smallerscale programmes are also having a good impact on outcomes for children. The
local authority is working with a local football club, which offers a programme
of education and sport that strengthens family relationships. Outcomes include
improved school attendance for children. The Look Forward and peer
mentoring programmes in Great Yarmouth support vulnerable mothers well, to
build their capacity to parent when they have previously had children removed
from their care. This has led to some children who have been in the care of the
local authority being successfully reunited with their families.
professionals and families where there are concerns about childrens welfare.
Key agencies are co-located in the MASH, including childrens social care, adult
social care, police, health, independent domestic violence advisory services,
probation and a local project working with children and young people at risk of
sexual exploitation. Housing, mental health services and education also provide
a virtual link to the MASH to support more effective ways of informationsharing.
shared swiftly between agencies and provides opportunities for a better joinedup approach to work in respect of missing children, child sexual exploitation,
female genital mutilation and radicalisation. The multi-agency response is well
developed, with clear procedures in place to support the development of this
work. Norfolk is working closely with a national charity, using its expertise to


help raise awareness of the issues locally. A plan to increase capacity in the
MASH with a dedicated worker aims to enhance further the councils approach
to female genital mutilation.
range of agency checks is undertaken by social workers in the MASH and
consent is consistently sought from parents for information to be shared. A
small minority of children in need referrals seen by inspectors should have
resulted in an assessment or further action where a decision was made by
managers in the MASH for no further action. Examples were also seen where
parents were left to set up support through early help arrangements
themselves when their children were identified as not meeting the threshold for
social work intervention. The local authority has sought to strengthen this by
providing additional managerial capacity, training staff and placing an early help
partnership assistant in the MASH. These improvements have not yet brought a
consistent response to all referrals.
after initial screening. This impacts on capacity within the MASH. The police
make the highest number of contacts, of which only a small minority (17% in
June 2015) result in a referral. Supported by the Norfolk Safeguarding Children
Board (NSCB), childrens services had already undertaken work to address this
with the police before the inspection. As a result of this proactive work, from
August 2015, the police plan take responsibility for screening their information
to ensure that contacts which progress to childrens social care services are
more appropriate.
of intervention. It is evident that some professionals across the partnership are
not yet clear in applying thresholds, given the high proportion of contacts that
do not progress to referral or are stepped down too early. Social work advice is
available in the MASH to support professionals regarding threshold decisions.
the response by the MASH is timely and proportionate. The MASH convenes a
strategy discussion and includes the duty team, which takes responsibility for
the subsequent child protection enquiry. Strategy discussions convened by the
MASH include appropriate agencies. Risk and protective factors are highlighted
and actions identified, but interim protection and contingency arrangements
while child protection enquiries are being undertaken are not yet good.
their own and carefully consider their experiences. The Signs of Safety
framework is used well to consider risk and protective factors and social
workers respond appropriately to those children in need of help and protection.
Enquiries include the key agencies. Where enquiries identify a need for an initial
child protection conference, this is timely in most cases. The local authority has
made significant progress in this area, improving performance from 59% of


initial conferences being completed within 15 days of a strategy discussion in
only 48% of assessments were completed within appropriate timescales. This is
an area in which the local authority has struggled to make progress, despite the
recommendations of the previous inspection. Most children are seen in a timely
manner by duty teams when they are first referred, and they are accessing
services, but their assessments are often written up late. The impact of this is
that some families wait too long to know the outcome of the assessment and in
a small number of cases experience some delay in receiving services. The local
authority recognises this is an area that requires improvement and is taking
steps to improve it with the introduction of the single assessment and
increasing the capacity within the assessment teams in the planned restructure
of the service in September 2015.
progress has been made to improve their quality. Many assessments seen are
now of a good quality, use the Signs of Safety framework and include an
effective analysis of risk and protective factors to support effective planning for
children to better target their individual needs. They evidence individual need,
the childs and the parents views (including non-resident parents) and family
history, and they consider childrens ethnicity and their cultural needs.
service. Inspectors saw some examples of effective work to help reduce
problems. Children are contributing well to their plans. A range of direct work
was seen in the children with disabilities team, carried out with the support of
parents and professionals, such as occupational therapists, to ensure an holistic
approach to identifying and addressing childrens needs. Most social workers
demonstrate a good understanding of childrens circumstances and build
trusting relationships with them.
of services being provided to improve outcomes. The local authoritys
performance data indicates some delays in child in need plans being reviewed,
although in almost all cases seen by inspectors children had plans in place
which had been reviewed regularly. Some child in need cases are stepped down
or closed too early or with insufficient follow-up support in place. Children
continue to experience difficulties and as a consequence some children are
unnecessarily re-referred for services within a short period of time. Re-referral
rates of 25% in May 2015 against a national average of 23% indicate that the
authoritys performance is not significantly worse than elsewhere. However, the
local authority is closely monitoring re-referral rates to understand better the
impact on children.
and children in need of help and protection remains too variable. Managers


quality assure most aspects of recording on childrens electronic files and this is
helping to improve the quality of recording and planning. Independent child
protection chairs are responsible for developing and overseeing child protection
plans. However, the majority of plans seen by inspectors are weak. Some do
not sufficiently consider how change will be measured and lack clear timescales
and contingencies. There is a quality assurance process in place to oversee the
quality of the child protection planning but more work is required to strengthen
this process. Independent chairs have very high caseloads, and this limits their
capacity to track progress made between reviews and influence the quality of
work undertaken.
attended by professionals from across the partnership. Parents and, where
appropriate, children and young people, are routinely invited. All children and
young people over 10 years who are the subject of a child protection
conference are referred to the advocacy service to support their participation.
This service was reaching 88% of these young people in February 2015.
Inspectors saw good examples where children had been supported to attend
conferences, or to have their views reflected via their advocate. This is having a
positive impact for some young people.
of harm remains or intensifies. However, inspectors saw a very small number of
cases where the cumulative impact of neglect was not recognised and so did
not result in escalation. In these cases children remained for too long in
harmful situations. At September 2014, over two thirds (67%) of children with
a child protection plan had a plan as a result of neglect. This was substantially
higher than both the statistical neighbour comparator level at 41% and the
England average at 43%. While there has been a reduction, with the most
recent single months figure at the time of the inspection at 60% for June 2015,
neglect continues to account for a very high proportion of child protection
plans. The local authority has identified this as an area of weakness and has
taken steps to address this by introducing the Signs of Safety framework as a
model of intervention across the service. Further training on the graded care
profile is also planned to strengthen practice in this area. Some 80 neglect
champions have been identified across different council departments, including
housing, to support early identification of neglect when visiting families. This
role is relatively new and needs to be further developed, but the benefits the
authority anticipates are likely to support good practice in the early
identification of neglect.
only been subject to a child protection plan for three months or less. Inspectors
found a very small minority of these cases had been stepped down from child
protection plans prematurely. While inspectors saw no cases where this had
resulted in harm, this practice could expose children to further risk. This is an
issue that the local authority is aware of, having noted a high proportion of
children becoming subject to a child protection plan for a second or subsequent


time during 2015. This was at 23% in June 2015 against a national average of
figure to the end of June 2015 is 17%, but the issue requires careful
monitoring.
abuse, parental drug and alcohol misuse and the impact of parental mental illhealth. A range of services are in place to support children and their parents
experiencing domestic abuse, including a local domestic abuse charity and a
womens centre which provides a one-stop shop for domestic abuse services.
Arrangements are in place across the partnership to support the coordination of
services for medium- and high-risk victims of domestic violence through the
multi-agency risk assessment conference process (MARAC). Minutes seen by
inspectors show that these meetings involved the appropriate agencies.
Services are also in place to support parents with drug and alcohol problems
and mental ill-health. The parent and infant mental health service attachment
project is a good example of partnership working between childrens social care
and mental health services. This service is beginning to demonstrate evidence
of impact in preventing children becoming looked after and in promoting better
quality relationships for children.
and robust processes for identifying and tracking them and those who are
electively home educated. The local authority maintains an up-to-date list of
children missing education and the circumstances of children are well known.
The local authority undertakes all reasonable checks to establish the
whereabouts of children missing education, including with health, housing and
social care services, the Department for Work and Pensions and the UK border
agency.
meeting. The police missing children service is linked with the Safer Schools
Partnership, and information-sharing is managed proactively through linked
police officers and police community support officers. Police undertake safe and
well checks and a commissioned service undertakes return interviews, unless
children and young people are open to childrens services, in which case their
return interviews are undertaken by their allocated social workers. Return
interviews are taking place but they are not consistently recorded and
information from them does not always effectively inform subsequent planning
and risk management.
were identified as missing from home in Norfolk, of whom 50 received social
work intervention. At the time of the inspection, there were no young people
missing from home for more than 24 hours. Young people missing from home
or care are supported through a commissioned project, which aims to reach out
to vulnerable young people by engaging them with services through return
home interviews. Where young people do not engage in return interviews,


project workers attempt to follow up through writing to the young person and
their parents. In addition, project workers provide a range of support to young
people including direct work, befriending and signposting.
exploitation and understand the steps they need to take when concerns are
identified. A specialist multi-agency child sexual exploitation team is located in
the MASH and undertakes screening of all young people identified as at risk of
sexual exploitation. A total of 264 children and young people living at home
were subject to screening between 1 April 2015 and 5 July 2015. At the time of
the inspection, no children were identified as at high risk and 10 were identified
as at medium risk.
children at risk of sexual exploitation are protected well. All cases of young
people identified as at medium or high risk trigger ongoing intervention by
childrens services and are reviewed at a multi-agency sexual exploitation
meeting (MASE). Some examples were seen by inspectors where young people
had been subject to MASE meetings but the minutes and action plans arising
from the meetings are not always evident on young peoples files. Where
concerns regarding child sexual exploitation are identified, social workers can
identify the risks to the young people they are working with but not all could
locate the risk assessment that had been completed in the MASH or articulate
how the risk assessment and risk management plan take account of changes in
the young persons situation.
exploitation, linked to missing children and perpetrators, and has effectively
identified hot spot areas around the county. Work with the night-time economy,
including taxi firms, licensing renewals by the district councils and hoteliers to
raise awareness of child sexual exploitation is underdeveloped.
exploitation in Norfolk. A local project undertakes direct work with young
people providing one-to-one befriending, awareness-raising and advice in order
to reduce the risk of sexual exploitation. The local authority has also
commissioned additional capacity through the voluntary sector to provide
workers who will join social work teams in September 2015. This will enhance
the assistance and expertise available to safeguard those young people most
vulnerable to sexual exploitation.
as homeless in Norfolk. No young people were placed in bed and breakfast
provision at the time of the inspection. A joint protocol for homeless 16- to 17year-olds is well supported by the district councils and clearly identifies the
process for assessing and meeting the needs of this vulnerable group. Young
people presenting as homeless are assessed to consider appropriate
accommodation options where a return home is not achievable, including


accommodation into the care of the local authority. A youth mediation service is
supporting over 25 young people to remain at home or return home where they
have been assessed as being on the edge of care or at risk of homelessness.
Requests for accommodation are discussed at a transitions panel, established to
provide the local authority with an overview of needs and ensure young people
are aware of accommodation available to them.
made against professionals who work with children. The service was subject to
a review by the local authority in 2014 and this led to clear governance and line
management arrangements that are independent of childrens social work
services. The service provides a timely response to concerns and is responsible
for chairing strategy discussions where cases fall within its remit. The quality of
minutes and action plans is good and the officers involved are knowledgeable
and appropriately questioning and challenging. Close partnership working was
seen in cases sampled and the designated officers role is well embedded.
the childrens workforce of private fostering, although the number of
notifications has remained in line with previous years, with 44 notifications in
a private fostering action plan has improved the help children receive once they
are identified. The response to notifications is prompt and assessments of
children and carers are of a consistently reasonable standard, although not all
assessments are completed quickly enough. The local authority treats every
privately fostered child as a child in need. Inspectors could see that this
approach has benefited young people by making it easier for them to access
services. The voice of the child is evident in the work seen and children and
young people are visited regularly. The local authority has undertaken positive
work to secure permanence for privately fostered children when it is in their
best interests.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Inadequate

Summary
Outcomes for looked after children and care leavers in Norfolk are inadequate. The
progress and pace of change, well evidenced in other parts of the service, have been
too slow to deliver tangible improvements for looked after children. Too many
recommendations from the 2013 Ofsted inspection have not been addressed
adequately. While there are emerging and already realised strengths in the service,
these are outweighed by some widespread and serious shortfalls in practice and
service delivery.
Inconsistent application of thresholds for instigating the Public Law Outline means
that some children spend extensive periods in the pre-proceedings stage with no
review or progress against agreed actions. As a result, a small number of children
and young people remain in unsuitable and unsafe situations, while other children
have remained the subject of statutory orders for too long.
At the time of the inspection, 16 looked after children did not have an allocated
social worker. In one team, 13 children remained unallocated for three months. In a
number of these cases, serious delay and drift had occurred in progressing key
meetings and decisions. Visits to looked after children are not always timely and in
some cases undertaken by a duty worker so children are not always able to develop
meaningful relationships with a named social worker.
Care plans are not based on a robust analysis of need, including consideration of
permanence arrangements. For a small number of children, the initial decision for
permanence through adoption is not made early enough. Independent reviewing
officers (IRO) caseloads are too high. Reviews are timely in the majority of cases but
the level of drive, scrutiny and challenge from IROs is not sufficient to ensure that
plans progress with pace. A legacy of poor planning for permanence means that not
all children who need an adoptive family have had that opportunity. Recent practice
has improved and a total of 103 children have been adopted in the last 12 months.
The educational attainment and progress of looked after children remain too
variable. Educational plans are poor and do not identify how children will get the
best possible chance to achieve at school. Childrens and young peoples access to
timely initial health assessments remains poor.
The local authority is not in touch with 25% of its care leavers. It does not know
what needs they have and is not safeguarding and supporting them well enough.
Pathway plans for care leavers lack appropriate actions to ensure their needs are
being met. Risk, health, education and employment needs are not adequately
prioritised.


Inspection findings
and sustained impact on the experiences and progress of children looked after
and achieving permanence, which remain inadequate. In particular, inspectors
found poor oversight, inconsistent care planning, unallocated cases, insufficient
attention to childrens health and education, an overloaded independent
reviewing officer service and very poor support for care leavers.
and young people in Norfolk are inconsistent. In a small minority of cases seen
by inspectors, children remained in unsuitable and risky situations for too long
before the local authority took appropriate action.
by children in need and safeguarding teams means that the majority of children
subject to pre-proceedings letters spend extensive periods at this stage with no
review or progress against agreed actions. The local authority has recognised
the need to improve practice and oversight for these children and is working to
strengthen pre-proceedings letters and track these cases more closely.
However, this has not yet secured a more effective approach. At the time of the
inspection, 32 cases (60 children) were subject to pre-proceedings, and 80% of
these had not had a review of their circumstances. A lack of robust tracking,
poor management oversight and inconsistent planning hamper timely decisionmaking about applications for legal orders. Delays at the pre-proceedings stage
mean that some children experience unnecessary drift and delay in achieving
permanent care arrangements.
young people identified 20 children accommodated under section 20 of the
Children Act 1989 for far too long where legal meetings or proceedings should
have been instigated earlier to secure their status. A further 21 children and
young people are living at home under Placement with Parents regulations and
are waiting for the discharge of statutory orders. Six (20%) have been living
with their parents for a number of years, remaining subject to statutory orders
and looked after children regulations unnecessarily. The local authority has
recently commissioned a local law firm to progress this work. The review has
identified 35 children in care whom it would be appropriate to reunite with their
parents, but just seven have successfully returned home so far. As a result,
some children and young people live away from their families for too long.
worker. The majority of these children (13) were in one team in the north of
the county and had been without their own allocated social worker for three
months. A series of duty workers, who did not know or fully understand the
care histories of these children, ensured they had visits in line with statutory
requirements. However, these arrangements limit the opportunity for children
to develop trusting relationships. In a number of these cases, serious delay and


drift had occurred in progressing key meetings. For example, in one case a
four-month delay in convening a legal meeting following a decision to revoke a
five-year-old childs placement order led to further delays in permanence
planning. In another, a statutory review went ahead without a progress report
or a social worker attending.
after children had a health assessment within 20 working days in the six
months before the inspection. This means that for the vast majority of children
and young people their health needs are not known or fully understood by the
adults caring for them in the early days of their placement, and are not
sufficiently considered in early planning. In 201314, performance in ensuring
timely annual health assessments stood at 84%  just below the statistical
neighbour average of 86% and an England average of 88%. According to
Norfolks own figures, performance has since declined further, with only 79%
having an up-to-date assessment in June 2015. The proportion of Norfolk
children with up-to-date dental checks was also low at 77% in 201314,
compared with 81% for statistical neighbours and an England average of 84%.
The authoritys performance has improved slightly, with 81% of children having
an up-to-date check in June 2015. The overall quality of the vast majority of
health assessments viewed by inspectors was inadequate, with important
information missing and plans not specific about what needs to be done, by
when or by whom. It is recognised that improving performance in this area is a
whole-system issue and that recent difficulties recruiting designated health
professionals may have hindered progress. However, this remains a serious and
significant weakness in the authoritys ability to meet the health care needs of
looked after children.
Information about attainment history is missing and targets are not specific or
challenging enough. Childrens and young peoples views are not always
evident. This suggests that PEPs are not used effectively to plan and evaluate
support for childrens education and to promote and raise childrens aspirations.
The local authoritys own audit of PEPs (May 2015) identified a number of areas
in which it is not meeting its statutory duties in this respect.
children do not see their social worker as often as is required by statutory
regulations. In a small minority of cases, the quality of social work support was
poor, with long gaps between visits and an overall lack of purpose, leading to
slow progress against the plan for the child.
working with well and could articulate childrens and young peoples wishes,
feelings, needs and any specific risks. However, written assessments and care
plans do not always reflect this. Most care plans outline objectives for children,
but are less specific about timescales for the work and the roles and
responsibilities of agencies involved.


good enough service for looked after children. Caseloads of individual IROs, at
an average of 92 cases, significantly exceed the recommended average. This
limits their capacity to effectively scrutinise, challenge, escalate and follow
through identified deficits in care planning.
consistent relationships with children and young people. They do not
sufficiently influence the quality of practice or give enough consideration to
permanence for looked after children at their second review. The local
authoritys own audit (April 2015) identified that care plans are not yet specific
enough about actions and required progress. In June 2015, 60% of looked
after children had attended their reviews, although this figure fluctuates and
has been as low as 45% in two of the last nine months. More work needs to be
done to ensure children and young people are encouraged either by attending
or otherwise participating in their review, so that they contribute to their own
care planning arrangements.
services, which help them express their views and influence decision-making.
However, take-up is low with only 47 children and young people currently
receiving advocacy services. Independent visitor services have reached
capacity; 36 young people have an independent visitor, but a further 22 are
waiting for a service. The use of advocacy in complaints is low, with advocates
involved in only 27% of cases. The local authority is aware of this and has
allocated additional funding to double the amount of advocates available, recommissioned the advocacy service and is raising awareness of advocacy
through social media, foster carers, social workers and the IRO service.
rationale for the decisions is not clear. This means that important information
about the reasons for decisions being made will be unavailable to children who
wish to read their care files later in life. Chronologies are nearly always in place,
but do not consistently provide a good overview of childrens circumstances,
diluting their usefulness to inform assessments, planning and reviews. Key
documents, such as risk assessments, legal minutes, chronologies and health
assessments, are not easy for social workers to find, with many not being
available.
home, a reflection of the largely rural nature of the county, with 181 (17%)
living outside the county. One young person placed out of county was visited by
an inspector and seen to be making good progress. However, the provider did
not initially receive timely information from the local authority to inform risk
assessments and planning. Nineteen children and young people living outside
Norfolk have not had an annual health assessment and 13 have not had a
timely review of their looked after arrangements.


exploitation are considered. The MASH completes all risk assessments for
children at risk or potential risk of child sexual exploitation. At the time of the
inspection, 41 looked after children had risk assessments. These had identified
five looked after young people at high risk of child sexual exploitation, 13 at
medium risk and 26 at low risk. In a minority of cases seen by inspectors, social
workers found it difficult to locate key documents relating to the completed risk
assessments. This dilutes the effectiveness of these critical documents in
reducing risks and protecting children.
missing from care episodes, although these are of variable quality and do not
sufficiently consider push and pull factors or use information to update care
plans. Specific risks to children and young people and the actions needed to
reduce repeat incidents are not always included in care plans. The local
authoritys own data identifies that between 1 April 2015 and 5 July 2015 there
were 92 missing from care episodes involving 45 young people (34 Norfolk
children and 11 children living in Norfolk placed by other local authorities).
Twenty-four (53%) of these young people were living in residential care. When
children have been missing more than three times in a 42-day period formal
arrangements are in place to trigger a strategy meeting. However, social
workers, particularly in the children in need, safeguarding and looked after
childrens teams, do not always follow these arrangements. As a result, children
experience drift and delay in assessment and planning to identify and reduce
the dangers associated with going missing.
(CCAS) provide oversight of children entering care, designing packages to help
them return to their parents care or to do well in their placement. Where the
care plan is for the child to return home, assessments consider risk.
Reunification plans include a range of services to support families but do not
routinely include contingency planning or a written format detailing the support
plan.
(68%) of children remaining within the same placement for at least two years,
affording them stability and security. For some children, short-term foster
placements have drifted into long-term placements by default rather than as a
result of decisions being based on a clear assessment. To support planning, the
local authority intends to introduce a permanence panel to formally recognise
these placements, where it is the best option for the child.
experienced chair. However, records of these meetings do not always reflect
the detailed discussions held by panel to ensure that foster carers are able to
meet the needs of children. As a result, there have been some missed
opportunities to develop the skills of foster carers. The agency decision-maker


has not demonstrated enough scrutiny of these minutes to ensure the service
has picked up themes and trends from panel minutes.
court and the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service
(Cafcass). When legal action is necessary, the timeliness of court proceedings is
good at less than 23 weeks on average.
contact arrangements to help them maintain relationships with people
important to them. Family support workers supervise contact where necessary
and provide reports to social workers. Some creative and persistent work by
social workers has enabled looked after children to enjoy contact arrangements
where relationships had previously broken down.
children who may benefit from additional support. A looked after childrens child
and adolescent mental health (CAMHS) worker provides an effective
consultation service to social workers and foster carers. At the time of the
inspection, 90 looked after children were receiving a CAMHS service on a oneto-one basis, with the COMPASS project working with a further 26 children.
Examples of effective work with children and young people were evident in
cases sampled by inspectors.
of, an offence has fallen. In 200910, 6% of looked after children had been
cautioned or convicted. In 201314, the figure was 4%. The local authority
attributes this reduction to joint working with targeted youth services.
carers to prevent family breakdown. Edge of care services in Norfolk are having
a positive impact in reducing the need for children to come into care. Close
links have been established with a number of local boarding schools to widen
options for those children on the edge of care where the risk of placement
breakdown is of concern. Currently 23 children and young people are helped by
the use of these schools. The local authoritys outreach service has worked with
these (97%) remained in the care of their families. Other services, such as the
Parental Infant Mental Health (PIMH) and COMPASS project, demonstrate
effective support in keeping children in the care of their families.
express their views. However, life story work is inconsistent, with some children
in long-term care foster care still waiting for support to help them understand
their childhood experiences and their histories, and what led them to be in care.
considered by social workers but are not always evident in assessments.


Inspectors saw examples of sensitive efforts to address childrens cultural and
religious needs. In one case, a young person was supported to visit their
homeland to maintain contact with their extended family.
people who are fully involved in the development and commissioning of
services. Children and young people were involved in a service pledge (The
Promise) which helps to reinforce the rights of Norfolks looked after children. A
DVD entitled The Promise is available for young children to help them
understand what is happening to them. Children and young people spoken to
by inspectors said they understood their rights and entitlements, and know how
to make a complaint. Children and young people spoke positively about their
relationships with their social workers and foster carers. Their achievements are
celebrated. This gives them the opportunity to meet others and socialise, and
enables them to build their confidence and self-esteem in group settings.
Orders (SGO). For some children for whom the plan is special guardianship with
family members, arrangements for temporary foster care approvals are not
clear. Assessments to determine whether or not these arrangements are right
for children and young people are not of consistent quality, and the status of
some carers lacks clarity. The local authority supports over 200 children and
young people under SGOs, residence orders and child arrangement orders.
required, with a small number being substantially outside the time limits set by
the local authority. The voice of children and young people within foster carer
reviews is absent. The lack of any representation of children and young people
at foster carer reviews does not allow for a robust review process. Children and
young people are not given the opportunity to comment on their care, and the
local authority is missing an essential part of feedback to ensure carers are
providing the best possible care.
fostering service to support a number of policy and procedural changes,
improve communication between foster carers and social workers and revise
the training offer. The group ran a highly successful conference earlier in the
year, inviting prominent experts in the field to support the development of the
service.
long-term and short breaks services. The local authority has also recruited
specific carers within its foster care service for young people who would
otherwise be held overnight in police cells (known as PACE beds). For children
who require emergency accommodation through the out of hours service, there
is a sufficient resource due to the local authority identifying spare capacity in
some foster care placements. Foster carers have appropriate delegated
authority to make day-to-day decisions for the children in their care and report


that while they feel confident about the limits of delegation they are not always
sure that social workers understand the process, particularly around overnight
stays.
and subjects. The local authoritys own data shows that an increasing
proportion of children in the Early Years Foundation Stage reached a good level
of development in 2013/14. However, the proportion achieving this was still low
at 28%. In 2013/14, children at Key Stage 1 achieved well in reading, writing
and mathematics, generally better than looked after children in similar areas.
Between 2012/13 and 2013/14, an increasing proportion of looked after
children achieved the expected level of attainment in reading and writing at Key
Stage 2, but a declining proportion in mathematics. The attainment of children
at Key Stage 4 has declined over the last three academic years. In 2013/14,
just 8% achieved five GCSEs including English and mathematics compared with
statistical neighbours at 13.8% and the England average at 12%. This
corresponded with an increasing proportion of children at Key Stage 4 with a
statement of special educational needs.
consistently, although some progress has been made. At Key Stage 1 the
attainment gap closed well in reading, writing and mathematics between
percentage points gap in reading. At Key Stage 2 the attainment gap between
looked after children and their peers has reduced well each year for three years
in reading and writing but it has grown in mathematics. At Key Stage 4 the gap
in attainment between looked after children and their peers remains wide;
indeed it has increased in the last three years.
stability of childrens education placements is good, with 90% of newly looked
after children being able to maintain their education place throughout the
academic year 2014/15. Only alternative education providers registered as good
providers are used for the small proportion of looked after children who attend
alternative provision. Increasing proportions of looked after children attend a
good or better school, with 84% doing so this year.
children is comparable to all children in the county at 95.1%. Improvements in
attendance for looked after children since the introduction of welfare calls has
seen the percentage of sessions missed reduce, from 4.7% in 2012/13 to 3.8%
in 2013/14. Persistent absences have also reduced from 4.8% to 3.7% over the
same period (both lower than statistical neighbour and England averages).
However, fixed-term exclusions for looked after children are increasing year on
year. These are monitored through welfare calls. The virtual school is actively
engaged in working with schools to reduce fixed-term exclusions and ensure a
swift re-integration back into class.


The graded judgment for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
children staying in care for too long. Practice is significantly improving, and in
the last 12 months 103 children have been adopted. A further 50 children have
been placed or matched with potential adopters. The local authority has been
successful in placing for adoption a higher number of younger children aged
five years and under and recognises that progress has been too slow for older
children, with only 11 children aged six to nine years being adopted in 2014
on a three-year average was 4% for 201114 and was below statistical
neighbours at 6% and the England average of 5%.
were placed with their adoptive families, with an adoption order in place, within
the national target of 487 days. Planning for young babies is also undertaken
promptly, with a small number of very young children being placed with their
adoptive parents and secured by an adoption order within 12 months. However,
there is still too much variability in the timescales taken for progressing
adoption in a number of individual cases. These range from 16 to 809 days
from children entering care to moving in with an adoptive family.
child entering care. For a small number of children, the initial decision to pursue
legal permanence through adoption is not made early enough to progress their
plans for adoption at the optimal time. This has taken over a year for six
children.
trajectory for the three-year average and one year performance for both the
length of time between a child entering care and moving in with their adoptive
family and between the local authority receiving authority to place and deciding
on a match. It is better than the England average for both indicators although
slower on average than statistical neighbours. This is a positive picture in
relation to the number of children being adopted, with few children waiting to
be matched.
based on a three-year average was 13% for 201114. This has increased over
time, albeit slowly, and was below statistical neighbours (17%) but higher than
the England average (8%).
reports and adoption placement reports seen by inspectors lack sufficient depth
and analysis to find the right families and inform good matching of children


with adopters. Realistic and important information about the impact of trauma
and childrens presenting behaviour are not always covered in sufficient depth.
Assessments of whether brothers and sisters should remain together are not
consistently carried out. These weaknesses highlight the need to strengthen
management scrutiny and oversight of the quality of reports.
recent rise in adoption disruptions with a small number (six) of very young
children experiencing potentially avoidable disruptions in the last 12 months.
Inspectors saw some examples of a few young children who had been placed
for adoption without thorough preparation. They had not undergone any
therapeutic intervention to enable the correct permanence plans to be
considered. The local authority is aware of the lessons that need to be learnt
from these disruptions to improve practice and inform future matching
arrangements. However, this is not yet consistently evidenced within too many
matching reports.
children of the 103 adopted have benefited from this arrangement and only two
foster to adopt families have been approved. Inspectors saw some examples of
very young babies who should have had the opportunity to live with their
adoptive family at a much earlier stage avoiding a placement move from foster
carer to adopter. The local authority is now actively promoting and exploring
foster to adopt arrangements and this can be seen in prospective adopter
reports and adoption panel minutes.
proactive and successful for most children. Referrals to the National Adoption
Register are carried out quickly where there are no in-house adopters available
who can meet the needs of the child. This is assisted by early identification of
these children through adoption tracking and involvement of family finding staff
early in the planning process. The adoption service uses activity days, referrals
to the consortium and profiling campaigns to promote adoption and has an
informative website that enables prospective adopters to make enquiries online.
Adopters spoken to by inspectors say that they received a timely and
welcoming response from the agency to their enquiries. Assessments of
prospective adopters seen by inspectors are informative, analytical and offer a
well-rounded picture of how the family would meet the needs of a child. There
is, though, a lack of urgency in completing assessments of the majority of
prospective adopters. In the last 12 months, only two fifths of assessments
were completed within six months.
an evaluative and analytical approach to the role. Panel training is focused on
relevant issues. The adoption panel provides feedback to the local authority,
but there is a need to strengthen its oversight to ensure reports are of
consistently good quality to inform matching. There are shortfalls relating to the
recruitment of more diverse panel members, such as from minority ethnic


groups, and appraisals being out of date for panel members. Plans are in place
to address these. Minutes of meetings give sufficient detail for the agency
decision-maker (ADM) to scrutinise recommendations. Recommendations are
considered by the ADM and decisions are made in a timely manner.
over half of approved adopters waited more than four months from the time of
approval for a child to be matched with their family. There are currently 74
adopters without a placement. Approved adopters are diverse, with single
families, dual heritage families and same-sex families available to meet the
needs of a range of children.
difficult for adopters to see immediately where they can get support from and
who to make contact with, should they require additional help. Good support
plans are developed following an assessment of need and give a much greater
level of detail relating to the specific needs of individual children and their
families.
their families. There is a waiting list of 20 children and their families requiring
assessment for adoption support. While no families had waited longer than four
months at the current time, caseloads within the support team are too high to
meet the demand for assessment and services. The delay means that the local
authority cannot be confident about the potential risk of breakdown in families
whose support needs have yet to be assessed.
therapeutic work, such as Theraplay, is available through the adoption support
team, helping children to make and sustain positive attachments and enabling
adoptive parents to meet their childs needs more effectively. Where more
individualised packages of specialist intervention are needed, they are provided
through commissioned services and finance is not a barrier. Services are
available both pre- and post-order where there is an assessed need. A total of
months. One adopter stated the quality of aftercare is impressive, with
adoption social workers easily contactable and on hand for support.
services. Inspectors saw evidence of birth parents routinely being offered
counselling and support. Direct and indirect contact are facilitated well, with 20
children and their birth families being supported directly with contact and
almost 1,108 letterbox exchanges taking place over the last 12 months.
life letters as soon as they need them. When these are provided, they are of a
high quality, personalised with the childs story and journey to adoption. They
are attractively presented and sensitively written in a way that suits the childs


stage of development. One adopter spoken with by inspectors described their
childs book as just lovely, it explains it so well, and is well presented.
The graded judgment about the experiences and progress of care leavers
is inadequate
allocated family support worker or social worker. The local authority is not in
touch with the remaining 190 young people and as a consequence does not
know what, if any, support they currently need. A lack of analysis of their
circumstances, needs and risks means that the local authority cannot assure
itself that 25% of its care leavers are safe or promote their welfare through the
receipt of services to which they are entitled. This is a widespread and serious
failure, given the local authoritys responsibility as corporate parents for these
young people.
former looked after children aged 16 and 17 years. The local authority does not
know if they are at risk, in education, employment or training, living in suitable
accommodation, or able to access healthcare services.
the service is in touch with have an up-to-date pathway plan, an improvement
of 8% from the previous month. While performance is improving, the quality of
pathway plans is poor. Most plans seen by inspectors were not informed by a
robust assessment. Plans lacked identified needs, specific actions and
timescales. Risk assessments are not evident in plans, so action needed to
address and reduce risks is not clear, including where young people may be at
risk of sexual exploitation. In cases seen by inspectors, pathway plans were
reviewed. However, the lack of clear actions with timescales, and an
inconsistent approach to recording, makes it difficult to fully assess any
progress young people are making.
health assessments or they were not being used effectively to inform pathway
plans. For some young people this means their health needs are not met,
prioritised or fully understood. Within the plans considered by inspectors
descriptions of health needs were generalised and not specific enough for the
individual young person to understand their importance. Care leavers do not
receive support to access and understand their full health history via a health
passport and do not fully access health services appropriate to their needs. A
significant number of care leavers have mental health needs that are not being
appropriately assessed, and so they do not receive the help they need. Young
people who have been in care since their early years do not always have access
to information about relevant family medical history including birth information.


care leavers who are in touch with the service. They know them well, see them
regularly, and are strong advocates and work hard to ensure that they receive
the support they need. Care leavers spoke positively about individual workers,
describing positive and trusting relationships that were helping them meet their
goals and achieve independence.
touch, over half (59%) are not in education, employment or training or their
education, employment or training status is unknown. The proportion of young
people of whose status is not known, at 20% (80 young people), is higher than
in Norfolks statistical neighbours (12%) and the England average (17%). As a
result, the local authority does not know if these young people can access
appropriate opportunities to develop skills and confidence to live productive and
meaningful lives. Care leavers in full-time further education who have part-time
jobs are not provided with financial assistance for housing and this is a
disincentive to young peoples participation. In contrast there is a good financial
package of support for those at university.
helping the local authority promote apprenticeships for young people.
Additional funding to top up their apprenticeship wage without them incurring
tax or national insurance costs is available. Twenty new apprentices are due to
start new apprenticeships in September 2015. There are some good
opportunities for work experience; examples were seen of placements in charity
shops that are supporting young people to develop their confidence and workrelated skills.
authority are considered to be in unsuitable accommodation. At the time of the
inspection eight young people were considered to be homeless. Three were in
emergency accommodation, and one was in emergency bed and breakfast
accommodation. Seventeen care leavers were reported to be in houses of
multiple occupation. In cases seen, inspectors saw that risk was appropriately
considered and support given by personal advisers to help young people find
accommodation that is more suitable. A joint protocol with district councils and
housing providers is beginning to improve care leavers access to a full range of
accommodation appropriate to their needs. However, for the 59 care leavers
currently residing in unsuitable accommodation progress has not been swift
enough to enable them to secure better living arrangements. A weekly
transition panel now offers advice directly to young people and a dedicated
looked after children and care leavers placement service coordinates
applications and access to suitable accommodation. In one case seen a care
leaver with moderate learning difficulties was helped to develop skills in
cooking, budgeting and self-care by a carer, which enabled her to work towards
achieving her own tenancy.


Care leavers spoken to were positive about these arrangements and one
reported that they felt very much as if they were her family, who were
supporting her and her sibling through university.
leaving service could be improved. They suggested a link worker to support
them in their transition from being looked after to being a care leaver. The
proposal was agreed and has recently been adopted with the purpose of
providing additional support to them. It is too early to assess the impact of the
role; however, it shows that young care leavers are consulted and listened to
and can make a difference to the service they receive.
felt they had received appropriate support in gaining access to records and
assistance in gaining employment and training. However, there is wide variation
in the extent to which young peoples records confirmed their awareness of
their rights and entitlements. As such, there was little evidence that this was
routinely considered. Good examples were seen of care leavers securing full
financial packages to support their university places, although assistance in
making applications to university was varied, with some young people saying
they did not get practical help in completing the necessary forms.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Since the previous inadequate judgements for the protection of children and looked
after children in 2013, the local authority has been able to demonstrate progress in a
number of key areas in childrens services. Leaders have ensured that governance,
scrutiny and commissioning arrangements have been strengthened. Challenge and
service development are based on better information being available to senior
managers and elected members and task and finish groups are developed to focus
on service improvement.
However, while progress and improved outcomes have been achieved for some
children, this has not been as effectively translated into improved services for looked
after children and care leavers. At the time of the inspection, 16 children did not
have an allocated social worker, statutory visits were not always timely and reviews
not always undertaken with a social worker present. The local authority had lost
touch with a quarter (190) of its care leavers, including 26 of the most vulnerable 16
and 17 year olds. The pace of improvement to adequately address their needs has
been far too slow and, as a consequence, children and young people in receipt of
these services are left vulnerable. These services remain inadequate.
Where progress has been effective, the local authority is able to demonstrate better
outcomes for children. A major organisational restructure in the last 12 months has
changed how services are delivered to children and families and the emergence of a
more integrated approach to social work practice is evident across the service. The
final phase of the restructure will see a dedicated care leaving service come on
stream in September 2015. While performance in key areas dipped as a result of the
re-organisation, social workers report being clearer about the direction of travel.
A much improved early help offer has seen more children and families accessing
early help services. The family support plan (FSP) is being used more consistently by
other professionals across the county. Robust performance management
arrangements, effective quality assurance processes and a better suite of
performance data mean there is sharper focus on, and better scrutiny of, practice
and service delivery.
Partnership arrangements are improving. The Signs of Safety project is enabling the
partnership to develop a more consistent approach to identifying risk. The senior
leadership team cites these as tangible efforts to provide a baseline on which to build
a more effective service for all children.


Inspection findings
leadership team. Improved governance arrangements, a clearer organisational
structure and better oversight and scrutiny mean there is a sharper focus on
services for children. However, while effective progress is being made in some
service areas, particularly in early help, children in need and child protection
arrangements, services for looked after children and care leavers are
significantly weaker and remain inadequate.
undertook a considered piece of leadership work to inspire and refresh the
improvement agenda. Supported by the elected members, she established
Getting in Shape, a programme of organisational and cultural change for
childrens services in Norfolk.
permanent DCS who takes up post in September 2015 and the permanent
appointment of a new senior leadership team. This will bring to an end the
reliance on interim arrangements and provide stability to take service
developments forward. Social work is now provided under one line
management structure and separate line management is in place for roles that
require a degree of independence, such as the designated officer, the principal
social worker and the independent reviewing service. Managers know that while
extensive organisational changes have taken place and provided clearer lines of
accountability, changes to previously accepted ways of working will take longer
to embed.
issues that have been identified in previous inspection reports. He has a clear
view of the progress made and where more effective management oversight
and grip are now required. A new and experienced safeguarding board chair
was appointed in January 2014 to revitalise the work of the board and the
partnership. A new Managing Director (Chief Executive) took up post in August
Norfolk County Council. Staff spoken with understood the rationale for the
restructuring and felt that the senior management style is enabling and visible.
Engagement with staff has been helped by newsletters Improving Times and
Future Voices  Young People Divulge, written by young people. Aprils edition
focused on child sexual exploitation including promoting Chelseas Choice, a
theatre production raising young peoples awareness of abuse and exploitation.
working relationships across the senior leadership team, with the Norfolk
Safeguarding Children Board (NSCB) Chair, the Lead Member, the Managing
Director and with partners, particularly the police. The Managing Director has


regular meetings with the DCS and the NSCB Chair and is responsible for the
annual appraisal of the NSCB Chair.
introduced, including a dedicated Childrens Services Committee. The
introduction of the Childrens Services Committee has provided a clearer focus
for children and stronger scrutiny arrangements. This is reinforced by task and
finish groups where elected members identify and focus on issues of concern.
Recent task and finish groups have concentrated on childrens centres as part
of the early help offer and on looked after children, demonstrating elected
members awareness of priority areas where improvements are still required.
Evidence of impact can be seen in the thought and planning in the
commissioning process for work in childrens centres, but is not yet evidenced
in services for looked after children. Although outside the remit of the task and
finish group, it did pick up on the need to focus on services for care leavers,
and a new task and finish group has been established. It will now support
managers in progressing improvements for these young people.
parent. The Managing Director and the Lead Member understand the recent
history and what action needs to be undertaken to address past failures.
Elected members now understand their responsibility as corporate parents and
a corporate parenting policy sets out what they are required to do. Their
understanding of the corporate parenting role has been further developed by a
presentation from the Norfolk In-care Council to elected members.
needs to change to improve outcomes for children in Norfolk. The role is
embedded in key strategic functions including the Health and Well-being Board,
the Norfolk In-care Council and the Corporate Parenting Board.
continued improvement and there is a helpful commissioning and sufficiency
strategy that provides an overview of requirements. However, the action plan
on key aspects of sufficiency, such as placement choice, lacks adequate focus.
help service, addressing a significant gap highlighted at the previous inspection.
While there is more work to be done, there is a clear early help offer for
children and their families and this is being further developed through some
innovative project work. For example, Discovery Cafes in childrens centres are
engaging parents in childrens learning and the Virtual Residential School is
supporting children to stay in education.
the social and emotional well-being of pre-school children, with a steering
group that oversees and monitors implementation. The Parent Infant Mental


Health Attachment Projects help for families in the high-risk child protection
cases is one example of work being overseen by the Board.
documents available to assist planning. A clear link can be seen from assessed
need to service provision, for example the setting up of the Domestic Abuse
and Sexual Violence Board with a domestic abuse change coordinator.
monitoring framework. Data reporting to performance manage staff and inform
elected members is now common practice across the service. It still requires
more work to improve the style and presentation of information and the
accuracy of the data to inform planning. Frontline managers need to be
supported and assisted in using reliable data to manage and monitor services to
children better and address any gaps or delays in provision. Childrens services
performance is now a standing item at the bi-monthly Childrens Services
Committee.
work. Capacity to undertake more audit work will be further strengthened by
two additional staff members in the audit team. Cases seen by inspectors
showed generally improving practice, with a stronger emphasis on direct work
with children, although evidence of their voice being heard remains
inconsistent. The local authority should ensure clear linkage of audit outcomes
to the training and development needs of the workforce.
managers being supportive and approachable to assist them if their caseloads
become challenging. However, in one looked after children team, inadequate
management oversight meant that 13 children did not have an allocated social
worker for three months following the departure of a member of staff. These
cases were managed by a series of duty social workers, which seriously
impacted on the authoritys ability to effectively plan for these children.
Childrens statutory visits were undertaken by duty social workers who did not
know the children and, in one case, a childs review was undertaken without a
social worker being present.
recommended in guidance. This seriously impacts on their ability to provide an
effective service to children in care, challenge practice and promote timely
decision-making. As a consequence, some children being looked after
experience too much delay and drift. Senior managers are aware of this and
have a plan to improve capacity within the independent reviewing service.
it is not always reflective. An audit on supervision in 2014 showed weaknesses.
In response, a new supervision document provided clear expectations and
helpful how to guidance to assist in the development of good-quality


supervision. Management oversight was consistently seen on cases sampled
and should be developed further to include management rationale for the
decisions taken that impact on individual childrens lives.
authorities to pilot signs of safety as a model to engage and empower families.
The local authority has a clear timeline for the implementation of the model,
with some basic training provided for over 600 council and partner staff from
December to June 2015. The inspection saw early evidence in casework, case
recording and supervision of this model providing a clear and analytical
approach to social work. Social workers reported it being helpful in their
practice. The signs of safety project runs from October 2014 to March 2016
and work is still required to embed the principles underlying the model and to
bring all partners on board for a consistent approach.
for Norfolk because of its geographical location. Childrens services currently
have 70 agency staff with an overall turnover rate of 11%. Norfolk has made
an investment in increasing social work posts by 42 in the new structure, with
establishment. Sufficient funding has been made available for additional agency
staff, although the impact of these changes will only be fully seen when the
new structure is in place.
(Norfolk Institute for Professional Excellence) project that started in June 2014.
This dedicated service recruits newly qualified social workers and provides
additional management and peer support, an extensive induction with very low,
highly supported caseloads for the first six months. Staff spoken with by
inspectors have benefited considerably from being part of the NIPE team and
the initiative may provide a long-term solution to recruitment. Recruitment for
the fourth cohort in July 2015 has resulted in 40 newly qualified social workers
being offered roles in childrens services through one of the NIPE teams. Given
the early strong benefits seen, Norfolk should evaluate the long-term impact
and outcomes of this creative scheme for children and for staff, to share
learning and continue to embed the culture of supported and reflective practice.
has shown demonstrable benefits. Staff report having a more readable system
and one that better supports assessment. However, this is not consistent across
the service as, for example, the designated officer is not currently able to easily
access overview management reports about their service.
improvements seen on children who are looked after and care leavers is limited
and insufficiently evidenced. While this reflects a local authority working
through each service area, progress needs to be accelerated. The local
authority is aware of these as priority areas and is taking steps to address them


through a looked after children task and finish group, the setting up of a
dedicated leaving care service and the investment of two additional principal
social worker posts, one of which will focus specifically on looked after children.
Member, the council and young people. Inspectors saw clear evidence of this
strategy in operation. One example is the input of young people into making an
animated DVD for children under seven, The Promise, to explain to them what
they can expect. Young people have been consulted actively in designing new
services; for example, young people with disabilities visited potential new short
break providers.
ambitious in trying to tackle some hard-to-address areas of practice through
innovative partnership working. Examples of this include the Parent Infant
Mental Health Attachment Projects work on high-risk child protection cases,
offering intensive assessment and therapeutic intervention for families through
a multi-agency team.
report has been set up in April 2015 as part of the Department for Educations
Innovation Programme. This demonstrates a positive example of partnership
working between social care, mental health colleagues and a voluntary
organisation. Although part of the early help offer and on the edge of care, it
includes looked after young people who are placed out of authority, those who
require support to move from residential care to foster care and those who
require intensive support to return home. Young people were involved in
designing the specification for the service.
cyber-bullying initiatives, including anti-discriminatory work resulting in Norfolk
achieving fourth place in Stonewalls education equality index.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.

Executive summary
The Norfolk Safeguarding Children Board (NSCB) was found by Ofsted in 2013 to be
underdeveloped. Leadership and governance arrangements across the partnership
were weak. The appointment of a new independent chair in January 2014 has
accelerated improvements. Governance arrangements for the NSCB are good. The
Chair of the Board has facilitated a culture of openness and challenge leading to
many positive changes.
Partners increasingly hold each other to account, ensuring that the responsibility for
safeguarding is central to the work of the Board. Improvements have been
considerable, but the drive for continuous progress is hampered by the scale of work
required by the Board and partner agencies.
The establishment of a senior leadership group and multi-agency advisory subgroups has improved communication, engagement and accountability for shared
priorities, which are set out in the business plan. The Board is actively reviewing the
plan to ensure that all actions are systematically acted upon to increase the pace of
change. Delays in implementing the revised threshold guidance, progressing the
signs and safety framework and the delayed introduction of the graded care profile
are examples of where the Board needs to sharpen its oversight and monitoring
responsibilities to ensure the impetus for change across the partnership is
accelerated.
Performance data is used more effectively to understand how services across the
partnership are improving outcomes for all children, including children looked after,
those placed out of county and care leavers. However, information is primarily
focused on childrens social care; data and performance information from other
agencies are not routinely available.
The work of the child death overview panel is underdeveloped and, as a result, there
is a significant backlog of reviews to be undertaken. The Board has strengthened its
multi-agency auditing of frontline practice, ensuring that improvements linked to its
five priority areas are evaluated. Serious case reviews are undertaken and published
appropriately. An enhanced learning and development framework linked to local and
national issues ensures that learning from serious case reviews is becoming
embedded in practice.


Recommendations
those placed out of the county, are afforded the same priority and scrutiny by
all partner agencies as other groups (paragraph 149).
work of the board and its business plan are systematically followed through and
completed, including monitoring the implementation of the revised threshold
guidance, the Signs of Safety framework and the graded care profile
(paragraph 148).
the Child Death Overview Panel; complete the backlog of reviews and ensure
that learning from modifiable factors is analysed and shared (paragraph 158).
routinely available and analysed by the Board (paragraph 155).
are considered in order to understand and support the analytical profiling of
those at risk and victims of sexual exploitation (paragraph 150).
application across the partnership to ensure compliance and challenge when
required (paragraph 148).

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
low base. It was found by Ofsted in 2013 to be underdeveloped; leadership and
governance were ineffective with evidence of agencies focusing on separate
responsibilities. The Board lacked clear priorities and attendance was
inconsistent. It was ineffective in meeting its statutory responsibility to
coordinate the work of safeguarding children and young people locally.
January 2014 has accelerated improvements. Governance arrangements for the
NSCB are good; priorities are clearly defined and shared across agencies. The
Chair has facilitated a culture of openness and challenge. Partners spoken with
by inspectors confirmed that the Board is inclusive, with all agencies given an
equal voice and increasingly held to account for delivering their shared
priorities, for example to improve the protection of neglected children and
young people and those at risk of sexual abuse or sexual exploitation.


agencies including the voluntary sector. Its priorities are aligned and
attendance and participation at the Board have improved. The Board has one
lay member and is recruiting a second. Board members are able to commit
resources to the work of the Board and to achieving its priorities within their
own organisations, due to their senior positions. Policies and procedures are
up-to-date and all partners have clearly identified senior officers with specific
responsibilities for leading the safeguarding agenda in their respective agencies.
planning for children and young people at a strategic level, for example through
the Norfolk Public Protection Forum and the Children and Young People
Strategic Partnership. Locally, it is influencing services through the work of its
Local Safeguarding Children Groups (LSCGs). It has successfully led a regional
innovation bid for work with Eastern European communities. The Chair, working
collaboratively with the Director of Childrens Services (DCS) and the chief
executives from partner agencies, has set out a vision of a whole systems
approach to safeguarding underpinned by the adoption of the Signs of Safety
principles and practice.
work required by the Board. For example, a review of its threshold guidance,
identified as an area for improvement by a peer review in February 2014, has
not been completed. The inconsistent application of thresholds across childrens
social care and with other partners continues to be a key area for concern. It is
a priority for the Board to effectively monitor and respond to this challenge.
The coordination of the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) response and
consistent use of thresholds across all partners, together with the
implementation of the Signs of Safety framework, the graded care profile and
the development of the early help offer, are examples where the Board needs
to demonstrate consistent challenge to agencies to improve practice in a timely
manner. The Chair recognises that it is vital to pull together these pieces of
work to ensure that the new locality structure, the Signs of Safety approach
and the revised guidance are aligned effectively.
experiences and progress of looked after children and care leavers. For
example, there has been insufficient challenge to the local authority on the
number of care leavers it has lost contact with, including potentially vulnerable
which can help partners understand trends linked to child sexual exploitation,
this needs to be consolidated to ensure a more joined-up approach across the
partnership. Recent work by the police has provided an analytical profile of
victims of sexual exploitation, linked to missing children and perpetrators, to
support further devolvement of this work and oversight by the Board.


strengthening the ability of the Board to hold partners to account for their
performance. All sub-group chairs are members of the Board and they report
their performance activity to the Boards Performance Information and Quality
Assurance Group (PIQAG). Multi-agency audits and data provide the NSCB with
a clear understanding of the quality and deficiencies of frontline practice.
improvements in risk assessment for children and young people at risk of
sexual exploitation. Practice has now developed to ensure that all referrals,
where risk of child sexual exploitation is identified, are tracked by the specialist
team in the MASH. The Board has looked critically at the areas strategic and
operational response to children and young people at risk of sexual exploitation.
The Chair meets regularly with the DCS and the Chief Constable to ensure that
Norfolks response is fully co-ordinated and specific pieces of work are aligned
to an overall approach to combating sexual exploitation. This strategic overview
has been informed by national learning.
example, the commissioning and roll-out of Chelseas Choice, a theatre
production to raise awareness of child sexual exploitation, was successful with
independent schools  included in the performance schedule.
regular attendance from all seven district councils. This ensures that each
district council is integrating safeguarding into its services and assessing these
against Board priorities (for example, child sexual exploitation and taxi
licensing), taking a consistent approach to safer recruitment checks,
disseminating learning from serious case reviews and involvement in the
Boards local safeguarding childrens groups. There is an escalation process in
operation for any issues that cannot be resolved within these groups and the
Board has a challenge log that is regularly reviewed by the Chair and the
Boards business manager.
the scheduling of reporting and multi-agency compliance with data, are not
fully embedded. In consequence, some actions arising from the work of the
Board and identified in the business plan are not systematically implemented.
The Board has strengthened its multi-agency audit process of frontline practice,
ensuring improvements linked to its five priority areas are evaluated. Themed
audits carried out in the last 12 months focused on child sexual abuse enquiries
that resulted in no further action, MASH contacts and referrals, the quality of
work with sexually exploited children and the journey of the child through the
system. Learning from audits is beginning to be disseminated down to
practitioners to help support improvement in practice. For example, a recent


audit of child sexual exploitation cases was undertaken and identified where
practice needs to be strengthened.
current processes are clear and effective. The level of activity  seven SCRs in
total since 2013  is a departure from previous reliance on discretionary multiagency reviews. Decisions by the Chair have been validated by the National
Panel of Independent Experts (NPIE). Findings from SCRs have informed the
Boards priorities and the neglect and child sexual abuse strategies. A
composite SCR action plan, taking forward the learning from current SCRs, is
updated by the Board every quarter.
for partner agencies to use to disseminate learning to their frontline
practitioners. Between April and May 2015, six road shows led by the Board
were carried out across the county with multi-agency presentations. The Chair
has met with frontline staff who reported positively on the impact of these
events. Practitioners spoken with during the inspection confirmed they were
aware of the findings from SCRs and using them to inform their practice.
panels 201314 annual report was not completed and inconsistent attendance
by clinicians meant that a third of meetings were cancelled. As a result, there is
a backlog of child death cases that have not yet been reviewed (84 children).
This delay undermines the work of the panel to raise awareness of modifiable
factors. Effective challenge has been made to health partners by the Chair of
the NSCB. A newly appointed CDOP Chair, who is also a clinician, will take up
post in September 2015.
partners completing these audits were invited to a challenge day with the
Chair. This process has been used effectively by Board members to identify and
improve safeguarding practice.
programme. The training is accessible through the NSCB website and is
managed by the NSCB support team, which shortlists applicants to ensure that
the courses are delivered to staff across the partnership. A comprehensive
range of training is available, responsive to agency needs and aligned to the
Boards priorities. This included, for example, regular multi-agency courses on
child sexual exploitation, information-sharing and child sexual abuse.
and private sector providers of early help services. Attendance data is
monitored and reported quarterly to the NSCBs Workforce Development Group
(WDG). The WDG also considers wider workforce training needs and the
challenges faced in ensuring all staff are trained to an appropriate level. To


support this, the NSCB has a validation panel that scrutinises the content and
quality of single agency training packages at lower levels.
highly valued. Practitioners who spoke with inspectors during the inspection
reinforced this. A joint NSCB and Norfolk Family Justice Board (NFJB)
conference was held this year on evidencing neglect in care proceedings.
training on frontline staff were carried out between April and June this year.
This detailed qualitative assessment has provided valuable information on the
positive impact of multi-agency training on practice, for example increased
knowledge when risk-assessing neglected children.
proactively involved in the work of the Board, for example facilitating and
presenting to 309 people at the child sexual exploitation conference in
November 2014, in partnership with police cadets. As a result of this event, the
Norfolk In-care Council (NICC) has developed training for foster carers and
adopters to raise awareness of vulnerability to grooming and exploitation. The
Board remains committed to involving young people in the safeguarding
agenda. However, recruitment and retention at the Shadow Board has
struggled over the last six months. Plans are in place to address this by working
with schools, using workshops developed and led by young people for young
people, to reach a wider audience and engage children directly in the
conversations about what makes them feel safe.
progress following the Ofsted inspection in 2013. It sets out the Boards
priorities and its aspirations for safeguarding children and young people. It
covers the work of the restructured sub-committees, including improvements to
the SCR process. The report provides a comprehensive analysis of the many
challenges for safeguarding children and young people in Norfolk. It provides
sufficient analysis about the extent of improvement work required across the
partnership and in particular children social care.
yet to be completed.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Helen Cawston HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Louise Hocking HMI
Team inspectors: Donna Marriott HMI, Linda Steele HMI, Tina Shepherd HMI,
Marcie Taylor HMI, Anji Parker HMI, Jon Bowman HMI, Brenda Mclaughlin HMI
Senior data analyst: Stewart Hartshorne
Quality assurance manager: John Mitchell Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 1231
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted

 Crown copyright 2015


