Reading Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and protection,
children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 23 May to 15 June 2016
Report published: 5 August 2016

Childrens services in Reading are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Inadequate


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Inadequate

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local authority
functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the report of the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local Safeguarding Children Boards
(Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
There are serious, persistent and systemic failures in the services provided to
children who need help and protection by Reading Borough Council.
Important areas of childrens social care services in Reading have deteriorated since
previous Ofsted inspections in 2012 and 2013, particularly services for children in
need and services for children at risk of and experiencing significant harm.
The safeguarding needs of children at potential risk of harm are not addressed by
consistently prompt and thorough inquiries. Children are left too long in situations of
unknown and acute risk. Escalating risks to children are often not recognised and
acted upon urgently enough. Inspectors found too many examples where children at
risk of harm had either not been seen by social workers or, if they had been seen,
their experiences and the continuing risks to them were not understood and acted
upon with sufficient urgency. The gravity and urgency of the level of risk were not
always reliably identified or understood. Assessments were all too frequently adultfocused, omitting consideration of family histories and lacking any real understanding
of childrens experiences. A number of immediate concerns were referred by
inspectors to senior managers. The local authority took urgent and appropriate
action in response to these concerns.
Recent efforts to reduce a heavy reliance on a high number of short-term agency
social workers and managers are showing signs of early progress. However, the
continuing impact of a high staff turnover across the service means that children,
parents and foster carers spoken to by inspectors consistently emphasised the
difficulties in building positive and trusting relationships with social workers. This
shortfall was particularly acute in the access and assessment teams, adversely
affecting the quality of child protection inquiries and assessments and militating
against careful, consistent management oversight of cases.
Service provision does feature some relative strengths in limited areas. A multiagency safeguarding hub (MASH) supports effective joint communication and prompt
information sharing across the partnership, although the understanding and
application of thresholds is inconsistent. The quality of practice for children with
disabilities and their families is stronger, including carefully addressing and promptly
responding to any safeguarding concerns that emerge. The targeted early help
service provides skilled, helpful support to children and their families. In the minority
of services where service provision was better, the rate of staff turnover was
considerably lower.
Services for children looked after are inadequate. In a large majority of cases seen


by inspectors, delays and drift have resulted in children starting to be looked after
too late. The onset of care proceedings was frequently delayed due to poor
management oversight of social work in pre-proceedings stages. Once care
proceedings commenced, timeliness notably accelerated, with the judiciary reporting
recently improved standards of assessments, care plans and statements of evidence.
Children mostly live in stable homes and approximately half of the children looked
after who were considered by inspectors made substantial progress in their
placements, assisted by comparatively high rates of stable and enduring care
arrangements. Not all children who are looked after benefited from permanence
planning being considered early enough, although management oversight and
tracking of the early stages of permanence planning are now improving. Nearly half
of the children looked after do not have an up-to-date care plan, which means that
their progress may not be regularly assessed and contingency plans are not made if
difficulties emerge. Planning for children who are looked after to return home is
poor, with two examples seen of children returning to care under emergency police
powers of protection.
The planning and provision of sufficient local placements has taken too long to
develop. As a result, the majority of children who are looked after live outside
Reading, and too many reside more than 20 miles from the town. This means that
the provision of services to support children and their foster parents is more difficult
to arrange and monitor. There is a poor understanding of children who go missing
when they live outside the local authority, limiting managers understanding and
response to risks.
Permanence is not considered early enough for all children who are unable to return
home to their families and for whom adoption is in their best long-term interests.
Compared with elsewhere, the local authority takes too long to place children into
adoptive placements, but there are emerging indications of an improvement in
timeliness. The adoption service features considerable strengths, for example a
relatively high number of children who are adopted, including older children and
those from dual heritage and minority ethnic groups.
Too many children the local authority look after are placed in family and friends
placements without a connected persons assessment being completed. As a result,
the local authority does not know if the arrangements are safe or suitable for
children and this is a serious failure in the local authoritys corporate parenting
duties. More effort is required to raise awareness and reporting of children who live
in private fostering arrangements. The influence and involvement of children who are
looked after in reviewing and planning services provided for them is too limited.
Services to care leavers require strengthening, primarily by increasing the rates of
participation in education, employment and training for young people from 16 years
of age upwards. The service should ensure that young peoples plans are consistently
purposeful and provide clear, detailed information on their rights and care-leaving
entitlements.


Instability in the senior leadership team has impeded progress in addressing
identified weaknesses in services for children and families. The current director of
childrens services, appointed in February 2016, has very recently completed
appointments to permanent senior management positions. Rigorous plans to
increase permanent recruitment and retention of social workers and frontline
managers have resulted in new appointments. The cross-party political commitment
to improve services to children urgently is underpinned by an additional investment
of 1.4 million to increase the number of social workers and frontline managers.
Senior managers are now confident that they have a realistic understanding of the
scale and seriousness of practice weaknesses. Until recently, actions to address
these failings have not been sufficiently urgent or thorough to prevent a decline in
practice across all parts of the service. This has left children at unacceptable and
unknown levels of risk and harm. Recent work is beginning to have some impact,
with improvements in timeliness seen and quality standards now in place.
Performance management systems have been recently established to support
managers in tackling areas of weakness more swiftly. Although signs of some
positive progress are apparent since the beginning of 2016, there is much more to
do before the circumstances of vulnerable children and young people are
understood, supported and safeguarded by effective services.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)



Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two childrens homes. Both were judged to be
outstanding at their most recent inspection in 2015.
 The last inspection of Readings arrangements for the protection of children was in
March 2013. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
February 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services has been in post since February 2016 (previously,
in the first half of 2015, she was the interim director for five months).
 The lead member for childrens services has been in post since May 2013.
 The independent chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in
post since 1 August 2014.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 35,850 children and young people under the age of 18 years live in
Reading. This is 22.3% of the total population in the area. (Office for National
Statistics, mid-year population estimates 2014).
 Approximately 18.8% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 14.8% (the 2015 national proportion is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 13.8% (the 2015 national proportion is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 36.6% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
White Other and Pakistani.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 33.4% (the national proportion is 19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 24.4% (the national proportion is 15.0%).

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it with
local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 As at 23 May 2016, 1,724 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from 1,394 at 31
March 2015.
 As at 23 May 2016, 256 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 204 at 31 March 2015.
 As at 23 May 2016, no children lived in a private fostering arrangement.
 Since the last inspection, five serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted. No serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at the time of
the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 As at 23 May 2016, 236 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 68 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 205 (57 per 10,000 children)
at 31 March 2015. Of this number:
miles or more outside the local authority area
authority area
 one young person lived in a residential special school outside the local authority
area
 five live with parents, of whom two live outside the local authority area
 six children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 25 adoptions
to be looked after
independent living
 one young person ceased to be looked after and is now living in a house in multiple
occupation.


Recommendations

Local authority leaders should ensure that permanent and competent social workers
provide skilled, responsive and safe services to children at risk of harm, and in need
of help and protection. The focus on improving practice standards for children
should be urgent, determined and relentless.


Ensure that the timely progression of child protection inquiries are informed by
clearly recorded strategy meetings with well-evaluated outcomes and
recommendations that are commensurate with levels of risk and need. Inquiries and
assessments should be overseen by consistent, rigorous and timely management
decisions.


Ensure that all children in need have clear plans to support and evaluate timely
improvements in their well-being and safety. Social workers and their managers
should continually evaluate and review levels of risk and need, taking prompt action
when childrens circumstances either fail to improve or deteriorate.


Ensure that staff are provided with regular, high-quality supervision to support and
challenge their practice.


Achieve a consistent understanding and application of thresholds to support more
effective and timely case transfers across different levels of need.


Ensure that assessments consistently feature consideration of family histories and
childrens daily experiences, to understand and evaluate the risks and needs more
accurately.


Provide effective management oversight to prevent delays in children being seen,
and to ensure the timely progression of their assessments and plans.


Review all cases where children are exposed to domestic abuse and neglect, to
ensure that their needs have been thoroughly assessed and that they are
safeguarded, where appropriate. Particular attention should be given to children
living with, or in proximity to, adults with histories of violence and abuse of other
adults and children.


Ensure that all young people who go missing from home and care are offered
prompt return home interviews, and that the information obtained is used to support
their safety plans. Links and associations with other young people and adults of
concern should be promptly identified, and preventative and disruption activities
purposefully pursued.


Provide rigorous screening, assessment and careful multi-agency planning and
follow-up at risk assessment conferences on sexual exploitation and missing
children for all children identified at risk of sexual exploitation.


Raise awareness of private fostering arrangements, and ensure that children living
in such arrangements are assessed and visited within the required statutory
timescales.



Ensure that the need for permanence for all children looked after is considered at
their second review, and is regularly reviewed thereafter.


Comply with care-planning regulations and legislative requirements when children
are looked after under voluntary arrangements or placed with family and friends.


Improve the sufficiency and availability of local placements for children who become
looked after, reducing the trend for placing children in settings that are at a long
distance from Reading.


Expand the membership and influence of the Children in Care Council so that it is
able to communicate effectively with and represent the views of all children who are
looked after.


Provide stronger support for care leavers in their transition to independent living
through more effective support in engaging or re-engaging in education,
employment and training.


Ensure that all care leavers have accurate, comprehensive and up-to-date
information about their rights and entitlements.


Ensure that pathway plans are specific and detailed enough to achieve objectives
and improve their outcomes for all care leavers.


Summary for children and young people
 Social workers and their managers do not always understand or take steps quickly
enough to make things safer for children who are living in families where they are
abused and neglected. Even when social workers are supporting and helping children,
they do not always see how things are sometimes still unsafe or are becoming riskier.
This is because they sometimes spend too much time talking with the adults and seeing
things from their point of view, rather than carefully listening to children to understand
what daily life is like for them.
 Children and young people get a poor service from the local authority. Earlier Ofsted
inspections found that help and support for children needed to be better. Since then,
things have become worse, and children who need protecting and help are failed by the
local authority too many times.
 Children have far too many changes of social worker, because many are short-term,
temporary workers. Their managers change a lot, too. This means that children and
families get frustrated with the changes, having to tell their stories over and over again,
and cannot trust that their social workers will stay for very long.
 Managers do not always check things properly and help social workers to think about
what is going on for children who are dealing with difficult issues.
 Senior managers have changed a lot, too. This means that they dont spend enough
time in the local authority to make sure that plans to improve things for children
happen. A new director of childrens services has been in the job for six months and is
determined to stay, to make sure that her important and urgent plans improve the
services for children and families.
 Children who are looked after by the council often live too far away from Reading.
Managers need to do more to offer children a choice of placements that are closer to or
in the town. When children who are looked after stay with their carers for a good length
of time, they do well in their education.
 The council is good at making sure that those children who would benefit from being
adopted are matched with adoptive parents, but this is not always early enough and it
can often take too long. It sometimes takes longer for good reasons, because older
children and those with very complicated problems are also given a good chance of
being adopted.
 Care leavers need to be helped more to find jobs, training and education, and have the
things that they are entitled to explained more clearly.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
There are widespread and serious failings for children in need of help and protection.
The local authority does not ensure that all children at potential and known risk of
significant harm are adequately protected. In too many cases, children are not seen
quickly enough, and child protection inquiries are not completed promptly and do
not establish clear decisions to intervene to protect the child. Poor management
oversight in assessment and planning for children means that children are exposed
to risky situations for too long. Where children are identified at being at immediate
risk of significant harm, the response to protect them is more timely. Management
oversight of individual cases of child sexual exploitation and missing children is
variable and often poor. Information about children who go missing and are at risk
of child sexual exploitation is not routinely utilised to inform practice and action.
The understanding and application of thresholds are inconsistent and not routinely
applied in accordance with the Reading Local Safeguarding Childrens Board (RLSCB)
multi-agency threshold document. The Reading MASH is well established. This
arrangement is supporting good communication and information sharing across the
partnership.
The early help service, delivered through the childrens action team (CAT), ensures
swift access to appropriately targeted support for families. It is child-centred and
outcome-focused.
The quality of assessments and planning for children is often inadequate. There is
delay in progressing the assessments of young people who are homeless and
children in private fostering arrangements. There are frequent changes in workers,
meaning that children do not benefit from consistent and meaningful relationships
with their social workers.
The local authoritys emergency duty service is effective. Inspectors found safe and
competent practice within the children and young peoples disability and locality
teams.
Child protection plans are often also subject to drift and delay. The transfer of cases
between teams is not always effective, resulting in a lack of continuity in driving
plans forward to protect children better.
There are effective arrangements for tracking children who are missing education.
Alternative education provision meets the needs of young people well.


Inspection findings

While the local authority has cohesive arrangements in place to support joint
working in the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH), inspectors found widespread
and serious failures in the assessment, planning and management of children in
need of help and protection. In examples seen by inspectors, a referral concerning a
child who reported a serious sexual assault had initially been lost. In another case, a
strategy meeting was not held and a child protection investigation was not
considered until four weeks after the referral. A number of serious concerns were
fed back to the local authority in relation to its failure to identify children at risk and,
in particular, to respond appropriately to escalating risks in families. This includes
children left at potential risk of significant harm for too long before action was taken.
These failures were particularly prominent where children were affected by domestic
violence and living with, or in contact with, men who had histories and convictions
of violence and sexual offending. The local authority took immediate and
appropriate action in response to these individual concerns. (Recommendation)


In the seven help and protection cases referred back to the local authority, the
failings identified by inspectors were pervasive, across all levels of need. Established
and potential risks to childrens welfare and safety featured the exposure to chronic
neglect, domestic violence, adult mental health difficulties, drug abuse and child
sexual exploitation. In some instances, concerns related to childrens continuing
exposure to dangerous men with extensive criminal histories of violence and
convictions against children. (Recommendation)


A breakdown in management oversight and too many changes of managers,
alongside the failure of professionals to recognise the level of risk posed to children,
were all too evident in far too many cases. There was frequently a failure to assess
risk effectively and recognise the seriousness of concerns. This meant that the need
to take decisive and timely action to protect children was not always seen.
Inspectors identified children who had been left unprotected and vulnerable to
potential risks of significant harm over long periods. These are unacceptable and
serious failings. (Recommendation)


In too many cases, there was drift and delay in progressing child protection
inquiries, including holding strategy meetings or discussions. Inspectors found cases
where the outcomes of inquiries failed to identify the gravity of potential risks to
children. This meant that children were exposed to continuing domestic abuse,
neglect and contact with dangerous men when risk assessments were not
undertaken. (Recommendation)


The early help service delivered through the CAT ensures swift access to appropriate
targeted support for families. Services are child-centred and outcome-focused. In
almost all cases seen, the views of children and young people actively influenced
plans and the services subsequently provided. These children benefit from having
consistent, stable workers who are tenacious in providing help to vulnerable families.
Inspectors identified challenge and oversight by managers, which helps to ensure
that cases open to early help are allocated at an appropriate level of intervention,


providing purposeful support to improve outcomes for children and families. The
council has been successful in driving forward the national Troubled Families
programme. It is set to meet the target of supporting 423 families within phase two
of the programme, which has so far resulted in 181 families successfully meeting
outcomes.

The Reading MASH is well established and is co-located with Thames Valley Police
and health partners. The recent increase in the capacity of frontline services means
that pathways to accessing services have improved for families and professionals,
and delay in responding to contacts and referrals is minimised. Appropriate consents
from parents and carers are sought and the initial response rates to contacts are
timely. Joint multi-agency access to the childrens social care database in the MASH
supports good communication and information sharing across agencies. The colocation of the domestic abuse risk assessor has significantly improved the screening
and timeliness of responses to domestic abuse notifications. This was identified as
an area for development in the last inspection.


The understanding and application of thresholds are inconsistent and are not
routinely applied by partner agencies, or childrens social care, in accordance with
the Reading Local Safeguarding Childrens Board (RLSCB) multi-agency threshold
document. When children are identified as being at immediate risk of significant
harm, in the majority of instances the response is appropriate and prompt.
However, in a minority of cases, serious known risks had to be raised by referring
agencies on several occasions before decisive action was taken by childrens social
care managers. Inspectors also saw one case involving complex domestic abuse
which was inappropriately stepped down by childrens social care and allocated to
early help services. Frequent changes of managers and social workers in frontline
services, compounded by high caseloads, restrict a shared, consistent multi-agency
understanding of thresholds. (Recommendation)


The local authoritys emergency duty service provides effective out-of-hours
provision that benefits from an experienced and established team. Clear systems
and processes support good communication between the out-of-hours service and
daytime staff. This informs purposeful decision making effectively, allowing for
prompt follow up of out-of-hours activity. Inspectors saw examples of appropriate
and timely interventions in response to child protection concerns.


When allegations are made against adults working with children, there are effective
processes in place for multi-agency strategy meetings with relevant partners to
enable complex cases to be reviewed regularly and action taken. The local authority
recognises that further work is needed to help to raise awareness and knowledge
across the partnership, and has provided refresher sessions on how to respond to
allegations against adults who work with children, including work with faith groups.


The percentage of assessments completed within timescales has improved from a
low rate of 55% in January 2015 to 81% in April 2016. Not all assessments are
completed within timeframes that are commensurate with childrens needs and
circumstances. In the large majority of assessments seen during the inspection, the
timeliness, recording and the overall quality of work were weak. Assessments are


not child-centred, and analysis of family histories when evaluating childrens needs,
including their need for protection, is poor. An over-focus on adults concerns within
assessments and plans, particularly in neglect and domestic abuse cases, resulted in
failure to consider the impact on childrens development and day-to-day lived
experiences. In too many cases, drift and delay featured and managers instructions
to undertake assessments were either not complied with or significantly delayed.
Consequently, children and young peoples experiences and voices were lost or
unheard, leaving them exposed to further harm. (Recommendation)

Social work tools and research are not routinely used in assessments. Either an
absence of chronologies or their ineffective use means that histories of known risks
do not routinely inform current assessments and planning. Insufficient partner
agency contributions to assessments result in a lack of integrated, holistic
approaches to planning and the management of risk. Inspectors found little
evidence of attention to diversity. (Recommendation)


Inspectors found unacceptable delays in progressing assessments when young
people presented as homeless. There is a lack of understanding and inconsistent
application of the Southwark judgement. The threshold for the accommodation of
young people under section 20 of the Children Act 1989 is not sufficiently considered
or discussed with young people. Delays in understanding and responding to young
peoples needs resulted in young people being left in situations of known or
unassessed risk for too long. (Recommendation)


There are currently no children known to be living in private fostering arrangements.
Inspectors found that in two of four recent private fostering assessments the
children were not seen following their assessments and there were delays in
commencing assessments of their carers. This means that when the local authority
is notified of children living in such arrangements, children are not sufficiently
supported and safeguarded during their period of residency with private foster
carers. The local authority has taken steps to raise the profile of private fostering
arrangements through workshops, mailshots to agencies and leaflets to schools.
(Recommendation)


Frequent changes in social workers and managers have resulted in children not
benefiting from good relationships with professionals whom they know and who
know them. For children with communication difficulties, changes in workers have
led to childrens development and experiences not being observed and evaluated
over time. These changes often lead to a start again syndrome, causing delays in
implementing plans. They also leave children vulnerable when their circumstances
deteriorate, which frequently goes unrecognised. (Recommendation)


Inspectors found some good practice within the children and young peoples
disability and locality teams, demonstrating sensitive and positive individual work
with children and their families. These children and their families benefited from
having a consistent social worker alongside effective, continuous management
oversight. This work led to some good outcomes for individual children and
improved their lives. However, this positive practice was comparatively rare. In two
cases, the work presented by the local authority as an example of appropriate and


current good practice also featured recent instances of missed opportunities and
serious failures.

There is an improving picture in the timeliness of initial child protection conferences,
which are held within 15 days. However, the number of children subject to second
or subsequent plans is high, at 23%, and above that of statistical neighbours and
the England average. Advocacy arrangements, while established, do not effectively
support and encourage childrens participation in child protection conferences where
appropriate. The local authority is currently considering increasing the capacity of
the independent advocacy service to these children and young people.


Inspectors found that in an overwhelming majority of the cases that were tracked
and audited the quality of plans for children was poor. Child protection plans were
subject to significant drift and delay and, in a few cases, consideration of legal
intervention was too slow. In a minority of cases, children on plans were left
exposed to known or potential risks of significant harm for far too long, particularly
in neglect and domestic abuse cases. These serious failings were referred by
inspectors to the local authority, who responded promptly and appropriately.
Inspectors did observe limited examples of more positive practice that successfully
captured the progress made against plans. (Recommendation)


Core group meetings are not always held within timescales, and the transfer of
cases from the access and assessment team to locality teams is not consistently well
organised, resulting in gaps in addressing plans and delays in assessing the progress
that children are making. Records of progress and discussions at core group
meetings are not consistently apparent. An absence of effective contingency plans
or the failure to implement plans within specified timescales has led to drift and
delay in taking decisive actions. In a minority of cases, visits to children on child
protection plans resulted in children not being seen on their own or not being seen
at all, and the recording of home visits was generally poor. In more recent plans,
inspectors saw a few examples of more positive work where discussions in core
groups and the measurement of progress were much clearer.


Local authority performance reports highlighted that 40% of children in need do not
have plans. In cases without plans, there is no effective method for the local
authority to determine whether children have been seen, what progress has been
made or whether risks are escalating. For parents, the absence of plans means that
it is not clear what needs to happen and what support will be provided to help them
to make the necessary changes. Delays in implementing decisions to step down
child in need cases lead to some children not receiving ongoing support quickly
enough from early help services. The local authority acknowledged that cases are
held for short periods of up to two weeks by assistant team managers when social
workers leave. During such periods no planned work is completed, although duty
social workers respond to any emerging safeguarding concerns. (Recommendation)


Childrens safeguarding needs are carefully considered at multi-agency risk
assessment conferences (MARAC) and multi-agency public protection arrangement
meetings. Inspectors observation of practice noted well-organised MARAC meetings,
with discussions clearly focusing on victims and the impact on children. There is


good attendance at these meetings across the partnership. Inspectors found that
some complex domestic abuse cases discussed at MARAC meetings were
inappropriately allocated to the early help service. It is not always clear how action
plans that are recorded in the minutes of MARAC meetings influence more positive
outcomes for children. This is recognised as an area for development.
(Recommendation)

Responses to risk arising from child sexual exploitation seen by inspectors were
variable, and in some cases weak. The local authority recognises that the child
sexual exploitation screening tool is not consistently used, and information from
return home interviews does not reliably inform planning and assessments of
children at risk of child sexual exploitation. The follow-through and coordination of
plans discussed at sexual exploitation and going missing assessment conferences
are inconsistent. Inspectors found overly optimistic views among professionals of
recent changes in childrens circumstances, a failure to progress plans adequately
and, in some instances, a failure to actively engage and see children at risk of sexual
exploitation. (Recommendation)


The director of childrens services (DCS) has made responding to child sexual
exploitation a priority. She chairs the LSCB sexual exploitation and missing subgroup. A child sexual exploitation coordinator, appointed in September 2015, has
helped to improve the performance mapping and tracking of children who are
missing and at risk of child sexual exploitation. Alerts are appropriately placed on
childrens files. However, frequent changes in workers impede the effectiveness of
this work. Inspectors saw some recent effective joint working and communication
with the police that resulted in some children and young people at risk of sexual
exploitation being appropriately protected. (Recommendation)


Upon the return of children who have been missing, there are marked delays in
conducting return home interviews for too many children. These children are less
likely to share important details about what happened while they were away.
Observations relating to their mood and physical presentation on their return cannot
be made to inform the understanding of their vulnerability and any risk that they
may have been exposed to. Where return home interviews are held, the quality of
information and analysis within case records is poor in most cases. This weakens
opportunities to reduce further missing episodes. In a few cases seen by
inspectors, return home interviews resulted in concerns being appropriately
escalated, with support provided to children to reduce risks. (Recommendation).


There are effective arrangements for tracking children who are missing education.
Of the 97 children missing education (CME), 59 were level one high-priority cases.
Most had very poor attendance at school, at less than 50%. A CME manager tracks
these cases well, supported by a commissioned provider who is immediately notified
of school absences and pursues immediate inquiries. Close work is undertaken with
partners to improve attendance or return children to school. Tracking data is shared
well across safeguarding meetings. A small proportion of children are on a reduced
timetable, and the virtual head closely monitors plans to move them towards fulltime education.



Alternative education provision meets the needs of 58 young people effectively.
These children have been excluded from school and either attend, or have their
education managed by, a pupil referral unit. Half of the children are on individual
plans and half attend the unit. These include five children looked after. The advisory
teacher for children who are electively home-educated maintains comprehensive
records and undertakes appropriate safeguarding checks with relevant agencies to
establish whether children are known and whether there are any relevant concerns.
The advisory teacher contacts every family, and the majority respond very
positively, and have received good advice and support through home visits.


Mature partnerships support the Prevent duty in Reading. Partners understand the
profile of the community and are alert to the need to remain aware of changing
patterns, profiles and trends. Four young people are currently receiving
interventions through the Channel panel, and partners described effective
interventions that meet different needs arising from a range of vulnerabilities.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Inadequate

Summary
Too many children known to childrens social care become looked after when their
circumstances have deteriorated to unacceptably poor levels. Although decisions to
look after children are appropriate, many of these children should have become
looked after sooner. Support and help for children on the edge of care are
insufficiently developed. As a consequence, some children are living in risky or
neglectful situations for far too long before decisions are made to safeguard them.
Agency checks and connected persons assessments for children placed with family
and friends are either not completed, or significantly delayed, meaning that some
children are living with carers whose suitability and safety have not been assessed.
Permanence planning is not rigorously considered or addressed at an early enough
stage, leading to drift and delay in achieving long-term secure arrangements for
some children and young people.
The number of local foster carers is insufficient. As a result, many children are placed
a considerable distance from their home, which impacts on their ability to remain in
contact with their extended families.
Placement stability is good, and the large majority of children and young people live
in homes that meet their needs. Overall, the educational outcomes for children
looked after are improving, with the virtual school increasing the level of support and
challenge to schools. The school attendance of a significant minority of children
looked after is poor.
Healthcare needs for children looked after have not been promptly assessed or
reviewed regularly until very recently. Provision for meeting the emotional and
mental health needs of children looked after is becoming increasingly effective.
There is increasing evidence of independent reviewing officers (IROs) challenging
weaker care planning arrangements, particularly when there are delays in
progressing timely permanent placements. Too many children looked after do not
have up-to-date care plans.
When children looked after go missing, return home interviews are not undertaken
quickly enough. Not enough information is collected to understand the risks that
children have been exposed to, and to enable social workers to plan interventions to
protect them more effectively.
The Children in Care Council is underdeveloped, with too few children involved.


Adoption is appropriately considered for all children who cannot live with their birth
family, but not early enough in childrens care pathways.
The quality of pathway planning for too many care leavers is not good enough.
Inspection findings

At the time of the inspection, the local authority was looking after 236 children. In a
minority of cases, decisions that children should become looked after were not made
within timescales that met childrens needs. Decisions are often based on an overly
optimistic determination that children should remain with their families, often in
circumstances of ongoing neglect and risk. This was particularly apparent where
risks were escalating, with slow responses to childrens changing circumstances by
workers. When children became looked after, inspectors saw examples of their
circumstances improving, such as reductions in the number of times that they went
missing. (Recommendation)


Inspectors saw some cases where legal planning meeting recommendations to
initiate care proceedings for children had been delayed for many months. The
rationale for not complying with recommendations was not apparent, reflecting poor
management oversight. These children were left in circumstances of unacceptable
risk, with their needs unmet. (Recommendation)


Consent from parents and carers when their children become voluntarily looked
after under section 20 of the Children Act 1989 was neither consistently evident nor
clearly recorded. Assessments of family and friends were either not undertaken, or
completed too slowly in some cases seen. This meant that these carers were not
offered financial and social work support. The local authority did not know if the
arrangements were suitable or safe for children whom they had a responsibility to
safeguard. (Recommendation)


Work to prevent children becoming looked after is underdeveloped. The edge of
care service is often commissioned too late, when childrens difficulties in their
families are too deeply entrenched to effect change and to prevent them becoming
looked after. Family group conferences are not used early enough to consult
extended family networks about alternative care arrangements.


Some children who return home have become looked after again within a short
period of time, in two cases as a result of the use of police powers of protection. In
cases seen, a lack of effective safety planning, rigorous assessments and support
plans developed prior to their return home contributed to these children becoming
looked after again.


The use of pre-care proceedings agreements through the Public Law Outline (PLO)
is poor. The use of letters before proceedings is not taking place early enough for
families to be clear about the areas of concern and the potential consequences of
their actions if the required changes do not take place. Inspectors saw recent cases


where the PLO had been initiated, and children and families benefited from a more
timely process. However, frequent delays in initiating the process mean that the PLO
is not consistently successful in reducing identified concerns for children. It is more
typically a pathway to subsequent court proceedings.

The Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and the local
judiciary highlighted that the quality of court work undertaken by the local authority
had recently improved significantly. The recent appointment by the local authority of
two court managers is an important element in improving the quality and timeliness
of assessments and evidence produced. There is less delay caused by the late filing
of evidence, and better quality assessments are increasingly received by the court,
thereby reducing setbacks caused by the need for independent assessments to be
completed. While the current average time of completion for care proceedings is
about 29 weeks, longer than the national requirement of 26 weeks, the timeliness of
proceedings has been adversely affected by the length of proceedings in addressing
a backlog of historical cases. Timeliness in recent cases is improving markedly.


Delays in considering permanence planning have negatively impacted on children
and young people, particularly their formation of a clear understanding of what is
likely to happen to them. Permanence planning meetings are not routinely taking
place prior to childrens second looked after reviews, or before subsequent reviews
when permanence has still not been achieved. This means that care plans are not as
effective as they should be in securing permanence for all relevant children who are
looked after. This has been recognised by the local authority, and improved tracking
of permanence plans has recently been introduced both for children who are the
subjects of legal proceedings and for voluntary care arrangements, supported by the
establishment of a permanence panel. However, in a minority of cases seen, delays
in implementing actions adversely affected the timeliness of permanence planning.
(Recommendation)


The local authority actively considers placements of children looked after within their
wider family, and has encouraged and enabled the use of special guardianship
orders (SGOs) and placements with family and friends. Of 63 children who ceased to
be looked after in the six months prior to the inspection, 14 were the subject of an
SGO. At 22%, this is well above both the local authoritys number for the previous
year and the national average. Twenty-four of the current 236 children looked after
are placed in family and friends arrangements.


Consideration of childrens identities is weak in assessments and plans. It is limited
to a record of their ethnicity, unless the childs identity needs are a critical, central
feature of the case. Inspectors did see some good examples of sensitive analysis,
such as the exploration of issues concerning sexual identity, but this was in a
minority of cases.


Overall, social workers visit children looked after sufficiently often and see them
alone where appropriate. In a minority of cases seen by inspectors, the purpose of
the visit was primarily to meet minimum visiting requirements, with little evidence of
purposeful direct work. In most cases seen, the views of children were well
recorded. Examples were noted of effective interactions helping them to understand


their circumstances. The high turnover of social workers and managers has
adversely affected the consistency and quality of practice, management oversight
and the timely progression of care plans. Nearly half of children looked after did not
have an up-to-date care plan, meaning that there was no recent assessment of their
progress or contingency planning if difficulties emerged. Frequent changes of
workers hinder the opportunity for children, their carers and families to establish
meaningful relationships with social workers. (Recommendation)

Social work caseloads are too high, with average caseloads of 35 children, and this
limits the capacity of social workers to undertake direct work with children, including
life-story work. The local authority is aware of the impact of changes in social
workers and heavy caseloads, and recent measures are beginning to address this.


Advocacy arrangements for children who are looked after are satisfactory. They are
provided through a commissioned service, and 26 children and young people
benefited from ongoing support at the end of March 2016. Advocates made contact
with children and young people in a timely manner to help to resolve complaints and
representations.


The majority of children looked after reviews, but not all, are held in time and are
well attended by an appropriate range of agencies. The meetings are well structured
and chaired to ensure that information is considered in all important areas. Overall,
the views of children are well evidenced and the chairs record the reviews in a childfriendly style to help children to understand their care plans and the outcome of
their reviews. However, not all reviews had recorded actions which were specific and
measurable, with some lacking sufficient clarity and detail.


The positive impact of IROs is gaining momentum, although they have yet to
demonstrate a sustained impact in ensuring up-to-date care plans and effective
early permanence plans. They meet regularly with social workers and children prior
to reviews. The same officer is maintained, where possible, to provide continuity and
familiarity for children. While not yet fully established, the use of midway reviews is
enabling IROs to perform an increasingly influential role in improving the quality of
care planning. In a minority of cases seen, the IRO challenge was not sufficiently
prominent to address ongoing situations of drift. However, the number of IRO
challenges during the year April 2015 to March 2016 was 58, an increase from 29 in
the preceding year.


The response to children and young people looked after who have been missing is
poor. The majority of return home interviews are not completed within 72 hours of
their return and, when interviews are conducted, the information recorded is not
comprehensive enough to understand the circumstances relating to them going
missing. Following the interviews, there are further delays in information being sent
to allocated social workers. The content is not routinely used to inform subsequent
care planning and the development of risk reduction strategies. When children
looked after are placed more than 10 miles from the local authority, they are not
offered a return interview by the local authority, with the quality of response, if any,
dependent on variable local arrangements. There is an absence of tracking and
oversight of children who are placed out of area. This means that the database does


not accurately reflect the scale of missing episodes for all children looked after. This
also inhibits the collection and analysis of intelligence to plan disruption activities to
help to keep children safer. (Recommendation)

Health arrangements for children looked after are improving. The local authority has
made successful efforts to improve the timeliness of health assessments, in the light
of considerable delays in 2015. As at April 2016, 96% of children looked after for 12
months or more had an up-to-date health assessment and 81% of initial health
assessments were completed within timescales.


Placement plans in the cases seen do not always record the healthcare
arrangements for children, including immunisation histories, meaning that carers do
not have all the information relating to childrens health to help them to ensure that
the childrens needs are understood and met.


Arrangements to meet the emotional and mental health needs of children looked
after are improving, with the development of a clear emotional health pathway. The
introduction of the Options team has significantly increased the range of provision
available. Individual work is undertaken with children, consultations are offered with
social workers and support is provided to carers. Social workers spoken to during
the inspection spoke positively about the impact of this provision on improving
childrens emotional well-being and in assisting enduring, stable placements.
Strengths and difficulties questionnaires are completed in most cases, but are not
routinely used to inform subsequent planning for children.


Commissioning arrangements to assess and provide support for the emotional and
mental health needs of children looked after who are placed outside the local
authority area are too variable, with only a minority of children receiving services.
This variability is largely due to the differing quality and accessibility of
arrangements with the local authorities for where children looked after are placed.
This makes it difficult for managers to assess the prevalence, quality and suitability
of such provision.


If they are remanded in custody, young people are well supported and visited
regularly by their social workers.


Children looked after are helped to keep themselves safe from bullying and
discrimination. Managers support schools well through a wide range of safeguarding
training, which has a good focus on preventing bullying and e-safety within a
framework of clear anti-bullying policies.


The virtual school is making progress in improving the support to children looked
after. Recent improvements include the imminent introduction of an electronic
personal education plan (PEP). Although the training provided for social workers and
designated teachers is improving, the content of plans and the quality of PEPs is not
yet consistently good enough. In plans of poorer quality, targets are not specific or
measurable, and do not enable accurate monitoring of progress in reviews.



The vast majority of children looked after attend good or outstanding schools. The
virtual school monitors the progress of children attending schools that are judged by
Ofsted to be less than good, where broader permanence and well-being factors are
carefully balanced with the potential benefits of moving to a good school. The pupil
premium is used effectively to provide additional support, where necessary.


Educational outcomes are improving for older children looked after. In 2015, key
stage 2 results remained constant with the previous year, with 33% of children
achieving the Level 4 benchmark in reading, writing and mathematics. This was
below the national average of 48%, but the cohort of children was very small,
comprising six children. Four of these had special educational needs. The key stage
children achieving at least five GCSEs at grades A to C, including English and
mathematics, in the past year. This is an improvement on the previous years
figures, and is well above the low national average figure for children looked after.


The number of fixed-term exclusions for children looked after from September 2014
to the time of the inspection was three in Reading schools and nine for children
living outside the town. There were no permanent exclusions during this period. This
is in line with national averages.


The accuracy of information held by the virtual school has improved significantly
with the commissioning of a service specifically to track attendance. The attendance
levels of children looked after are not good enough, with 29% of children looked
after who are of school age having school attendance of under 90% for the past
year. Too many children are not benefiting from regular school attendance that
could further improve their educational attainment.


Better sufficiency of local placements is a priority for the authority at the time of the
inspection, with 162 children, comprising 68.2% of children looked after, living out
of area, with 33.7% of these children living 20 miles or more outside the local
authority area. A clear sufficiency strategy is in place, with targets set for increasing
the number of local in-house foster placements. Recruitment strategies have neither
significantly increased the supply of local foster placements nor correspondingly
reduced the number of children who are placed outside the local authority area. This
means that there is a restricted choice available when matching the needs of
children to potential placements. (Recommendation)


Placement stability is good, and the large majority of children and young people who
are looked after live in foster or residential placements that meet their needs.
Placement stability figures are either consistent with or significantly above those of
statistical neighbours or the national averages. Of 193 children looked after in
fostering households at the time of the inspection, 87 had been in the same
placement for over a year. Arrangements to enable children looked after to remain
in their foster placements beyond their 18th birthdays are well established.


The fostering panel is well chaired by two experienced, independent chairs, with a
central list of members who bring a range of experience and knowledge, providing
challenges to raising practice standards for children. Family and friends assessments


are not always brought to panel in a timely manner, with three placements reported
as overdue for consideration and approval at the time of the inspection.

Foster carers report largely constructive, purposeful relationships with their
supervising social workers, and are positive about the wider levels of support that
they receive though support groups, training and the after-hours telephone service.
Foster carers expressed frustration at the frequent changes of social workers that
the children in their care experience, with consequent negative effects on care
planning and young peoples willingness to trust or engage with other social
workers. (Recommendation)


The number of children and young people who have an independent visitor is low,
with only three new referrals in the past year. This means that very few children and
young people who are looked after benefit from the support of an independent
visitor. This is particularly relevant in Reading, where a majority of children looked
after are placed outside of the area, with many over 20 miles away from their
extended families. (Recommendation)


The Children in Care Councils group, Your Destiny, Your Choice, is
underdeveloped. It is attended by a very small group of dedicated and enthusiastic
children, and its influence and communication with the larger set of children looked
after is limited. Most children and young people, therefore, are not aware of the
groups activities or how to influence its work and priorities, particularly those placed
outside the local authority. (Recommendation)

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement

The local authority is demonstrating an increasing sense of renewed focus and
urgency in its adoption work. An improvement plan designed in 2015 to address
delay has introduced tracking arrangements and earlier involvement by the adoption
team. This is having a positive impact on the time taken to place children who are
currently in the system. However, adoption is still not considered and progressed
early enough for all children who are unable to return home to their families of
origin and for whom adoption would be in their best interests. The average time
taken between a child entering care and a decision to adopt is seven months. It
takes an average of seven to eight months to match children with adopters once a
placement order has been granted. (Recommendation)


Better performance is evident in the recently published Department for Education
(DfE) adoption scorecard (2012 to 2015). This shows that 23% of children left care
through adoption, which is higher than both the England and the statistical
neighbour average, at 16% each. This means that suitability for adoption is
considered for a wide spectrum of children looked after in Reading.


The average number of days between a child entering care and moving in with their
adopted family, from 2012 to 2015, at 635 days, was shorter than the average time


for the 2011 to 2014 three-year period (669 days). There has been a year-on-year
decrease from 681 days in 201314 to 568 days in 201415. This demonstrates that
the process is becoming quicker, but it is still considerably longer than the DfE
target of 426 days. (Recommendation)

Performance in placing a diverse range of children, including older children, brother
and sister groups, and children of mixed or Black and minority ethnic heritage, is
strong. Of all children who left care through adoption between 2012 and 2015, 8%
(15 children) were over the age of five, which is above both the England and
statistical neighbour averages of 5% and 6% respectively. In the same period, 17%
of children adopted were from Black or minority ethnic groups, which is also above
both the England and statistical neighbour averages of 9% and 10% respectively.


Foster to adopt is established in the process of adopter recruitment, preparation
and approval, and is actively considered for children who would benefit from this
arrangement. Five fostering for adoption placements were made in the past year.
The use of Link Maker is strongly promoted, facilitating adopter-led matches with
children.


Therapeutic support to help children to address difficult pre-care experiences that
can lead to attachment difficulties and challenging behaviours is available from the
Options service. This resource positively assists the transition of children to their
prospective adopters and better enables children with significant complex needs to
be afforded permanence through adoption. It also contributes to the stability of
placements. There have been no placement disruptions for children placed for
adoption over the past two years.


Since 2014, the local authority has been part of the Adoption South Central
consortium, comprising 11 local authorities and two voluntary agencies. This has
introduced benefits of scale through an increased pool of available adopters,
improved management of long-distance placements and readily accessible support
to adopters. Additionally, the adoption service is in a partnership with the Berkshire
Adoption Advisory Service (BAAS), which provides a joint adoption panel,
prospective adopter preparation groups, profile sharing of children available for
adoption, birth parent support, post-adoption contact and joint staff training.


The timeliness of the recruitment and assessment of adopters is slower than the
national target of six months from application to approval. At stage one of the
assessment process, the considerable delays in obtaining timely returns from
disclosure and barring checks have been reduced. Prospective adopters are made
aware of this potential delay at the outset, and good use is made of the unintended
additional time available. A recent positive innovation for potential adopters has
been the partnership between the adoption service and a DfE-funded social
enterprise, Cornerstone. This organisation provides mentoring and training for
prospective adopters, and continues to support them post-approval. There have
been 12 mentoring matches made to date, and this offer has been well received.


The quality of prospective adopters assessments is good. They are clear and
concise, carefully evaluating potential adopters life experiences and their suitability


to adopt. Adopters spoken to during the inspection reported that their preparation,
training and approval had been challenging, but that they were well supported
during these stages by knowledgeable, reliable and sensitive staff. The continuity
and stability of social workers from the adoption service was appreciated by
prospective adopters in building and sustaining trusting professional relationships.

Sufficiency of adopters available to meet the needs of children with an adoption plan
is met through internal recruitment, consortia arrangements and non-consortia local
authority adoption agencies. The adoption service recruited 14 adopters in 201516,
which was below its sufficiency target of 22. Considerable efforts are made to recruit
carers who reflect the diversity of the children needing to be placed.


The BAAS provides an adoption panel which meets twice monthly, to avoid delays.
The panel has effective oversight of the approval of adopters and matching
recommendations. The chair is appropriately qualified and has significant relevant
experience. The chair and panel members receive regular appraisals, and have
access to a wide variety of development and training opportunities. The panel is
administratively well supported, with panel minutes reflecting careful and thorough
scrutiny of approvals and matches. The adoption panel chair and adviser provide the
agency decision maker (ADM) with six-monthly performance reports on the standard
and quality of reports and presentations to panel. The majority seen by inspectors
were of a high quality.


The ADM responsibilities are discharged by the head of service for childrens
safeguarding. Monthly ADM meetings are in place to oversee and review the
decision-making process. This is effective and efficient, and provides better
timescale certainties for all parties.


Post-adoption support is strongly promoted and provided, consistent with the
priority that the adoption service places on ensuring that adopters have the
confidence, knowledge and assistance to ensure that children are successfully
adopted and that disruption is avoided. Adoption support plans (ASPs) form part of
a comprehensive adoption placement report, completed by the adoption service and
presented to adoption panel for every child matched. ASPs sampled by inspectors
reflected detailed consideration of childrens health, education, development,
identity, family and social relationships, self-care, contact and birth parents views.


At the time of the inspection, 62 carers were in receipt of adoption allowances for 76
children. To date, 12 applications have been made to the adoption support fund. In
the cases sampled during the inspection, it was evident that the local authority
provides specific packages of support to meet childrens needs and to ensure that
adoptions are successful.


BAAS supports adopters and birth parents effectively to engage in and maintain
letterbox contact arrangements, to the benefit of approximately 226 adopted
children. Fifteen referrals were made to this service in 201516, but inspectors
heard that there are occasions when referrals to the service are not always
sufficiently timely. Support is also available to birth parents through the BAAS birth
relative support service, with 11 referrals made in 201516.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement

The care-leaving service is currently working with 136 care leavers. The service
benefits from a more stable workforce. Care-leaving advisers have heavy caseloads
of an average of 30 young people. Despite this, advisers work closely and effectively
with the large majority of care leavers to support them towards independent living.
For a minority of care leavers, the level of support that they receive is insufficient to
meet their needs. As a result, these young people are less well prepared to become
successful, independent adults.


Care-leaving advisers meet with most young people every three to four weeks. For
the large majority of young people this provides sufficient support, but a minority
with more complex needs would benefit from more frequent visits. The Reading
team is in touch with almost all care leavers. Managers identified four care leavers
with whom they were no longer in contact. Case records showed that the last
contact with each of these young people, all aged over 18, was very recent, and the
continuing efforts to re-establish contact were clearly evident.


Transitional arrangements begin shortly after young people looked after reach the
age of 16. Care-leaving advisers attend the looked after reviews and start pathway
planning with the young person and their carers. They work hard to gain the trust of
the young person. This work is important and largely successful. Care leavers said
that they were disillusioned during the period that they were looked after by the
local authority, largely because of frequent changes in their social workers. In some
cases, this entailed multiple changes of social worker in a very short period. Most
reported that their trust had been re-established and that they are well supported by
their care-leaving advisers and get on well with them. (Recommendation)


Leaders and managers have placed a high priority on removing the need to use
unsuitable accommodation for care leavers, even in emergencies. One care leaver is
occupying bed and breakfast accommodation, which is a significant improvement on
the 30 young people who were in such accommodation a year before this
inspection. Plans are well advanced to contract a commissioned partner to provide
higher-quality independent living units. Managers are undertaking further urgent
commissioning work to ensure that this new supply of temporary and permanent
accommodation becomes available as soon as possible. The objective is to reduce
the current pattern of spot purchasing semi-independent accommodation,
introducing improved quality and market management to this unregulated area of
housing provision. (Recommendation)


Care leavers told inspectors that they feel safe in their accommodation and that they
are helped by their care-leaving advisers to improve their independent living skills,
such as budgeting and cooking. In addition, key workers help those young people
living in supported accommodation to develop these essential skills.



The quality of pathway planning is too variable. Better pathway plans include
detailed information about young people, reflect their views well and outline plans to
provide the support that they need to make good progress towards successful
independent lives. They also include clear, detailed targets, which are reviewed
regularly by care-leaving advisers, to prevent drift and delay. Weaker plans contain
less detail and poorer targets that do not readily identify who needs to take what
action and by when. These plans typically do not reflect the views of young people
well. Care leavers interviewed during the inspection said that they did not feel fully
involved in either their children looked after reviews or their later pathway planning
meetings. A minority said that they saw little value in the plans and that they
included out-of-date information that was not updated prior to or during reviews.
(Recommendation)


Assistant team managers do not review cases with care-leaving advisers frequently
enough. In one tracked case, there was a supervision gap of 18 months that
managers agreed was unacceptable. Managers have recognised that the managerial
structure to support care leavers requires improvement. The care-leaving service is
being restructured to create a separate team to provide greater managerial capacity
and oversight, improving the frequency and quality of supervision. Apart from
continued support from a nurse for sexual health, there is no specific, dedicated
healthcare provision for care leavers beyond their 18th birthdays. The children
looked after health team directs care leavers to universal services when specifically
asked to do so, but this is not routinely established practice. The health team
provides young people with a health passport when they reach the age of 17. The
passports contain information relating to young peoples health histories and provide
useful details of local health provision. For young people who need it, there is an
explicit child and adult mental health services (CAMHS) transfer protocol at age 17
years and six months to adult mental health provision. Five young people benefited
from this in the past year. (Recommendation)


Leaders and managers celebrate the achievements of care leavers through an
annual awards event. Care leavers are able to influence the work of the authority
through presentations at whole-service events which occur throughout the year.
However, the care leavers pledge is not supported by clear, written information and
materials for care leavers. As a result, too many care leavers lack a clear
understanding of their entitlements. (Recommendation)


A good proportion of young people living with foster carers remain with them after
the age of 18. Five of the six young people who turned 18 during 2015 benefited
from these staying put arrangements. This is significantly above the rates achieved
nationally.


The proportion of care leavers aged 16 to 18 who are not in education, employment
or training (NEET) is similar to national rates, at 23%. Despite being comparable to
other authorities, this is not yet good, particularly in the context of a buoyant local
economy with high employment levels. All young people up to the age of 18 should
be in education, employment or training, and the proportion of Reading care leavers
who are thus engaged should be increased. (Recommendation)



The proportion of young people age 19 to 21 who are NEET has increased to 44%,
which is significantly above statistical neighbours and national figures. However, this
headline figure masks a more complex picture. Of 22 care leavers who are NEET,
seven are young parents, five have poor health and are claiming employment
support allowance and five are in custody. Care-leaving advisers support the five
young people in custody well. Through regular visits and strong advocacy with
prison staff, care leavers are encouraged to gain the most from employment and
education opportunities within prison. Support continues for all care leavers until
they reach the age of 21, and includes monthly visits by care-leaving advisers.
(Recommendation)


In its work to help greater numbers of care leavers to find employment and training,
local authority managers recognise that they could do more to provide access to
apprenticeships and traineeships for care leavers at the council. They could also
positively influence local employers to consider care leavers as a priority group.
However, managers have used City Deal funding effectively to implement the
Elevate programme, which provides enhanced support to all young people seeking
education, employment or training. (Recommendation)


A good proportion of care leavers gain places on university courses. At the time of
the inspection there were 10 young people undertaking degree courses. These
young people continue to benefit from valuable support provided by their careleaving advisers. This support extends to helping them to find appropriate
accommodation during summer breaks, if they want to return to Reading.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
The managing director of the local authority, senior managers and political leaders
have presided over a significant deterioration in services for children and young
people over the last three years, and have failed to identify and safeguard many of
the most vulnerable children.
Significant weaknesses in the quality of services for children and young people were
identified by senior managers in 2015. Relevant plans developed to address these
have stalled as a result of continual turnover during the last 12 months within the
senior leadership team. As a result, insufficient improvements have been made.
Inspectors saw during this inspection that, for many children and young people in
need of help and protection, risks are not always properly identified and responded
to promptly.
Too many children become looked after following a continued decline in their
circumstances at home, which has left them exposed to significant harm. Inspectors
saw some cases where legal advice to instigate care proceedings had been delayed.
Permanence plans for children who need to be looked after for longer periods are
not made quickly enough, and a large proportion live too far from their families. The
local authority does not effectively safeguard children looked after who live more
than 10 miles from Reading and go missing.
High staff turnover has led to children and young people having too many changes
of social worker, contributing to children experiencing drift and delay. Caseloads in
frontline social work teams are too high. Management oversight and supervision is
inconsistent and, in some teams, poor.
Commissioning arrangements are underdeveloped and not underpinned by a detailed
needs assessment.
Senior managers understand the weaknesses in the service. However, many plans to
address them are at a very early stage and have not yet led to improvements for
children and young people. In some areas, there is evidence that improvement work
is properly targeted and is having an impact on achieving better outcomes for
children, young people and their families. For the majority of children and young
people, the failures in service provision are widespread and serious. Substantial
financial investment is supporting a review of the workforce and a redesign of
childrens services


Inspection findings

Services for children and young people requiring help and protection have
deteriorated since the last child protection inspection in 2013, when services were
judged to be adequate. Instability in the senior leadership team has contributed to
the significant delay in addressing substantial weaknesses in service delivery. The
local authoritys improvement plan, underpinned by audit and service reviews and
overseen by an independently chaired improvement board, has identified priority
areas for development. However, progress has been impeded by the break in
continuity at senior management level and the absence of a stable permanent senior
management team. The DCS has made it a priority to secure a senior management
team and permanent appointments are now in place. Having undertaken an earlier
interim period in the role of DCS from February to June 2015 the DCS has, since her
reappointment in February 2016, picked up and driven forward interrupted
improvement plans. Although some positive progress can be seen, it is very recent
and, for too many children and young people, circumstances have not yet improved.


Workforce instability across social work teams has presented a serious challenge to
the local authority over the past 12 months, with a significantly deteriorating picture
in late 2015. Staff turnover is high and children, social workers and managers told
inspectors about the negative impact that this has had on the ability of children to
form meaningful relationships with their social workers. The high turnover of social
workers and managers, sometimes caused by positive and necessary action taken
by the local authority to address poor performance, has also contributed to children
and young people experiencing drift, delay and exposure to risky situations for
longer than they should. Management oversight is insufficient in too many cases,
and does not mitigate the impact of the high staff turnover. Senior leaders
understand the pressures in the service, and the local authoritys self-assessment
recognises that services for children and young people who require help and
protection are inadequate. (Recommendation)


The local authority has rightly prioritised the establishment of a skilled, stable
workforce to reduce the authoritys high reliance on agency staff, currently at 42%.
The complement of social workers in the access and assessment team has been
increased by five. This has reduced caseloads from a peak in December 2015 when
social workers were working with up to 60 children. Caseloads at the time of the
inspection had been reduced to an average of 35, but inspectors saw some social
workers with caseloads still exceeding 40, which is unacceptable. The local authority
recognises that caseloads are still too high and knows that there is more to do. It
aspires to reduce caseloads to between 18 and 22 within the next six months, as the
capacity within the workforce is increased. (Recommendation)


The local authority now has a comprehensive recruitment and retention programme,
illustrating a clear, cross-party political intent to improve services for children and
young people. This is supported by an additional investment of 1.4 million to
increase the number of social work and management posts to populate a specialist
childrens service structure, due to be introduced in autumn 2016. Eight current
members of staff have been seconded to social work degree courses and the council


is involved with the Step Up to Social Work programme. Significant progress has
been made in recruiting staff in recent months, with 29 social work posts in the
process of being filled. Eight are from within the United Kingdom and 21 from
overseas. Although this is a positive step, most of this cohort of new staff will not be
in post and having an impact until October 2016. A positive indication of recent
progress made is the application and appointment of six agency staff, who are
employed in the borough, to permanent social worker positions. (Recommendation)

The quality and regularity of supervision seen by inspectors is inconsistent and often
poor. It is notably better in those teams where there is greater stability, such as the
fostering team. The local authoritys own audit identifies that compliance with the
departments expectations in relation to supervision is low. As a result, training on
supervision for managers and staff has been commissioned, with the first sessions
beginning during this inspection. (Recommendation)


Senior leaders understand the weaknesses of the service. The local authority audit
programme demonstrates a realistic appraisal of the quality of practice. Judgements
reached by the local authority in the cases audited as part of this inspection were
generally in line with those reached by inspectors. Plans to improve the quality of
practice are in place, but have not yet had a sufficiently positive impact. In some
instances, improvement work completed last year needs to be repeated, for example
in relation to 16- to 17-year-old young people who are homeless. A joint protocol
with housing that was established last year is not being consistently applied in the
cases seen during this inspection.


There are clear and regular lines of communication between elected members and
senior strategic leaders. Both the lead member and the chair of the Adult, Children
and Education (ACE) Committee, which also acts as the Scrutiny Committee, show a
focused and clear understanding of the challenges and performance of childrens
services, underpinned by regular, comprehensive performance management reports.
The committee has increased the number of meetings held each year to provide
additional focus on childrens issues and to ensure that officers are held to account.


In the past six months performance management systems have been revised and
re-established. Managers at all levels have access to a suite of information, including
weekly as well as quarterly performance reports, that is reviewed by a performance
board and the improvement board. The lead member also receives copies of these
reports. There is evidence of clear improvement in some indicators. These include
timeliness of assessments, at 54.9% in January 2016, which improved to 81% in
April 2016. This improvement was achieved despite an increase in the volume of
assessments undertaken. Similarly, the timeliness of initial child protection
conferences held within 15 days has improved to 86% in April 2016. However, the
quality of practice identified in the local authority audits and during the inspection
remains largely poor across the spectrum of assessment, planning and reviewing.
(Recommendation)


The quality of practice is stronger in some services and teams, especially where
there is a more stable workforce, such as the early help service and childrens
disability team. Across all teams, inspectors saw some limited examples of good


work making a positive difference to children and young people. In some service
areas, improvement work has had a noticeable impact. In the last year, the number
of care leavers living in bed and breakfast has been significantly reduced, and the
number of children being adopted has been increased. Very recent improvement can
be seen in the application of the Public Law Outline process and a significant surge
in better timeliness in the completion of care proceedings.

An experienced, knowledgeable and enthusiastic principal social worker, appointed
in February 2016, has been proactive in identifying areas for improvement, planning
improvement work and measuring baseline performance. This includes the
consolidation of practice standards, the development of induction programmes, and
quality-assurance activity and training. A realistic appraisal of practice and
challenges faced in Reading is supporting progress. It is too soon for much of this
work to demonstrate an effect on performance.


Arrangements are in place for learning from complaints, audit and case reviews.
This is disseminated to staff through newsletters and briefings. The impact of
learning from this work has been reduced by the high level of staff turnover.


A web-based joint strategic needs assessment includes consideration of important
aspects of services for children. These include the issues of female genital
mutilation, childrens emotional well-being, young people not in education,
employment or training, and an insufficient number of local foster carers. Some
unmet needs are identified concerning care leavers and children looked after
however, the data requires updating as in many areas it is often two or three years
old.


Commissioning arrangements are underdeveloped. The current commissioning
strategy is recognised as a holding document that is not informed by a
comprehensive needs assessment. The local authority is not meeting its duty in
relation to the sufficiency of local foster placements and, as a consequence, too
many children looked after live outside Reading. As a consequence, the provision of
services to them is too variable and not adequately organised or monitored by the
local authority. The local authority knows that this is a key area for development,
but the pace of implementing these plans needs to be much swifter to support the
improvement programme. (Recommendation)


Established links are in place between relevant strategic bodies. The lead member
sits on the childrens services improvement board and the Local Safeguarding
Childrens Board, and chairs the Childrens Trust. She is vice-chair of the corporate
parenting panel. Relevant attention is given to childrens matters by the Health and
Wellbeing Board, with regular reports received in relation to child and adolescent
mental health services and the autism strategy. The board also coordinates the work
to respond to the issue of female genital mutilation in Reading.


The chair of the corporate parenting panel has a clear plan of work with a focus on
key areas of weaker performance for children looked after. There is increasing
evidence of challenge from the panel, for example in relation to the completion of
health assessments having a positive effect. The participation and influence of


children looked after and care leavers on the panel are insufficient and require
strengthening in order that children are contributing to its priorities and work plans.

Strategic partnerships in relation to children and young people who go missing and
are at risk of sexual exploitation have slowly developed from a low base in 2014.
The child sexual exploitation strategy was launched in June 2015. All schools,
including academies, put on a drama production to raise awareness of sexual
exploitation among young people. Work is aligned with services for vulnerable
adults, in recognition of the continued vulnerability of some young people in their
transition to adulthood. Police, in conjunction with the licensing authority, have
undertaken awareness raising with hotels. Strategic oversight, for example in
relation to the number of return home interviews completed, has recently increased
the number now undertaken. However, the timeliness and quality of these
interviews require further improvement. There is still work to be done to improve
the quality of work in frontline teams in relation to the recognition of risk and to
provide consistently effective responses to it. (Recommendation)


The local authority has appropriately notified Ofsted of five serious incidents in the
past three years. Until recently, the process for referring these cases to the Reading
Local Safeguarding Children Board (RLSCB) case review sub-group worked well to
consider whether a serious case review was needed. However, in recent months the
process has not been sufficiently clear. This has resulted in confusion about whether
two serious incidents should be considered by the sub-group. The DCS and the
RLSCB chair have undertaken to implement a formal, transparent process and to
revisit the decision-making process for these two cases.


Six months ago, key partners such as the judiciary and the Children and Family
Court Advisory and Support Service described the service as failing. They report
significant improvements since then in an increasing number of care proceedings,
with the application of thresholds for initiating court proceedings considered to be
more appropriate. Both the quality of social work evidence presented to the courts
and the timeliness of the proceedings are improving. The appointment of two court
case managers is pivotal in achieving these improvements.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
Despite positive change in the past 18 months, the Reading Local Safeguarding
Childrens Board (RLSCB) requires further improvement before it can be judged
good. The board was previously unaware of the extent of concerns about the poor
performance of childrens services. Through greater scrutiny, it has gained an
accurate view of practice, appropriately escalating concerns where deficits are
highlighted. Almost all key partners are well engaged. However, its influence has
been hindered by frequent changes in the childrens social care senior leadership
team.
Partners and young people have shaped the boards priorities. The majority of subgroups are shared with other Berkshire local authorities. They have been reviewed
with refreshed terms of reference and membership to ensure that they are aligned to
these priorities. Some sub-groups are more advanced than others. For example, the
sub-group to counter child sexual exploitation and missing children has ensured that
appropriate strategic arrangements are in place to oversee this work. A
comprehensive safeguarding training programme is in place, but the learning and
development sub-group has yet to achieve a sharp focus on Reading professionals.
Work is underway to strengthen the sub-groups, but they do not yet routinely link
with each other to follow up issues, actions and practice improvements.
A strong independent chair has led the boards restructure. Changes, including the
disbanding of the executive group, have enabled the board to fulfil its statutory
functions consistently and to exert its influence better. The challenge and concern
log facilitates active challenge, and has led to practice improvements.
Comprehensive performance information enables the board to identify potential
strengths and weaknesses in local safeguarding practice. A cycle of audits and
section 11 safeguarding audits is in place. However, the board lacks a systematic
approach to learning and improvement. An improvement cycle is evident, but it is
overly reliant on individuals and is not consistently driven. A learning and
improvement framework was agreed in May and is now in place.
The case review sub-group makes sound decisions about whether serious incidents
should be scrutinised through a serious case review. Learning is appropriately
disseminated. The process for deciding whether a case should be considered by this
group has not been sufficiently formalised in recent months.
The board has developed and published a comprehensive threshold of need
document. Although the board has analysed some aspects of early help practice, an
up-to-date detailed analysis of the application of thresholds and of the effectiveness


of the early help pathway is yet to be completed.
The board has engaged well with young people in some areas, for example in
producing a vibrant young peoples version of the annual safeguarding report. It has
not yet made arrangements routinely to involve young people in all areas of its work.
The 201415 annual report is comprehensive and well written.

Recommendations

Develop an overarching process to ensure that learning from quality assurance
activity is properly shared, tracked and reviewed. This should include clear and
relevant actions from single and multi-agency case audits.


Implement a clear and transparent process for referring serious incidents to the case
review sub-group for detailed consideration of whether a serious case review is
needed.


Ensure that the work of the learning and development sub-group has a sharper
focus on the particular learning and training needs of Reading professionals,
including overseeing and, where appropriate, influencing the provision of single
agency training.


Undertake a review of local safeguarding thresholds, including the effectiveness of
the early help pathway, and the understanding and application of thresholds at all
the key points in a childs journey.


Secure regular and consistent attendance and engagement at the board and subgroups by childrens social care, to increase the boards ability to contribute to
improvements in core social work practice.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Soon after the independent chair was appointed in December 2014, she began a
comprehensive reorganisation of the board. All of the boards sub-groups have been
reviewed and some have been substantially restructured. The executive group,
which, according to the chair and key partners, had been overly focused on
administrative processes with little influence over local safeguarding practice, was
disbanded in 2015. This resulted in a large number of issues, challenges, updates
and work streams being considered at full board meetings. This centralised
oversight has been necessary to increase the boards accountability and drive
change, but the volume of work has led to protracted board meetings and a risk that
these become less productive. The chair has introduced high expectations, a culture
of continual improvement and an intolerance of complacency. She expects partners
to prepare well, to engage fully in discussions and to demonstrate their
understanding through their challenge of each other. This is uncomfortable at times,
but all partners spoken to by inspectors said this cultural shift has enabled them to

tackle successfully some longstanding areas for development, for example poor
performance in health assessments for children looked after.

The board benefits from the involvement of two lay members and from consistent
representation from the voluntary sector. The lead member is a committed board
observer. For almost all partner agencies, senior managers at the right level are well
engaged. This is illustrated by the willingness of key partner agencies such as the
police, the clinical commissioning group and a local head teacher to act as
champions for the boards priorities. The one exception is childrens services, where
the high turnover of senior managers has led to fragmented attendance and
frequent changes in membership. This has not prevented the board from closely
scrutinising some areas of social care practice, such as the response to children who
go missing or who are at risk of child sexual exploitation, the experiences of children
looked after who are placed out of area, social work caseloads and the impact of
social care staff turnover. However, it has limited its ability to influence effectively
the frontline services for children who need help and protection. (Recommendation)


Board members acknowledge that they have not always fully understood their roles
and responsibilities in relation to the work of the board. A board compact and
induction pack, developed by members themselves, provides a straightforward
summary of key expectations, duties and responsibilities. This has been welcomed,
particularly by new members, but it has only recently been rolled out and it is
therefore too early to judge the difference that it has made.


Established working relationships and communication between key groups and
strategic bodies are in place. For example, the independent chair of the RLSCB
regularly attends the Health and Wellbeing Board (HWB) and also regularly attends
the Childrens Trust Board. The chair has championed greater understanding and
action to tackle the issue of female genital mutilation in Reading by chairing a task
and finish group. This has resulted in a clearer view of prevalence, clarity regarding
governance arrangements and the development of a multi-agency protocol and
pathway. These will be rolled out alongside a multi-agency training programme in
June 2016. The independent chair also provides regular updates to the childrens
services improvement board, and to the councils children and education scrutiny
committee.


The board has identified a need to formalise relationships with key strategic bodies
and, as a result, has recently refreshed the 2014 joint working protocol between the
RLSCB, the HWB, the community safety partnership and the safeguarding adults
board. This protocol has been signed by all relevant strategic group chairs. It
includes a requirement for chairs to meet biannually to review priorities and discuss
prioritised challenges, agendas and actions. Although this has yet to take effect, it
has laid the foundation for a more meaningful partnership approach to tackling the
boards priorities, in particular domestic abuse and the emotional well-being of
children and young people.


The board undertakes a range of activities to maintain oversight of local
safeguarding practice. The quality assurance sub-group was merged with the
performance sub-group early in 2015. It now appropriately focuses only on Reading


safeguarding practice. This group has overseen a programme of single and multiagency audits, with themes such as child sexual exploitation, multi-agency risk
assessment conferences, core groups, neglect and missing children. The 201617
audit programme reflects the boards priorities well.

Audits result in individual action plans which include appropriate learning activity and
strategic changes, such as the development of the neglect strategy that is soon to
be published. However, childrens social care has only very recently joined the subgroup, and this has been a crucial gap. Further, not all audits have taken place as
planned, and not all action plans sufficiently address the findings from audit activity.
For instance, the actions from the 2016 missing children audit tackle the inequity in
experiences of children looked after who live more than 10 miles from Reading and
the quality of their return home interviews, but they do not include the need to
improve the timeliness of these interviews. Although the voice of the child is
included in some audits, for instance through the 2015 lived experiences of children
subject to plans audit, where children were spoken to directly about their
experiences, this is not a sufficiently consistent feature of single or multi-agency
audits. (Recommendation)


The boards ability to review and satisfy itself that practice changes are sustained is
hampered by the absence of an established process for overseeing and checking
actions, or a clear and consistent cycle of scrutiny, action planning, communication,
learning and review. A learning and improvement framework was formally adopted
by the board in May 2016 and is in now being implemented. (Recommendation)


In the last three-year cycle, all agencies completed a section 11 audit. This is an
assessment undertaken by local agencies to analyse how they safeguard children
through their day-to-day business. The section 11 sub-group is pan-Berkshire, and
enables partners to complete just one audit rather than repeating this for each local
board. The new cycle, which began in September 2015, includes a face-to-face
meeting with agency leads. This has increased the boards scrutiny of its strengths
and areas for development. The multi-agency dataset has been regularly reviewed
over the past 12 months, and now contains the right breadth and depth of
information. For example, it includes data regarding numbers of missing children,
the proportion who received a return home interview and the timeliness of these
interviews. Commentary is helpful to partners in understanding what the data
means.


The board has ensured that the local threshold of need document is up to date and
comprehensive. It was launched through well-received multi-agency workshops to
childs journey, and the effectiveness of the early help pathway now need to be
comprehensively scrutinised by the board. (Recommendation)


The case review sub-group has applied the right threshold when considering
whether serious incidents should be addressed through a serious case review. The
sub-group uses the national case review panel appropriately as a source of advice
when making difficult decisions. Partners are provided with sufficient notice to be
able to share useful information, and this aids the decision-making process. National


serious case reviews are discussed and learning is appropriately disseminated. The
reconfiguration of the group to include all Berkshire West cases has helped partners
to manage the pressures of attending a number of meetings for various local
boards. It has also enabled the group to learn from serious incidents in other local
areas. However, the current process for referring serious incidents to the sub-group
is not sufficiently formalised. Recently, this has resulted in confusion about whether
two serious incidents should be discussed in this forum. The chair of the board, the
chair of the sub-group and the DCS have recognised that a clearer and more
formalised process is needed and have already begun to address this. Both cases
will now be considered. (Recommendation)

The RLSCB has provided a range of multi-agency safeguarding training opportunities
for its partners. Core training is provided, along with specific workshops to address
safeguarding issues such as child sexual exploitation, Prevent and female genital
mutilation. So far this year, 57 newly appointed childrens social care staff have
attended training on how to complete domestic abuse risk assessments, Specific
workshops are arranged to communicate lessons learned from case reviews,
although the board has not yet established a reliable way of checking whether these
workshops have made a difference to frontline practice. Training methods are
increasingly flexible to the needs of learners. For instance, take-up of e-learning
courses in 201516 increased by 132% from the previous year. The joint Berkshire
West training sub-group has very recently been reconfigured and now has a
stronger Reading focus. This is in recognition of the need for it to oversee more
closely local single agency training and to be more responsive to the needs of
Reading frontline staff.


The board has been instrumental in establishing a comprehensive child sexual
exploitation strategy. Appropriate strategic and operational processes are in place to
oversee and track these children, and regular reports are received by the board. In
March 2016, steady progress was reported on the action plan to counter child sexual
exploitation. For example, the board has committed partnership money to continue
to fund the missing children coordinator post. Through its analysis of data and audit
activity, the board has highlighted concerns about the consistency and quality of
responses to children who go missing and the use of risk assessment tools
concerning child sexual exploitation. It is critical that the board continues to oversee
and closely analyse these areas of practice.


One of the key areas for development for the board is the need for a systematic
interlinking of the sub-groups with each other in the progression and oversight of
actions against the boards priorities. This gap is contributing to the large amount of
work being overseen and progressed via board meetings. The chair has established
a process for sub-group chairs to report on a quarterly basis. This is strengthening
their role and increasing their accountability. She has also introduced a bi-annual
sub-group chairs forum in order to strengthen sub-group arrangements further. It is
too early to judge whether this will bring about the required improvements.
(Recommendation)



The board knows itself well. A recent self-assessment of its strengths and
weaknesses, undertaken by board members themselves, is largely accurate. It seeks
the views of local partners and agencies on its ongoing development. For example,
during summer 2015 the board undertook a survey of its effectiveness, sending
questionnaires to 269 individuals and obtaining 103 responses. The findings have
informed the boards work programme. For instance, the need to improve
communication led to the development of a virtual communications sub-group.


The board has established an effective approach to multi-agency challenge through
its risk and concern log. This enables partners formally to highlight issues of concern
and track actions to address them. Over the past 12 months, the oversight of this
log and the accompanying action plan has become a core aspect of the boards
business. Progress in tackling these issues is evident, for example through the
increased engagement of Thames Valley Police at child protection conferences, the
review of the rapid response protocol and additional financial contributions from key
partners. The culture of transparency and challenge has been further strengthened
by themed challenge sessions.


The 201415 RLSCB annual report is a well-written document. Almost all areas of
local safeguarding practice are critiqued, with equal weight given to children
receiving early help, children in need, children at risk of harm and children looked
after. Data is presented in an easy to understand way and with relevance. RLSCB
priorities are explained well, alongside achievements, challenges and impact.
However, the work of the designated officer is not sufficiently scrutinised and private
fostering is not given sufficient attention. The 201415 business plan has been used
well to track and drive actions, evidenced by 46 of the 55 actions showing as green
and complete at the end of the year.


The board has engaged well with young people in deciding on its priorities, and in
the creation and publication of a childrens and young persons version of the annual
report. However, it has not yet found a way routinely to involve young people in its
work.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who have
needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and young people
who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and starting their lives as
young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives of
children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how professional staff
work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness of help and care given to
children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked to children, young people and
their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to understand what the local authority
knows about how well it is performing, how well it is doing and what difference it is making
for the people who it is trying to help, protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the Education
and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section 15A of
the Children Act 2004.
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the review of
the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in accordance
with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMIs) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Nick Stacey
Deputy lead inspector: Janet Fraser
Team inspectors: Mary Candlin, Andy Whippey, Michael McCracken (seconded inspector),
Mark Shackleton, Stephanie Murray, Caroline Walsh, Natalie Trentham
Shadow inspectors: Christy Wannop
Senior data analyst: Donna Neill
Quality assurance manager: Helen Cawston, Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in the
guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds website:
www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy
of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of all
ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and Family Court
Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further education and skills,
adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other secure establishments. It
assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after children, safeguarding and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please telephone
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under the
terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/opengovernment-licence, write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or
email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and updates:
http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


