Metropolitan Borough of Rotherham
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 16 September  8 October 2014
Report published: 19 November 2014
The overall judgement is that childrens services are inadequate
There are widespread or serious failures that result in children being harmed or at
risk of harm. In the delivery of services for looked after children and care leavers
these failures result in the welfare of these children not being safeguarded and
promoted. Leaders and managers have not been able to demonstrate sufficient
understanding of failures and have been ineffective in prioritising, challenging and
making improvements.
Ofsted expects that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive good help,
care and protection.2

The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Inadequate

permanence

Inadequate


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Rotherham are inadequate because:
Leadership, management and governance
 Serious and widespread failures in child protection work mean that children and
young people are not adequately protected. Partnership working in child
protection, particularly between the local authority and the police, is ineffective.
 Deteriorating performance has not been effectively identified or challenged.
Insufficient action has been taken in relation to recommendations from previous
inspections and reviews.
 There is a lack of clear leadership and accountability for childrens services and
currently no permanent Director of Childrens Services.
 Elected members have not been kept sufficiently informed by senior managers to
enable them to have a clear picture of the quality of their services.
 Although senior managers and elected members have conducted regular visits to
meet with children and young people, the feedback from their experiences has
not sufficiently impacted upon the design, delivery and improvement of services.
 Senior managers do not ensure that they have sufficient oversight of the quality
of practice.
 The local authority and its statutory partners do not meet their statutory duties
towards vulnerable children and the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
has failed to ensure that partner agencies are held to account.
Quality of practice
 Social work practice is not robust and management oversight is weak.
 Arrangements to tackle child sexual exploitation are fragmented. Moreover, the
local authority and its partners have not identified these weaknesses.
 Children and young people who go missing from home or care do not receive a
good enough service.
 Social workers do not see children frequently enough. Many social workers do not
have up-to-date records and childrens views are often not included in
assessments and plans.
 Looked after children do not receive good enough care and they wait too long for
permanent homes. Too many children and young people are placed out of the
borough because there are not enough local placements.


 Children have returned home from care without sufficient background checks,
assessments and visits to ensure that they are safe.
 Care leavers are not given enough support to achieve their potential.

What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Leadership, management and governance

Secure effective leadership across childrens services.


Carry out effective performance management and quality assurance
arrangements and ensure that they are well understood.


Coordinate leadership and commissioning across the Health and Wellbeing
Board, the LSCB, the Childrens Partnership Board and the Corporate Parenting
Board to establish and deliver against jointly agreed priorities.


Ensure that social workers have an electronic social care record that
encourages good practice and supports managerial oversight and accurate
performance information.


Strengthen partnership working arrangements in child protection between the
local authority and South Yorkshire Police, at both a strategic and operational
level.

Management oversight of social work practice

Significantly strengthen the strategic management and oversight of all
interventions for children and young people at risk of child sexual exploitation,
including those placed out of the area, so that they are all fully protected and
helped.


Ensure that all child protection work is managed robustly and that appropriate
decisions and actions are agreed with partner agencies.


Ensure sufficient workforce and managerial capacity to manage staff effectively.


Ensure that the complexity of work allocated is appropriate to the experience
and skills of social workers and that they have manageable caseloads.

background checks, assessments and visits to ensure they are safe, and that
these occur before any more children return home.


Areas for improvement

Enable looked after children and young people to live in permanent homes
are maximised, including child arrangements orders and special guardianship.
permanency being considered early enough. Ensure the swift initiation of legal
processes, good assessments and effective oversight of all children in need of
legal protection.
needs and strengthen the strategy so that good planning ensures enough
places for the future.

Thresholds
threshold for referrals to childrens social care so that most referrals, including
notifications from the police, are appropriate.

Assessment, planning, recording and reviewing childrens progress
they are underpinned by thorough assessments, measure progress clearly and
are kept up to date.
including chronologies, and that outstanding tasks are completed.

Looked after children
met in a timely manner and to a good standard.
would benefit from living outside of the authoritys boundaries do so.
this additional vulnerability taken into account in planning and in the provision
of services to meet their needs.

Care leavers
emotional well-being and mental health services and effective support to
improve their engagement in education, training or employment.


the commissioning of provision, taking full account of care leavers views.
Ensure that the service is supported by an effective performance management
and information system.
clear understanding of their rights and entitlement to services.
meaningful pathway plans and regular reviews.

Direct engagement with children and young people
routinely heard at all levels within the local authority and that they inform
strategic planning and commissioning.
with their Independent Reviewing Officers (IROs) so that their views and
wishes are fully taken into account in planning.
meaningful sustained relationships with children in need of protection and
looked after children, so that they understand the childrens feelings, views and
experiences, and this knowledge informs their assessments and plans.

The local authoritys strengths
range of initiatives and provision.
helps to ensure that childrens individuality and needs arising from their
disability are understood.
good use of advocates.
strong.
its statistical neighbours. In 201314, 36 children were adopted and 47 were
placed for adoption.
from a service previously characterised by high levels of turnover and agency
staff. The vast majority of staff are now permanent and vacancies are filled
promptly. Practitioners are positive about the support they receive.


Progress since the last inspection
July 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate in both inspections.
have not been addressed quickly enough. Some have not been addressed at all.
Shortfalls in practice remain and some areas have deteriorated.
and planning, and the support for looked after children and care leavers.
Progress has been made in some areas, such as providing advocates to support
children at child protection conferences. Overall, the scale and speed of
progress against the recommendations has been inadequate.
contributed to the authoritys lack of effective action to address deteriorating
performance.


Summary for children and young people
 When children and their families have serious problems and need a social worker
they have got one, but it may have taken too long to decide on the help that they
needed. Social workers have not always visited often enough or asked children
what they want and what they think needs to be done.
 Some children and young people have had a lot of changes of social worker.
Sometimes this has meant that plans take too long to get going and that they
might have had to tell their story again, which can be difficult.
 When children cannot live with their family and are cared for by the local
authority, they make a plan and ask children for their views. But there is not
enough choice about where children live, and too many young people have been
placed outside Rotherham, which has made it hard to keep in touch with family,
friends and school.
 It has taken too long to find permanent homes for children in care. This has been
with adopters, foster carers or childrens wider family. The time it has taken is
getting gradually shorter, but this still needs to improve.
 Some children and young people in care have not been looked after well enough;
not visited regularly by their social workers and not having all their health and
education needs met. The local authority understands this and is now working to
make improvements.
 Care leavers have had a good choice of accommodation, with support to help
them become more independent. But many young people who live in childrens
homes have had to move at 18, even if they didnt feel ready. Care leavers need
support, such as counselling and emotional support, to deal with the difficult
experiences they have had. Half of all care leavers over the age of 18 are not in
education, employment or training, and the local authority needs to do more to
help care leavers become independent and be successful in their lives.
 When children, young people and families have problems they have good help
from childrens centre workers, youth support workers and other family projects.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area
 Approximately 56,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Rotherham. This is 22% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 23% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 20% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 17% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 15% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British and mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 11% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 8% (the national average is 14%).
 A large number of Slovak and Czech Roma families have moved to central
Rotherham since 2004, with over 600 pupils now in school. English is an
additional language for nearly all Roma children and young people, and many of
their parents do not speak any English.
Child protection in this area
 At 30 September 2014, 1,915 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 30 September 2014, 393 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 332 at 31 March 2014.
 At 30 September 2014, five children lived in privately arranged fostering
placements. This is an increase on 31 March 2014. Data for earlier periods are
restricted due to low numbers.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Children looked after in this area
 At 30 September 2014, 398 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 71 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 392 (70 per
authority area
 two live in residential special schools4, of whom one lives out of the
authority area
area
 No children are unaccompanied asylum-seekers.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 38 adoptions
 one child became subject of a special guardianship order
returned to be looked after
independent living
 No children and young people live in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. The most recent full
inspections judged one home to be good, one was adequate and one was
inadequate. The most recent interim inspections on the other two homes found
one to be declining in effectiveness from a previous full inspection judgement of
good, and the other making good progress from a previous full inspection
judgement of adequate.
 The last stand-alone inspection of the local authority adoption service in January
 The last stand-alone inspection of the local authority fostering service in July
 Child protection arrangements were last inspected in July 2012 and were judged
to be adequate.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


 Services for looked after children were last inspected in July 2010 and were
judged to be adequate.
Other information about this area
 During this inspection the Chief Executive advised that he is currently fulfilling the
statutory duties of the post of Director of Childrens Services.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since September 2013.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
Serious and widespread failures in child protection work mean that children and
young people are not adequately protected.
Inspectors referred 13 cases back to the local authority because of serious issues of
concern. The local authority agreed that seven out of the 18 cases it audited were
inadequate.
Strategy discussions, including those where children are believed to be at risk of
child sexual exploitation (CSE), are not compliant with statutory guidance. This
means that key information held by other agencies may not be taken into account,
and potential risks to children may not be considered. There is ineffective working
between social workers and police officers.
The recent co-location of the contact, assessment and referral team (CART), the CSE
team, and phase one of the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) has yet to lead
to improvements in the identification of risk and support to children and young
people, including victims of CSE.
Arrangements to identify and protect children who go missing from home and care
are inadequate.
Caseloads of individual social workers are too high.
The quality of assessments and the identification of risk are insufficiently robust and
do not support safe planning or improved outcomes for children and young people.
Assessments are too descriptive, and fail to analyse risks or consider the impact on
the child. The lack of analysis leads to unfocused plans.
When childrens circumstances deteriorate and risks to them increase, this is not
always recognised, or recognised swiftly enough, leading to delays in taking action to
make children safe.
Children and young people are not seen regularly enough by their social workers and
their voices are too often absent from assessments and plans.
Children and young people are not helped enough to understand what is happening
to them.
Managers are not sufficiently involved in the oversight and quality assurance of
practice.


through a broad range of local services underpinned by a detailed early help
strategy. Early help is coordinated through the Early Help Assessment Team
(EHAT) either at the emergence of a problem or when the threshold for social
care intervention is not met. Children and families are stepped up to childrens
social care when risk increases and early help is no longer meeting childrens
needs. Assessments are undertaken through the Family Common Assessment
Framework (F-CAF). However, too many do not meet a good enough standard
and fail to capture the views of children and their families, or to include clear
action plans.
majority of which were judged to be good or better in their most recent Ofsted
inspections. In the past year, 717 families (with 1,402 children) received early
help, which prevented the need for more intensive support. The Integrated
Youth Support Service (IYSS) provides good support for older children and
young people, resulting in a steady drop in the number of young people who
are not in education, employment or training, a reduction in teenage
pregnancies and an increase in young people accessing sexual health services.
The number of young people subject to anti-social behaviour orders is reducing.
initiative, has achieved effective change with 435 (65%) of the 730 families
worked with. The Family Recovery Programme (FRP) has had a positive impact
on families, which include adults with problematic substance misuse, mental illhealth and who are subject to domestic abuse. Since August 2013, 13 out of 75
families have successfully completed year-long interventions and have been
stepped down to universal services.
inspections to improve the consistency and quality of referrals, including
notifications from the police. The threshold for intervention by childrens social
care is not understood by all partner agencies. The quality of many referrals is
poor and not all agencies complete the multi-agency referral form (MARF). This
results in a significant number of inappropriate contacts to childrens social
care. In September 2014, 1,128 contacts were received, of which 568 (50%)
required no further action. The number of contacts is significantly inflated by
domestic violence notifications from the police, with 1,164 (72%) in the past six
months requiring no further action. This high volume of inappropriate contacts
limits the capacity of the CART to make timely decisions. In the period April to
September 2014, 33% of decisions were not made within the expected period
of 24 hours.
and information on cases which step down to universal services or step up to
childrens social care are not collated.


childrens social care in phase one of the multi-agency safeguarding hub
(MASH) arrangements has not yet led to good quality information-sharing and
coordinated responses to children and families in need of help and protection.
Phase two of the arrangements to develop the operational processes, policies
and procedures has commenced.
information. Consent is not always recorded on cases where this is necessary in
order to share information. Management oversight of practice is not robust,
leading to drift and delay for some children, who do not receive a prompt
response to reduce risk and improve their circumstances. Most decisions to
progress referrals to child protection (section 47) enquiries and/or a single
assessment are appropriate, but they are not always made quickly enough.
oversight recorded on files. Most strategy discussions held are solely between
childrens social care and police representatives, which means that key
information from other agencies about the child and their family is not taken
into account and the opportunity to understand potential risks to children and
develop safe plans with other relevant professionals is missed. In addition, the
local authoritys data are unreliable; the information does not reflect the true
number of strategy discussions due to the high number which are not recorded.
For example, 17 of the 18 current investigations seen by inspectors had no
strategy discussion recorded. The last inspection identified the need to improve
strategy discussions and section 47 enquiries as immediate areas for
improvement but this has not happened.
protection investigations are undertaken by social workers on their own, even
in some cases when a crime may have been committed. This has led in the past
to situations where alleged perpetrators of child abuse have not been
investigated and prosecuted, thus allowing the potential for further abuse to
occur. Findings of investigations are not routinely recorded and managers do
not monitor outcomes. Childrens files do not show that they are always seen or
asked about their views and feelings. As a result, risks are not fully assessed
and managers cannot be satisfied that children and young people are safe.
Eight cases were seen where managers had agreed that matters should
progress to a child protection conference on the basis of verbal reports from
social workers, without any written evidence of investigation findings or
assessments.
progressing multi-agency planning meetings and single assessments. This
means that children and young people are experiencing delays in their needs
being assessed and responded to in a timely way.


child protection enquiries and they lacked adequate management support and
direction. However, social workers were positive about their access to informal
supervision and valued the open door policy of managers. Not all social
workers receive regular and sufficiently detailed and reflective formal case
supervision; some workers had not had this for a number of months.
the time of the inspection two experienced duty workers had caseloads of 41
and 46 respectively, which included new child protection investigations and
single assessments. Both workers had difficulty finding the time to complete
less acute work which was also important. The impact of high caseloads is that
too many children are experiencing delay in their needs being assessed. Not all
assessments, statutory work and decision-making are undertaken by suitably
qualified and experienced social workers; too many complex cases and child
protection cases are held by newly qualified or inexperienced social workers.
interventions undertaken by the out of hours (OOH) team. The OOH team is
not supported by a dedicated manager, which means that social workers
working outside office hours do not have sufficient guidance, management
oversight or supervision.
oversight, irregular supervision and high caseloads for social workers means
that managers are unable to prioritise workers time. This leads to poor support
for staff, ultimately poor practice, and potentially greater risk for children.
and young peoples needs are met in a timely way. The true situation may be
worse than the local authoritys performance data suggest, as inspectors saw
within the childs social care system. A number of these cases had drifted
considerably, with no visits to the child after the initial child protection
assessment visit. Delays in recording the start of an assessment on the childs
social care system mean that managers are unable to monitor the true volume,
pace and progress of assessments.
concerns about a child and their family. Risk and protective factors are neither
clearly explored nor analysed. Chronologies are not used to support
assessments; this limits the ability of social workers to see the cumulative
impact of events on children, particularly in cases of neglect and abuse. The
use of tools to help staff undertake assessments, such as the graded care
profile and the CSE screening tool varies considerably across the workforce.
The lack of robust risk analysis leads to unsafe planning for children and young
people.


situations for too long, with insufficiently decisive action being taken to protect
them. The review of 59 cases of serious neglect led by the LSCB in August 2013
found poor performance in risk assessment, care planning, supervision, and a
lack of consistency of workers. Similar poor performance has been seen in this
inspection. Despite neglect being a priority for the LSCB, progress has been
slow and the neglect strategy is not due for completion until December 2014.
good examples are rare. Only a few childrens files were seen which showed
how their views influenced their assessments and plans, or how they are helped
to understand what is happening to them. Almost a quarter of visits to children
and young people on children protection plans do not meet the local authoritys
own standard of a visit at least every two weeks. Overall there is a lack of
purposeful visiting and a lack of evidence of positive intervention. A vital
element of safeguarding work is therefore missing in many cases.
characteristics are not sufficiently explored or addressed and there is not
enough focus on the childs experience. Not all children and young people in
need of help and protection have a plan. Plans are not specific or outcomefocussed and do not always fully address all the key risks and needs; it is
difficult for parents and professionals to see who should do what, by when, and
why. The last inspection identified the need to improve the quality and
consistency of children in need (CIN) and child protection plans, with a
particular emphasis on risk assessments; this has not happened.
been updated in the last three months. CIN reviews are not held routinely and
no data are collected in relation to CIN reviews. This makes it difficult to
establish if childrens outcomes are improving or deteriorating and this risks
them remaining too long in harmful situations without action being taken.
protection core groups are not always timely and some are poorly recorded,
which makes it difficult to measure progress against the plan.
plans and have escalated their concerns about aspects of childrens cases in 38
out of 197 conferences. This is evidence of their vigilance and proactivity, but it
is also indicative of the prevalence of poor practice.


participation is increasing. Good arrangements are in place to ensure that
children are well supported by advocates. There is good participation from
parents, but their views are not routinely recorded. The most recent
information shows that 62% of social work reports were submitted less than 48
hours before the conference and 15% were provided only on the day of
conference. This means that children and families do not have the time or
opportunity to see and digest what has been written about them, to comment
on the content of reports, or to be well prepared for the conference.
years. The local authority has only just begun to monitor this cohort, following
an audit commissioned by the LSCB and reported on in March 2014. The audit
found that lengthy plans were attributable to a lack of confidence that parents
would sustain early improvements, and two cases were raised with senior
managers because of concern about drift. There is no current detailed oversight
of this group by the local authority to ensure that drift and harm are avoided.
protection performance provided to senior managers or the LSCB, so senior
managers do not have a detailed understanding of the quality of practice or the
effectiveness of child protection arrangements. The last inspection identified the
need to collate feedback from children and young people subject to the child
protection process, to use this to inform service development, and to collate all
practice issues and other quality assurance work to inform the LSCB of
progress. This has not been achieved.
the Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference (MARAC) is well established and
attended well by most partner agencies except childrens social care. This lack
of engagement is hampering information exchange and the effectiveness of the
MARAC. This issue was highlighted in the recent national review of MARAC
arrangements, leading to an immediate positive response from childrens social
care. However, further improvements are still required, with consistent
representation by a sufficiently senior manager who will share and disseminate
information appropriately.
good suite of services including refuge provision, freedom projects, victim
support, counselling and dedicated independent domestic violence advisors
(IDVAs). There are no perpetrator programmes, which is a significant gap.
lack of access to specialist services and insufficient cultural understanding in
some risk assessments about the obstacles preventing women from reporting
abuse. A specialist support group for minority ethnic women reports a mixed
response from childrens social care, and also a lack of financial and practical
support for women and children fleeing abusive relationships.


specialist young persons risk assessment tool has been developed to assist in
identifying domestic abuse, stalking, honour-based violence and CSE risks. The
tool, launched in June 2014, has already led to a higher number of referrals to
IDVAs as the training is rolled out across childrens services.
undertaken by a commissioned service or the local authority, depending on
their circumstances. No young people aged 16-17 are without suitably assessed
and safe accommodation.
strong. At the time of the inspection 120 children were not in education for a
variety of reasons; 71 cases were active. Almost all of the remaining cases were
awaiting school placements, either as new arrivals to the local authority or
moving to a new placement. The CME officer goes to great lengths to trace the
whereabouts of children. Performance reporting is regular and robust, with
comprehensive data collection and routine sharing of information with senior
managers, coupled with scrutiny from elected members and the LSCB. The
database is updated weekly and new referrals are responded to swiftly.
Effective information sharing protocols have been established with key agencies
such as health, housing and schools.
alternative education provision in the two maintained sector pupil referral units
(PRUs), and those who are educated at home.
attending this provision receive a minimum of 25 hours a week of education
during term time. Pupils are subject to close tracking and monitoring of their
attendance, progression, behaviour and attainment. Personalised programmes
are implemented for those children who require more specialist or intensive
support.
are inadequate. Shortfalls are exemplified by the disparity between the 200
missing episodes notified to childrens social care by the police during the most
recent quarter, but only 35 return interviews being completed in the same
period. No information has been supplied to the local authority from the
commissioned service about the content, quality, trends and emerging evidence
from return home interviews. This missing information is significant and is
impacting on the ability of the local authority and its partners to identify trends
and patterns in other CSE data and intelligence. The local authority recognises
this and recently launched a new missing persons protocol. It is as yet too
early to see its impact.


awareness-training about CSE across the partnership. There has been good
work to raise awareness in key business sectors such as hotels and taxi
companies. The local authority accepts that more awareness-raising needs to
take place so that risks relating to CSE are recognised at an earlier stage by
communities and partners and that this should be evaluated for impact.
tool. At this stage not all social workers and partners have received training,
including social workers in the specialist CSE team. Some workers in this team
are unclear about their role in the new arrangements. The number of strategy
meetings convened when CSE is suspected is increasing, although the multiagency response is not yet consistently robust. Working arrangements with the
police are still not effective. In some cases seen during the inspection, the
quality of practice and recording of work was poor. Not all young people who
may be at risk of CSE received a timely response. There was ineffective
assessment and planning, resulting in some children and young people
remaining in vulnerable situations and not receiving appropriate support. The
lack of plans meant that progress could not be measured, and increasing risk is
not clearly identified.
agencies and the community about private fostering. Targeted training is
underway with education professionals, school admissions and European Union
migrant outreach workers, to identify children who are registered at schools
and nurseries and to clearly establish who holds parental responsibility for each
child. Staff in the early years and education sectors are also assisted to
understand different concepts of families in specific minority ethnic
communities, to ensure that they make the relevant enquiries.
who are identified as being privately fostered as there are significant delays in
undertaking assessments, files do not contain evidence of parental consent to
these agreements, plans are missing, and there are no regular reviews or visits.
The local authority cannot therefore be satisfied that these children are safe or
that the arrangements meet their needs.
managed effectively by a full time dedicated Local Authority Designated Officer
(LADO). Establishing a dedicated LADO post has helped to raise the profile of
this work. There has been a steady increase in the number of contacts to the
LADO in the last 12 months, which demonstrates good partnership working and
an increased awareness of the LADO role. However, raising awareness of the
LADO role in faith organisations and delivering multi-agency training to the
voluntary sector have been slow to develop, as has addressing issues identified
in the last annual report such as the lack of referrals from health and the youth
offending service.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Inadequate

Summary
There continue to be serious weaknesses in services for looked after children
including delays in initiating court proceedings and delays in the consideration of
permanency.
Many looked after children have had long periods without being seen by their social
worker and this has led to drift and plans not being progressed. The frequency of
looked after children being visited by their social worker has improved, but it is still
not good enough.
Not all looked after children have an up-to-date care plan and assessments and plans
are not updated when there is an important change in a childs circumstances.
Education support for looked after children is poor and health care for this group of
children and young people is inadequate, with only 41% of children having an up-todate dental check.
Plans for children to return to live with family and friends are not rigorous enough
and lack background checks and assessments.
The fostering service is not recruiting sufficient carers, including carers from all
sections of the community, so that too many children and young people have to be
placed outside the borough. Overall the local authority is not meeting its sufficiency
duty.
Young people placed further away because of their vulnerability to CSE do not
always have sufficiently well-developed safety plans, risk assessments or robust
responses to further incidents of concern.
There are too few independent visitors and advocates to support all looked after
children, particularly those placed outside the borough.
Permanency for children through adoption is improving, but other routes to
permanency are not considered often enough or well enough.
Looked after children and care leavers are not aware of their rights and entitlements
and care leavers do not have good access to emotional support and mental health
services. Not enough care leavers are in education, training or employment.


initiated swiftly enough when children are at risk of, or are experiencing,
significant harm. This has led to poor care planning prior to applications for
care orders. However, when cases are referred to the legal gateway panel, the
local authority takes prompt action to initiate proceedings. The legacy of
insufficient use of public law outline processes and poor quality social work
practice has led to the local judiciary declining some applications for care. Two
cases were seen where applications to remove children from their parents were
refused, with the decisions being influenced by previous poor quality work. The
District Judge confirmed that the local authority has not always produced the
required reports for court, nor complied with court orders, and that this has led
to delays in progressing care proceedings. The local authority does not
currently have tracking arrangements to ensure that all children in legal
proceedings are proceeding swiftly enough to their final hearing.
looked after children and judged arrangements to be poor. Many looked after
children did not have regular visits, children and young people were not
consistently seen by the same social worker and, in some cases, were not seen
for six to eight months. This poor practice has resulted in under-developed
relationships between children and their social workers, delays in progressing
plans, and essential actions not being completed.
improvements for looked after children allocated to social workers in these
teams. They are visited regularly and have clear plans. Standards of social work
practice are higher in the looked after children teams, reflecting the greater
experience of staff and lower caseloads. Staffing and management capacity
have been increased for these two teams and each are almost fully staffed with
enthusiastic, experienced workers who have chosen to work with looked after
children and have manageable caseloads. They benefit from robust
management oversight and regular supervision, including periodic in-depth
discussion about particular children. However, records of these detailed
discussions are not always transferred to the childs file as well as being held on
the supervision file.
children and the social workers have good knowledge of their children. Most
social workers in these teams understand the importance of children being seen
alone, taking their full history into account and recording their views.
social workers, with higher caseloads and who are also completing child
protection work. The overall service provided to looked after children is still not
good enough with, for example, 41% of all looked after children still not being
visited in a timely manner.


been significant changes in their circumstances such as a change of placement
or a decision for the child to return home. This weakens the quality of planning.
About 20% of children do not have an up-to-date care plan. For those who do,
the plans are mostly of a reasonable quality and take into account the childs
needs and their views. Too few plans are specific, ascribe tasks and
responsibilities, include timescales, and make it clear how childrens progress is
to be measured. For many children and young people there continues to be
work outstanding from periods when they have not been properly supported by
the local authority. This includes a need to undertake checks, assessments and
visits when children are returning to live with their families. There are currently
too many gaps on childrens files to provide assurance that these tasks have
been done to a sufficient standard to protect children who have already
returned home; retrospective remedial actions are required.
after children social workers and the looked after and adopted childrens
therapeutic team (LAACTT). This includes life story work, therapeutic support
and the development of childrens communication skills and confidence.
However, apart from children who are being adopted, other looked after
children do not have up-to-date life story work being completed. Children and
young people spoken to had variable views about the support they had had
from social workers. They said their workers knew them and helped them but
some also said that they have too many changes of social worker; one young
person described having four different social workers this year.
including records of key decision-making. This makes it difficult to understand
the childs journey. The electronic recording system does not support good
practice: it is common for staff to be unable to locate previous documents.
Chronologies are rarely up to date and most have significant gaps. These issues
militate against social workers developing good plans and risk assessments,
based on full background information.
some key areas. The inspection in 2010 recommended strengthening the role of
the virtual school to improve the attainment of looked after children. The new
Head has already instigated a series of audits and reviews of procedures and
processes since taking up post in September 2014. Challenge and scrutiny by
the Corporate Parenting Board have been ineffective until recently, but new
governance arrangements and management oversight are now being
strengthened.


declined in 2014. Attainment of pupils in Year 6 achieving Level 4 at Key Stage
although this was from a strong performance in 2013, which was above the
national average. The cohort of 14 children is small, and 11 have special
educational needs. Outcomes at Level 5 improved in the last academic year in
reading and writing, but declined in mathematics. At age 16 years, the number
of looked after children achieving five or more A* to C GCSEs including English
and mathematics has dropped from 22% in 2013 to 15% in 2014. While this
remains in line with the national average, the number of looked after children
achieving good outcomes falls well below standards achieved by all other
children in Rotherham and nationally. Cohorts are comparatively small and, of
the 26 children eligible to sit these qualifications in 2013/2014, 19 (73%) had
special educational needs.
vulnerable groups, including looked after children, the gap between these
groups and all pupils in Rotherham has increased and is too wide at both
primary and secondary levels. Pupil tracking systems have been improved
recently to make sure that all looked after childrens progress and attainment
are closely monitored and recorded centrally, including data on those children
placed out of the area.
and out of the authority and swift action is taken to make sure children and
young people attend regularly. In 201314 average attendance was good at
number of fixed term exclusions has increased for all pupils across the borough.
after in the borough are attending good or better schools. Fourteen pupils are
in schools which require improvement and seven are in inadequate schools. The
out of authority profile is proportionately weaker. Of the 96 pupils who live
outside the borough, 60% (58) are in good or better schools and 29% (28) in
inadequate schools. The virtual school checks that the needs of each child are
being monitored and reviewed by each school as well as centrally, but a lack of
capacity within the team means that more regular follow up work is limited.
ensures that some children make better progress. Owing to the teams limited
capacity, the majority of children do not receive this support and the role of the
team is under review to determine best use. The role of designated looked after
childrens teachers within schools has been under-utilised and this, too, is
facing scrutiny.


at September 2014)  were completed in the required timescales. However, the
quality of the PEPs sampled was inconsistent and the majority were poorly
completed. Insufficient information about current progression and attainment
has meant target setting is too often nonspecific and unhelpful. Childrens views
were not recorded on the PEPs reviewed by inspectors.
under-spend of this budget. Until recently the allocation and oversight of this
award had not been well managed by the local authority. In 2013-2014 only 85
pupils out of a possible 279 who were eligible, benefited from this funding. This
means the majority of looked after children did not receive the additional
support to help raise their attainment or aspiration. Clear guidance has been
issued to all schools which clarifies the criteria for use of pupil premium funding
to improve and enhance the educational outcomes for children who are looked
after.
looked after children have been implemented successfully for those children
who have participated. Such initiatives include 1:1 tuition for children and
young people requiring additional support with literacy and numeracy or
behaviour; attendance at university summer schools and specialist activities to
raise their aspiration. Outcomes for these events have been recorded and
achievements celebrated through special presentation evenings, which are
given a high profile by good attendance from senior officers and elected
members.
funding and better access to activities and leisure facilities. All looked after
children receive subsidised access to leisure facilities in Rotherham, and those
placed out of the authority are given free access to leisure activities where they
are living, supported by placement contracts. Reviews, including PEP reviews,
are used well to identify childrens and young peoples hobbies and interests.
They are encouraged to attend a wide range of after school activities, which are
popular. Activities involving children and young people with their carers are also
encouraged and supported. Older young people have been successfully
encouraged to attend activities over the summer to help them plan for future
destinations post-16. There is a good partnership with the Sheffield Universities
and encouragement for looked after young people to attend the 'Go Further, Go
Higher' summer school.
that only 24% of initial health assessments are held in timescale, and this
reduces to 9% for those placed out of borough. The performance on review of
health assessments is better, at 86% in timescale. At the end of September


delay. Many of the children and young peoples files seen by inspectors had
evidence of LAACT team support and some of this was excellent. There are 38
children and young people accessing longer term support through the team,
including art therapy, family therapy and a range of training options.
Four per cent (8 out of 197) of looked after children aged 10 to 17 and looked
after for a year or more had a criminal court disposal, reprimand or a final
warning in 201314, which was a reduction on the 6% figure in the previous
year (11 out of 186).
and supported by dedicated contact workers in the looked after and disabled
childrens teams. However, foster carers have raised concerns that the turnover
and volume of people involved in contact arrangements has negative
consequences for children, including an expectation that they should be willing
to travel with adults they do not know, which is not good practice.
and young people were placed outside the local authority, including 32 placed
in childrens homes. Some are placed outside the borough appropriately, for
their own safety or because they have specific needs such as being part of a
large family. However, the local authoritys own analysis suggests that too
many are placed outside as a result of insufficient local options. The local
authority is therefore not meeting its sufficiency duty.
also provided to 23 children with a disability. There are also 21 connected
persons (family and friends) foster carers. In 201314 the service approved 34
new foster carer households and de-registered 15, resulting in a net gain of 19
households. However, there are no vacancies for children over ten years of age,
for young parents and their infants, or for young people with challenging
behaviours. This lack of choice results in children having to be placed outside
the borough, with the consequential detrimental impact on maintaining family,
friend and school links. Foster carers have sufficient training, including on
delegated authority.
looked after for over two and half years had been in the same placement for at
least two years. Placement stability is slightly better for children and young
people placed with the local authoritys own foster carers. Special guardianship
orders are not used enough as a means of securing permanence for some
children, with only one looked after child achieving permanence through this
route in the last year. Overall, the full suite of routes to achieve permanence for
looked after children, including child arrangements orders, is not considered
fully enough.


work presented to the panel and work seen was of an adequate standard. The
panel has also had positive feedback from foster carers about the quality and
availability of support they receive. The fostering services annual report 2013
development. The last stand-alone fostering inspection in July 2013 judged the
service as good. Fourteen foster carers who were spoken to as part of this
inspection confirmed that they felt well supported to meet the needs of the
children they look after. This includes good access to support in the evenings
and at weekends, a range of support groups, and training courses. All have
development plans which stretch their skills.
fostering is not taking place early enough after they start to become looked
after, resulting in unnecessary delay. Permanency is not always considered at
the childs second looked after review, resulting in them living in temporary
situations for too long.
changed. From 2010 to 2013, 20% had a decision changed from adoption,
which is twice the rate of statistical neighbours and the England average.
Analysis suggests that this is likely to be a consequence of historical poor
practice, slow case planning, and insufficient consideration of alternative
options such as child arrangements orders and special guardianship orders.
Significant delays in revoking placement orders also have a negative impact on
the time it takes for children to be settled in alternative permanent homes.
including two for children with disabilities. During this inspection, four of the
homes were simultaneously inspected. Two were found to have declined in the
overall quality of their services. One full inspection judged the home to be
inadequate from a previous position of making good progress; one interim
inspection found declined effectiveness from a previous position of having been
judged good. Shortfalls identified in the inspections included inappropriate
matching of young people to the home, subsequent disruption and bullying of
other residents, and problems filling staff vacancies. The third home had
improved and was judged to be adequate from a previous position of making
inadequate progress. The fourth home was judged to be good, from a previous
full inspection judgement of adequate.


concerns about their vulnerability to CSE, a number were found to lack
thorough risk assessments, with instances of poor coordination between
agencies when young people went missing again. There is evidence of
ineffective work between childrens social care and the police. Not all children
benefit from a return interview after going missing. For one young person who
went missing repeatedly, the police refused to respond, thus evidencing poor
understanding of the issue. Overall, care plans for looked after children who are
at risk of CSE lacked depth and did not consider the emotional and therapeutic
needs of the child.
children attend their reviews and are consulted by their IROs, but some are not
seen prior to their reviews, so their wishes and feelings are not fully heard.
Relevant professionals attend and good efforts are made to involve parents.
The quality of reviews is variable, with some being appropriately challenging
and thorough, but others do not focus enough on the pace of childrens
progress. IROs provide feedback to managers when they identify deficits, and
this generally leads to improvements for the child. Recording of reviews is
adequate but there are delays in the minutes being circulated. IROs have high
caseloads, and this is compounded by the need to travel distances to chair
reviews for all the children and young people placed out of the borough.
dedicated worker. Opportunities for younger children and those placed out of
the borough to get involved are much more limited and ways of widening
participation are being explored. Recently the LAC Council consulted with 62
looked after children and care leavers about the support they received. Some
young people were positive about their opportunities, the help they got from
staff, and the good relationships they had with staff. Others said they had poor
support and too many changes of social worker; they disliked having to get to
grips with different rules in different placements, were not satisfied with contact
arrangements with their families, and felt powerless. 78% of the contributors
wanted additional support, including financial support. Respondents were not
aware of their rights and entitlements. These consultation findings provide a
good basis for the local authority to further improve its services for looked after
children, but it is not yet clear how it intends to capitalise on these findings.
which children like. However, it is under-resourced and can only provide 12
independent visitors and seven advocates. There are 21 children awaiting
support and many more are eligible. The Rother-link service is currently being
piloted and is aimed at those placed further away being able to have regular
contact by phone or the internet with a volunteer, but it is too early to see its
impact.


numbers from the Roma and Slovak communities. Needs arising from their
ethnicity are usually taken into account, but there is insufficient differentiation
between these two ethnic groups and they are often referred to
interchangeably. There are good examples of social workers researching ethnic
needs and using this knowledge to improve their practice. Interpreters are used
for children who do not speak English. Not all children with minority ethnic
heritage are placed with carers from similar backgrounds, as most foster carers
are white British.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
reducing, but further progress is required. Performance management of
adoption has improved, leading to better outcomes with clearer targets. In this
performance year so far, children are waiting an average of 469 days, which
meets national targets and is better than the picture for 201314, when
children were waiting an average of 634 days before being placed for adoption.
Despite this improvement, weaker previous performance means that the local
authority may not meet the national target for the three year period 2012 to
its statistical neighbours, and more than double the England average. In 2013
children who are considered harder to place. From 2010-13, 9% of children
adopted were over five years of age and 16% had minority ethnic heritage.
There is currently a wide range of children placed for adoption, including those
who are harder to place. It is to the local authoritys credit that adoption
continues to be the right option for these children, but it does result in longer
times to find suitable homes overall, which is reflected in the adoption
scorecard performance. There are currently 27 children placed for adoption.
of statistical neighbours and the England average. This is due to previous
ineffective practice and slow or stalled progress on plans. Permanence options
for these children have been reviewed, which has led to all these children living
with carers in permanent arrangements through different legal routes.
matched with adoptive families has reduced, but it is not yet good. The average
for 201314 is 284 days, which is 132 days over the target set. The local
authoritys most recent data show that children are currently waiting an
average of 218 days.


staff who are proactive in starting to find families once children have a should
be placed for adoption (SHOBPA) decision and undertake a wide range of
family finding activity. The adoption team supports childrens social workers and
monitors the progress of family finding. There are currently 23 children who
have a placement order but are not yet placed. Of these, only five do not
currently have a clear link or match to an adoptive family. The team is also
family finding for an additional 11 children who have a SHOBPA decision but no
placement order.
resulted in greater staffing capacity, which has translated into more adopters
being recruited and approved. In 201213, 18 adopters were approved, which
increased to 31 in 201314. This improving performance has continued in
Recruitment is orientated towards finding carers for the cohort of children
waiting and is wide-ranging. There are currently 18 adoptive households
approved, with nine currently linked to a child. Of the remaining nine, four are
willing to consider sibling groups, which is in line with the needs of those
children waiting.
vigorously. Adopters who spoke to inspectors confirmed that they preferred
Rotherham because of the quality and speed of the initial response. The twostage adoption process has been effectively implemented and timescales
achieved are good. Adopters feel valued, well supported and trained. Adoption
staff are regarded as experienced and knowledgeable, helping adopters
understand complex issues well in order to improve their care, for example,
regarding the importance of contact with birth families. Fostering to adopt has
been introduced recently and there are three children in such placements now.
decision-making; the disruption rate is low. This is assisted by life appreciation
days being held for all children prior to matching, and adopters find these
effective. Life story work and later life letters are provided, and are often
available at the point of placement.
constituted by members with relevant knowledge, and is independently chaired
by a suitably experienced person. The panel takes good, careful account of
childrens individual needs including, where relevant, their disability, ethnicity
and faith, and gives thorough consideration of prospective adopters.
gathering and evidence of good analysis. The quality of child permanence
reports (CPRs) is more variable, with the panel advisor and the agency decision
maker (ADM) both undertaking significant work with social workers and their
managers to ensure that the reports meet the required standards.


information. There is evidence of robust challenge in relation to SHOBPA
decisions, which has led to care plans for some children being reconsidered.
readily available to families, which means that children can get help throughout
their childhood and also in later life. The LAACT team is highly responsive and
ensures that children can access adoption support without delay. The team
supported 72 children in 201314 with a range of help including art therapy,
play therapy, direct work and family therapy. Other good quality services are
provided, including training for staff and adopters.
adoptees during 201314. Support groups for adopters are commissioned in
partnership with neighbouring local authorities and provide good help, for
example, helping adopters understand issues from a childs perspective.
plans. Arrangements for post adoption contact are managed well and
appropriately. Birth parents and adopters entering into letterbox contact
agreements have good support from the outset and then ongoing support
wherever possible. There are currently 440 children with one or more letterbox
contact arrangements in place. There is good evidence from adopters and from
some childrens files that the range of support available is making a positive
difference to children and helping adopters to meet childrens sometimes
complex needs.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is inadequate
the service was delivered by an external provider. This service has now been
brought in-house, but there is no evidence yet of improvements to the service
or outcomes for care leavers. Care leavers spoken to by inspectors were
dissatisfied with the re-integration of the service. They felt that their personal
advisors are less accessible, and that the service is less flexible; they miss the
valued drop-in facility and are unhappy with the location of the facilities. The
local authority is aware of the need to improve service design and delivery for
care leavers, but is not sufficiently involving them in the plans and proposed
changes.


quality of service that care leavers are receiving and to help them plan for the
development and improvement of the service. The current performance
management system does not provide aggregated data to support the
oversight of care leaver provision, nor to predict future demand and types of
needs. Data systems are rudimentary and require manual updating.
do not demonstrate that young people are seen regularly and there is no
routine auditing of case files. Data and information on individual files are not
collated to enable an understanding of the needs of care leavers, for example,
who and how many care leavers are at risk from drug or alcohol use or from
sexual exploitation, and therefore require services to address these needs. Staff
and managers were unclear how many care leavers are pregnant, or how many
are young parents. This is particularly concerning given that many care leavers
have experienced high levels of neglect or abuse, and are likely to need
significantly higher levels of support to succeed in life. As a result of these
shortfalls, the local authority cannot assure itself that young people are safe
and are having their needs met.
and can articulate their histories and the support they need. Others are less
clear, particularly about young peoples backgrounds, and this limits their
capacity to ensure current plans and support packages are fully meeting their
needs.
inconsistent; they varied from inadequate to good, but most seen were
inadequate. Care leavers spoken to did not know what their pathway plans
were for and said they had not been given copies. Files do not make it clear if
copies have been given to them and most plans seen by inspectors were
unsigned. Care leavers plans are not aspirational and the planning is not
specific, measurable, achievable, realistic or timely. Pathway plans do not
provide an overview of the young persons health needs. Care leavers reported
that they do not receive their health history as part of leaving care
arrangements. Planning does not always start early enough or take sufficient
account of young peoples history to predict their future welfare needs or what
services they are likely to require. Too many care leavers do not have sufficient
support to guide them into adulthood and independence.
have to wait eight weeks or more to be seen. CAMHS managers do not know
how many care leavers are accessing their service. The LAACT team plans to
extend their service to care leavers, but the team is currently only supporting
two young people.


intervention and planning for care leavers is inadequate. It was unclear from
case files what actions the local authority had taken for some young people. In
some cases, CSE strategy meetings had been held, resulting in support
services, but for too many young people there was little evidence of appropriate
planning and interventions to reduce risk and provide support. There were no
clear assessments that analysed aspects of CSE such as the push/pull factors,
nor assessments that monitored the escalation or de-escalation of risks. The
CSE risk assessment plans on files were inconsistent in both format and review
timescales. In those cases where young people were identified as at risk of
CSE, there was a lack of correlation between the various risk assessments and
pathway plans, and weak management oversight of discrepancies. For example,
one young person was identified as at medium risk with a concurrent note to
review circumstances in 6 months time, but the workers supervision notes
stated that the young person should be reviewed at least every three months.
accommodation. The monthly multi-agency panel, which supports all young
people to access appropriate housing in the borough, gives priority to care
leavers. Care leavers can attend this panel with their personal advisor. Some
care leavers are helped to produce a detailed work book, Moving on, as
evidence that they are ready to live independently. The Moving on work book
is a good example of collaboration between staff and care leavers to develop a
young person-friendly useful tool, although its effectiveness has not yet been
evaluated.
but it is unclear how the local authority intends to ensure sufficiency of
accommodation in the future. Figures of how many young care leavers are
registered as homeless are not collated. No young people are placed in houses
of multiple occupancy or bed and breakfast. Care leavers spoken to by
inspectors reported that they feel safe in Rotherham.
beyond the age of 18 years, remain under developed, although the number of
young people in such arrangements has increased from five in January 2014 to
leavers is that young people who live in childrens homes have to leave at the
age of 18; in one case seen by inspectors this resulted in homelessness.
group could identify some of their entitlements but were unaware of a care
leavers pledge. The local authority gives every care leaver a grant of 1,500,
with a discretionary additional amount of up to 500 which can be applied for.
This is below the national minimum recommended grant of 2,000.


looked after children and care leavers for post-16 access to education,
employment or training. Robust transition arrangements prepare looked after
children before they leave school at 16 years to move smoothly on to further
education or training placements. IYSS workers arrange information, advice and
guidance meetings to help young people prepare for transition in Years 10 and
this review process. The college youth support worker based in the IYSS
monitors all those care leavers in education and training placements and liaises
closely with designated care leaver tutors on college sites. This ensures that
young people keep on track with their studies or training, have good and
sustained attendance, make the expected level of progress and achieve their
potential.
training and employment opportunities that match the needs of the post 16-18
looked after children and care leavers. Work is underway to find bespoke
provision for those who have additional needs and to ensure that enough
provision is available to meet the raising the participation age (RPA)
requirement. Local employers, the two general further education colleges, and
the 6th form college are very supportive of the needs of care leavers. They
work collaboratively with the local authority to accommodate those who meet
their requirements into appropriate further learning, training or employment.
this is in line with the profile for all young people in apprenticeships in
Rotherham. Figures for all young people not actively engaged in work or
training are reducing steadily.
education or training placements. A high number of the remaining 25 are
difficult to place and work is ongoing to support them. Of these, three are
awaiting college placements, one is in custody and three are unavailable.
employment or training and a further 15 are disabled or otherwise difficult to
place. This is a high number, amounting to approximately 50% of the older
care leaver cohort who are not in education, employment or training. Although
there is an improving picture for young people aged 16 to 19, the lack of detail
and understanding by the local authority of those who are 19 plus with poor
outcomes undermines this improvement. The prognosis for older care leavers is
poor and there is no clear overview of their progress, difficulties, needs or
plans.
allocated appropriately. Currently six care leavers are in higher education. All
have received access to bursaries to support further learning and progression to
higher qualifications.


through a yearly award ceremony for young people aged 16 years and over,
including care leavers, which is hosted by the Mayor and with elected members
in attendance.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
The local authority does not understand many of its shortfalls in performance and
there has been insufficient pace and focus on driving change. Many essential building
blocks for effective change management are either not in place, or not well
coordinated or monitored.
Governance arrangements are mostly in place but elected members and senior
officers are not sufficiently well informed about the quality and performance of
services.
There is little routine direct communication with children and young people,
particularly those in receipt of child protection services and those who are looked
after and placed out of area. There is limited communication with front line
practitioners.
Where poor performance has been identified, there is little evidence of robust,
targeted action to address deficiencies.
Strategic planning and commissioning are ineffective and the local authority is not
meeting many of its statutory duties, including its sufficiency duty.
The local authoritys improving lives select commission has not had sufficient
knowledge and understanding to test and challenge the performance of services.
Matters have taken too long to be considered, and follow up has been largely
ineffective.
The creation of a stable, qualified workforce in social care gives a good base for the
future, but it needs greater nurturing. Child protection and children in need services
have an imbalance of experience and expertise and there is inconsistent supervision,
guidance and direction for staff. Some workloads are already too high, with the
service experiencing increasing demand.
elected members and those involved in front-line service delivery. Senior
managers have relied heavily on performance compliance data and have not
understood the impact of practice on children and families. Senior officers and
members have not routinely engaged with practitioners in childrens social care
nor routinely considered the views of children and their families. This has led to
an absence of feedback, insight and learning by the local authority and its
partners.


few examples of this leading to improved outcomes for vulnerable children. For
example, a recent consultation on health assessments for looked after children
has not improved the timeliness of initial health assessments, and other aspects
of health care for looked after children and care leavers continue to be poor.
agencies are long-standing problems, both of which have a serious negative
impact on the quality of services for children and their families. The pace of
change in tackling these issues has been too slow and serious deficits remain.
is limited by the capacity of the electronic recording systems which primarily
report on compliance measures such as timescales. Considerable data cleansing
is required to eliminate human input errors. The retrospective nature of much
performance information, coupled with questionable integrity, creates an
incomplete picture of real performance and therefore the identification of
problems and slow pace of improvement.
social care, such as drift in the timely completion of both assessments and
plans. Deteriorating performance has not triggered vigorous interrogation or
robust improvement planning. Detailed audits of childrens files take place but
although they have the potential to improve performance, they are not
sufficiently independent and are not utilised to effectively disseminate the
learning obtained from this activity. Some critical learning is yet to be fully
acted upon, and change is not pursued quickly or fully enough, such as in
relation to CSE.
a period of great turbulence. However, the post holders in some of the most
pivotal roles have changed in a very short period of time. New senior managers
have, in a short time, shown a rapid and accurate understanding of the
strengths and weaknesses in childrens social care, although this is clearly work
in progress. The current priority is on tackling immediate issues of concern but
there is a need to undertake more fundamental problem solving.
the Chief Executive, and the independent chair of the LSCB show clear
communication and identification of relevant issues, but there is insufficient
evidence of these leading to swift improvements. The last Lead Member,
recently appointed as Leader of the local authority, considers performance
information carefully and interrogates it appropriately. However, the depth of
challenge has been limited by the quality, integrity and depth of data available,
and this requires improvement. The newly appointed Lead Member for
childrens services understands previous and emerging issues of concern but it
is too soon to see any improvements.


childrens social care, matters take a long time to be considered and any
consequent actions take too long to implement.
and the Childrens Partnership are not strong enough, resulting in a lack of
focused commissioning and strategic planning. Priorities are neither well aligned
nor driven in a coordinated way. Childrens issues are becoming increasingly
important for partner agencies, based on a needs assessment, with two of the
six priorities of the Health and Wellbeing Board focusing on children. However,
it is too early to see the impact of this.
broadest needs of children in the area and it lacks detailed analysis of the
needs of the most vulnerable children. This contributes to inadequate
commissioning of services to meet identified needs and poor medium and
longer term planning.
consequence of findings from external evaluation or internal performance
reporting. An example is that a quarter of all complaints about childrens
services are not responded to in a timely way, and young people are not
routinely advised about the complaints process nor helped to access it. There is
little evidence of learning from complaints. This undermines the stated
commitment to hearing from children about their views, and exemplifies how
commitments do not translate into clear actions.
creating specialist social work teams, increasing the number of children being
adopted and introducing fostering to adopt and staying put arrangements.
However, many of these are recent, some are limited in scale, and all are not
well connected to a sufficiency assessment and plan.
public protection arrangements (MAPPA), coordinating arrangements to protect
the public from serious offenders in the community. Although the local authority
engages with Cafcass, the family courts and the regional Family Justice Board,
this engagement is not leading to improved practice, and poor practice continue
to contribute to delays in legal proceedings for children.
assurance activity or manage performance sufficiently well. There is poor
practice in the supervision of staff, recording of management decisions, and
overseeing the content and recording of assessments and plans.


care. Two years ago there was a high turnover, high use of agency staff and
low morale. The workforce is now predominantly permanently employed staff,
with the few vacancies being covered promptly with use of agency staff.
Practitioners report good support from managers. Many social workers in their
first year of practice benefit from reflective casework consultations with their
allocated consultant practitioner and structured learning. However, workforce
stability has been achieved through significant recruitment of newly qualified
social workers, and this inexperience needs to be borne in mind when
considering the capacity of the service.
and experience into account. This was an area for development at the last
inspection which has not been addressed. Caseloads in the child protection and
children in need teams, which have the most inexperienced social workers, are
high. Caseloads in the looked after children teams where the staff are
proportionately more experienced are lower. The majority (55%) of social
workers have more than 20 cases, 28% have more than 25, and 11% have
more than 30 cases. High caseloads make it difficult for staff to deliver good
quality practice or benefit from the learning and developmental opportunities
available from the local authority and the LSCB. Some staff said they had not
been able to prioritise their learning needs over the demands of their caseload.
This is particularly important given the high percentage of inexperienced staff
and the need for staff to concentrate on issues that are most relevant to the
local area, such as CSE.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
inadequate.


Summary of findings
The LSCB is inadequate because:
Performance and evaluation
 The pace of change and improvement delivered by the LSCB is insufficient, with
change taking too long and the impact of changes not being clear or evaluated.
 There is little evaluation of the impact of the LSCBs work.
 The LSCB has failed to recognise the inadequacies in the local authority and
partner agencies. Some are now being recognised, but overall the LSCB has not
provided sufficient scrutiny or challenge.
 The LSCB is not yet effective in holding all partner agencies to account for the
delivery and impact of work.
 The LSCB frameworks for performance monitoring, reporting and evaluation do
not yet enable the robust evaluation of performance across all partners, and
practice issues and deficits have not been identified.

Coordination with strategic and commissioning activity
 The LSCB cannot demonstrate that it has taken the necessary steps to
encourage and support partners to make sufficient improvements.
 The LSCB does not have sufficient impact on other strategic partnerships, such
as the Health and Wellbeing Board.
 The LSCB does not have a link or influence on the joint commissioning
arrangements in the area.

Hearing and understanding experiences
 The LSCB does not have a good understanding of the experiences of the most
vulnerable children and young people in the area and those placed outside the
area; their voices are not heard. This inhibits the opportunities for the LSCB to
drive forward appropriate improvements.
 Poor practices in response to CSE are not known by the LSCB.
 Practitioners could not describe the impact of the LSCB on their practice.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Performance, challenge and improvement
improvement and the evaluation of impact.
the most vulnerable children through aligned performance data from all
partners.
priorities, is used to evaluate the impact of the required improvements in
practice.

Coordination with strategic and commissioning activity
Lead Member for childrens services.
commissioning through stronger representation on the statutory partnerships
and, in particular, the Health and Wellbeing Board.
Areas for improvement

Hearing and acting on the experiences of others
experiences of vulnerable children, including those placed outside the area.

Learning and development
partner agencies and the link with improved outcomes.
understand its priorities and impact and that learning from serious case reviews
(SCRs) is disseminated.
with current expectations and learning from reviews, SCRs and audit and
performance analysis. Ensure that learning and change are implemented
swiftly.


Inspection judgement about the LSCB
and robust testing and challenge towards all partner agencies and appropriately
initiated a self-assessment to reshape the LSCB. Within the last year, the LSCB
has been restructured, has taken early steps towards performance reporting
and has started to seek links with other bodies responsible for strategic
development and commissioning. Funding for the LSCB is secure, with a recent
increase to support performance reporting.
the profile and priorities of the LSCB, particularly in meetings with the previous
DCS. Given the current turbulence within the local authority and changes of
most key senior personnel, establishing and renewing relationships to maintain
the current momentum of improvement will need to be a priority.
business plan objectives and improving mutual challenge from members and
the evaluation of performance. While the direction of travel is positive, it is too
early for these efforts to show evidence of positive impact on practice.
travel and are sufficiently senior in their organisations to effect change.
Executive board members also chair the sub-groups, which should ensure that
efforts are directed towards the agreed priorities. Despite recent commitments,
long-standing problems remain, such as the ineffective implementation of the
threshold guidance across all agencies, poor quality referrals and the poor use
of the multi-agency referral form, poor health outcomes for looked after
children and the lack of support available for care leavers.
the LSCBs recently agreed priorities of CSE, neglect, domestic abuse and early
help. These priorities largely align with the Childrens Partnership Board but are
yet to be sufficiently aligned to the Health and Wellbeing Boards priorities. Until
very recently, there was no acceptance or understanding that the LSCB should
be routinely involved in discussions concerning vulnerable children and
contributing to the decision-making in relation to commissioning. Further work
is needed to cement the links with the Corporate Parenting and Community
Safety Boards.


the authoritys response to CSE, including the Independent Inquiry in Child
Sexual Exploitation in Rotherham 1997-2013, have been accepted by the LSCB.
Findings have led to much activity, but this has been ineffectively coordinated,
with insufficient integration of effort - the pace of change has been too slow.
The recent establishment of CSE as a priority for the LSCB, led by a sub-group,
is shedding light on aspects of planning, commissioning, availability of services,
local procedures and training. This has led to the establishment of a system for
tracking and monitoring cases. Poor practice in relation to CSE indicates the
urgent need for these areas to be robustly addressed.
CART contact and referrals. However, the impact of these audits on practice is
ineffective. Despite the audits and their findings, too many CART contacts,
including domestic violence notifications, continue to be inappropriate. This
volume negatively impacts on the timeliness of decision-making. The LSCB
completed a section 11 audit programme during 2014 to a good standard as
part of a biennial audit programme.
priorities are regularly refreshed and updated in line with emerging evidence
and findings in relation to best practice. Evaluation of training takes place at
several stages after delivery, recognising the challenges in identifying the
effectiveness of training and the impact on practice.
four years and no recent SCRs have been undertaken. These figures are too
low when compared with the serious issues that have come to light through
systemic reviews in the area. They suggest that the LSCB has not been
applying the thresholds effectively and has failed to recognise issues of serious
concern. The decision to initiate a SCR earlier this year was correct, but
required the independent chair to disagree with the recommendation of the
sub-group. The review identified serious shortfalls in section 47 arrangements
and inexperienced social workers holding cases that were too complex. The
reports recommendations are yet to be published and implemented. Learning
from previous local and other national SCRs has been disseminated, but many
practitioners have little knowledge of the key findings or the role of the LSCB in
informing their day-to-day practice.
performance and effectiveness of local services, identifying areas for
improvement. However, the analysis and evaluation of performance are limited.
The LSCBs impact on performance has been hampered by insufficient
performance information from partner agencies, and partners have been slow
to contribute to a joint performance framework. Efforts are now underway to
consolidate performance measures from health partners and the police in
addition to childrens social care.


about their experience of local services and this is identified as a weakness. The
last safeguarding inspection identified fully implementing the proposed quality
assurance framework as being an area for development. This included regular
collation of practice issues noted by child protection chairs and findings from all
quality assurance work to be reported to LSCB. The framework has not been
implemented.
comply with new statutory guidance and best practice guidance. Some, for
example the missing children policy and procedures, have been recently
reviewed but further work remains. The absence of a common understanding
and application of thresholds has been identified as problematic across the
partnership but, although a document has been agreed, effective improvements
in practice are yet to be achieved.
effectively to promoting changes in the wider community to reduce the risk of
accidental child deaths.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and one
Additional Inspector from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Sheena Doyle
Deputy lead inspector: Tracey Metcalfe
Team inspectors: Brendan Parkinson, Stella Butler, Nancy Meehan, Paula ThomsonJones, Neil Penswick, Karen Wareing, Martin Parry
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


