Sandwell Metropolitan Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 27 January 2015  19 February 2015
Report published: 5 June 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services are inadequate
There are widespread and serious failures that create or leave children being harmed
or at risk of harm. Leaders and managers have not been able to demonstrate
sufficient understanding of failures and have been ineffective in prioritising,
challenging and making improvements.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.2
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Inadequate

permanence

Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority - Summary of findings
Childrens services in Sandwell Metropolitan Borough Council
are inadequate because:
Leadership, management and governance
 Strategic leaders have failed to ensure that vulnerable children at risk are
protected. The application of thresholds is inconsistently, and at times,
inappropriately, applied. Managers do not always recognise risk. This result in
some childrens needs not being assessed or supported at the appropriate level.
 Strategic leaders have failed to act with urgency to address audit findings, which
identify that 2025% of threshold decisions require a higher level of response.
 Strategic leaders and managers have failed to understand the potential impact on
outcomes for children and the significance and reasons associated with a large
drop in the number of children in need receiving services from November 2013.
 The arrangements for the management of children who are missing and at risk of
child sexual exploitation are poor. This has resulted in children for whom there is
known high risk of child sexual exploitation not receiving a social work
assessment or service and not always being protected.
 The local authority and its partners do not fully understand the scale and
prevalence of child sexual exploitation in Sandwell.

Quality of practice
 Management oversight of frontline practice is failing to ensure that children and
families are receiving services at the right level based on need and risk and taking
account of the requirements of Working together to safeguard children.3
 The arrangements to escalate concerns about children from early help services to
childrens social care are not robust and result in some cases not receiving a
social work intervention when they need one.
 There is significant drift in multi-agency core group meetings being held and this
contributes to delay in progressing child protection plans.
 The authority is failing in its statutory duty to identify and effectively assess all
aspects of private fostering arrangements.
 Sixteen- and 17-year-olds who present as homeless do not always benefit from
an assessment of their needs, including their need for accommodation.


Working together to safeguard children A guide to inter-agency working to safeguard and promote
the welfare of children, Department for Education, March 2013;
www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-together-to-safeguard-children.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Leadership, management and governance

Ensure that the application of thresholds results in children receiving services
appropriate to their levels of need and risk and in line with Working Together
requirements.


Undertake an immediate review of all child sexual exploitation cases and ensure
that children and young people are appropriately assessed and receive services
that meet their needs and risk.


Ensure that, when children go missing, the arrangements for independent
return interviews result in children, including children looked after, being seen
by an independent person within 72 hours.


Ensure that assessments inform planning where young people are either living
in a private fostering arrangement or are 16- or 17-year-olds and homeless.


Ensure that case file auditing processes are robust and that action is taken to
address audit findings in a timely manner.

Areas for improvement

Help and protection

Improve the management oversight of social work practice to ensure that
assessments, plans and interventions are at the right level to address need and
risk and that appropriate action is taken to safeguard children.


Improve the quality of plans, including child in need plans, to improve
outcomes for children.


Ensure that multi-agency core group meetings are held within timescales and
drive child protection plans forward.


Ensure that assessments include rigorous analysis of childrens circumstances,
are informed by chronologies, take account of issues of childrens diversity and
inform planning.

who are absent and missing inform risk assessments and support effective
joint working.


Looked after children
and are reviewed by an independent reviewing officer.
second looked after childrens statutory review meeting.
meaningfully engaged so that they understand why they are in care.
the quality and timeliness of health and dental assessments.
looked after children, care leavers and adopted children.

Adoption

Care leavers
history and that all care leavers have a current pathway plan that is reviewed
regularly.
care leavers who will need support from adult services after the age of 18.

The local authoritys strengths
enthusiastic about their role and have strong support from the participation
officer. Members of the group sit on the Corporate Parenting Board and
childrens contributions influence the decisions that affect their lives.
lead their own looked after review meetings. This increases their participation in
and contribution to the review process.
best interest.
local authority has been invited to be an early implementer of the next troubled
families phase.


Operating Groups (COGs) know their cases well and visit families frequently.
There is evidence of success in some early help cases, such as improved school
attendance.

Progress since the last inspection
children was undertaken in March 2013. The local authority was judged
inadequate. The last Ofsted inspection of Sandwells services for looked after
children was in June 2013 and was judged inadequate.
inspection, such as the establishment of the multi-agency safeguarding hub
(MASH), the early help offer, reduced reliance on agency staff and the
appointment of senior officers. However, serious failings remain.
results in cases not being allocated for a social work assessment when
appropriate and in cases remaining in early help when a social work
intervention is required due to known and potential risk to children.
that shows a significant drop in the number of children in need receiving
services. The scale of the reduction in the number of children receiving services
or its significance and potential impact on childrens lives has not been
recognised or understood. This is a serious failure.
contact highlighted that a significant number of decisions require a social work
response. These findings have not been effectively acted on.
poor. The local authority is aware of many of the weaknesses in practice. These
include the quality of plans, core groups and child in need meetings. The local
authority also recognises the need to strengthen the use of chronologies to
inform assessment and planning and the need for greater availability of CAMHS
provision.
from the last children looked after inspection. There is improvement in the
effectiveness of the independent reviewing officer service. All children looked
after now have care plans. The local authority has been proactive in reviewing
the arrangements for children on care orders placed at home reduce drift
now influence decision-making. Care leavers influenced the looked after
childrens and care leavers pledge, which reflects issues that are important to
them.


leaders listen to their views and take them seriously. Children have been
actively involved in the work of the Board and presented the looked after
children annual report to full council.


Summary for children and young people
 Some children who are at risk do not always get the right level of help and
support they need to keep them safe.
 More needs to be done to make sure those children who are at risk of being
sexually exploited get the right level of help and are protected.
 Too many children have had too many different social workers. This makes it
hard for children to build a trusting relationship with them. It also makes it hard
for social workers get to know the children and means that sometimes it takes
too long to get important things done. This is a big problem for children looked
after and for their foster carers.
 When children looked after go missing, they sometimes have to wait too long
before someone comes to talk to them, to support them and help keep them safe
in the future.
 There is a wide range of services to help children and their families, but the local
authority needs to make sure that the right sort of help is provided to children
and that it meets their needs.
 Social workers assessments are getting better. Good assessments lead to
children getting the help and support they need.
 When it is not safe for children to go back home to live with their parents, some
children have to wait too long before a permanent home is found.
 Children looked after are supported to chair their reviews and this helps them to
participate and contribute in decisions that affect their lives.
 Children and young people wait too long to get help from Child and Adolescent
Mental Health Services (CAMHS) if they need it.
 Childrens school attendance has got better and fewer children are being
excluded from school. In 2014, children looked after in Sandwell did better at
their GCSEs than children looked after living in other areas.
 Children told inspectors that senior managers listen to them and take their views
seriously.
 The adoption team is doing well at finding adoptive families for children who
need them.
 Services for care leavers have improved. Most care leavers are in employment,
education or training and are living in suitable accommodation. Most young
people are being helped to prepare for independence.


Information about this local authority area4
Children living in this area
 Approximately 76,867 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Sandwell. This is 25% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 30% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 22% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 22% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 41% of all
children living in the area compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Indian and Pakistani.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 31% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 26% (the national average is 14%).
 Sandwell has experienced an increase in economic migrants, with the majority
arriving from Poland. This group increased from 208 individuals in 2001 to 5,673
in 2011. In 2011, people born in EU accession countries accounted for 2.6% of
the usual resident population of Sandwell. There have also been additions to the
established communities, including the number of individuals born in India
increasing by 4,556 to 15,190, in Pakistan increasing by 1,722 to 5,295 and in
Bangladesh increasing by 1,120 to 2, 8483.
Child protection in this area
 As at 2 February 2015, 1,441 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 As at 31 January 2015, 323 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 383 at 31 March 2014.
 As at 31 January 2015, three children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from six at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection, two serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and one serious case review has been completed.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Children looked after in this area
 As at 31 January 2015, 538 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 70 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 575 (75 per
authority area
 four live in residential special schools,5 all of whom (100%) live out of
the authority area
area
 two children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 36 adoptions
subsequently returned to be looked after
independent living
 three children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority does not operate any childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of Sandwells safeguarding arrangements for the
protection of children took place between 25 February and 6 March 2013. The
local authority was judged inadequate.
 The previous inspection of Sandwells services for looked after children took place
between 24 and 28 June 2013. The local authority was judged inadequate.
 The last adoption service inspection took place on 8 June 2010 and judged overall
quality as satisfactory.
 The last fostering inspection took place on 27 July 2012 and was judged
adequate.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days a year.


Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since January 2013.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since August 2014.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
The local authority has not ensured that cases of high risk or actual harm to children
have a statutory assessment of need to enable children to be kept safe. The local
authority has failed to apply effective thresholds or to respond appropriately to
known or potential risk, which means that vulnerable children do not always receive
services at the right time or at the appropriate level. This has left some children at
risk. Those children who are identified as being at risk benefit from agencies working
closely together within the MASH.
Too many child protection cases have had recent changes of social worker, causing
drift and delay in progressing work. Multi-agency core group meetings are not held
regularly enough and are not well recorded. This contributes to delay in the
progression of plans.
Information about children who go missing and children at risk of child sexual
exploitation is not brought together effectively to inform planning and intervention.
Recording of return interviews is not entered on childrens files, meaning that
information is not being seen or acted on by social workers.
The identification, assessment and management oversight of private fostering
arrangements is poor, resulting in children being left at potential risk.
Sixteen- and 17-year-olds who present as homeless do not benefit from an
assessment of their needs.
Early help services, including childrens centres are well resourced and parents who
spoke to inspectors spoke positively of resources available and help received.
Exclusion rates from schools are reducing and attendance rates are improving. The
numbers of children missing education shows a significant decrease.


the MASH and a recently developed early help offer, not all children are
adequately protected and some are left at serious risk of harm. Decisionmaking in the MASH sometimes results in children who need statutory
intervention to ensure that they are fully protected being inappropriately
referred for early help. At the initial point of contact, management decisionmaking within the MASH is not consistent. Inspectors found that, in a
significant number of contacts that led to no further action, management
decision-making demonstrated over-optimism and a lack of professional
curiosity. Consequently, presenting information is not subject to adequate
challenge or scrutiny. This resulted in children in need of services potentially
not being recognised and left at risk.
progressing to a referral. A significant number of these cases were repeat
contacts. Between 31 March 2014 and 2 February 2015, there was a 43%
reduction in the number of children in need receiving services. The local
authority has failed to understand and act on the reasons for this.
the Sandwell LSCB multi-agency thresholds document, or in line with Working
Together 2013. Although the local authoritys early help strategy makes it clear
that early help is for families who are below the threshold for social care
intervention, inspectors identified cases where the risks identified required a
statutory social work response. Failure to apply thresholds correctly reflects the
local authoritys own audits of activity within the MASH during 2014, which
consistently identified 2025% of decisions made as requiring a higher-level
response. The local authority is yet to take action to address these shortfalls.
particularly in relation to some children considered to have targeted additional
needs or be at risk of child sexual exploitation, has become blurred. This has
resulted in some children at risk of sexual exploitation who required a high level
of support being allocated to early help services without the necessary
safeguards in place to ensure their protection. During the inspection, eight
cases of serious concern were referred back to the local authority that met the
criteria for child protection enquiries.
exploitation means that many child sexual exploitation cases are open to early
help. Sampling of these cases identified 23% children at serious risk of harm.
These cases were referred back to the local authority.


social workers took urgent action to ensure childrens safety. In each of these
cases, there had been a failure to identify known risk and take appropriate
protective action. In another case, inspectors identified the potential risk of
sexual abuse to a child, leading to the local authority taking immediate action
to rectify the situation.
and level of child sexual exploitation, leaving some young people at potential
risk. The implementation of the recently introduced child sexual exploitation
screening tool and risk assessment is inconsistent, with some staff remaining
untrained in its use. Although there has been some initial analysis of its use, its
impact on the management of risk has yet to be evidenced.
they receive a visit from an independent person to explore the reasons for
going missing. This leaves children vulnerable and without appropriate and
timely support. Records of these interviews are not stored on childrens files.
This means that social workers do not consider this information when assessing
risks and planning interventions.
missing education and child sexual exploitation to identify themes and patterns
to inform planning. Police record absence episodes manually. This does not
support robust joint working or timely intervention.
the joint intervention of partners co-located in the MASH. Child protection
strategy meetings take place promptly where children are at potential or
immediate risk of harm. Outcomes from these meetings are consistent with the
information discussed and the level of risk identified, and this supports timely
interventions. However, the recording does not always make clear which
agencies attended.
always take into account historical information to inform assessments.
Assessments of childrens needs are often detailed and consideration is given to
childrens wishes and feelings, which reflect their understanding of situations
and what they want to happen. Assessments result in the provision of a wide
range of support services. This includes services from Sandwell womens aid
and interventions through safer activities for everyone (SAFE), a scheme run
by the NSPCC. There was evidence that families and children benefited from
the help provided by these services.
plans do not pay sufficient attention to the impact and context of cultural
background. This results in poor consideration of childrens full needs and does
not inform the planning process.


establish their eligibility for support under Section 17 or Section 20 of the
Children Act 1989. One young person had been referred to the MASH but had
been stepped down to early help. In another case, the young person repeatedly
presented as homeless and, while good support was provided from the early
help service, no assessment of need was undertaken. Failure to provide
appropriate levels of assessment and support means that young people who
present as homeless are potentially vulnerable.
two further cases. One young person was recognised as being fostered
privately but appropriate action was not taken. In the other, the local authority
did not actively consider the appropriateness of the arrangement. In these
cases, young people had been left in situations of unassessed risk. This is a
serious weakness.
children in need cases of chronic neglect in households with very young
children. In seven of nine tracked cases, there was evidence of poor
management oversight and of multiple changes of social workers, which
contributed to some drift and delay.
within agreed timescales and, while there is evidence that children are seen
during visits, they are not always seen alone. Records of these visits are not
always purposeful and do not demonstrate what actions have been undertaken
to drive forward the child protection plan.
and are attended by an appropriate range of agencies. Social work reports
presented at the conferences identify risk factors and make recommendations
that are supported by evidence. However, conferences do not always receive
reports from social workers and reflects variable performance. In January 2015,
the rate of reports provided for conference was 70%, which is poor.
young people 12 years and over in child protection conferences is low,
averaging at 15% over 201415. This means that children and young peoples
contribution to the arrangements to protect them is potentially limited.
not always make clear what needs to change for the better. Timescales are not
always specified. There is insufficient challenge from conference chairs when
there are delays in progressing plans and actions. The use of written
agreements with families is well utilised and focuses on identified actions to
reduce immediate risk, particularly in domestic violence cases.


accordance with the agreed timescales set out in the child protection plan.
Some of these delays were significant. When meetings were held, minutes were
often not added to the childs case file. This means that core group meetings
are not used as an effective way of ensuring and tracking the progress of child
protection plans and the engagement of the family and partners. This is a
significant weakness.
This means that children do not benefit from relationships with professionals
who they get to know. Frequent changes in social workers also led to drift in
the planning for some children.
authority, social workers have a good understanding of the public law outline
(PLO) process. Inspectors saw appropriate use and consideration of the PLO.
Legal services monitor progress in PLO cases to ensure that cases do not drift.
nine cases tracked in care management teams there were evidence of poor
management oversight and multiple changes of social worker. These
contributed to drift and delay.
oversight of these concerns. An assessment tool effectively supports decisionmaking and provides a good range and depth of information. However, police
notifications to childrens social care do not consistently include information
about whether children were present during domestic abuse incidents. The local
authority is taking steps to address this, but it is too early to identify any
impact.
are chaired by the police. They appropriately review cases deemed high risk.
These include breaches of Domestic Violence Protection Orders and Claires
Law applications. However, there was little evidence seen on childrens case
files of minutes of these meetings.
authority designated officer (LADO) provides timely and effective intervention,
although the systems for recording activity are cumbersome. The LADO reports
that the service is under-resourced and this has limited the effectiveness of the
role. Work with faith groups to ensure that they have a full understanding of
their safeguarding responsibilities and when to refer concerns to the LADO is
under-developed.


risk. The out of hours service provides timely support to families who need
help. Clear recording passed from the out of hours service to daytime staff
supports the MASH to make informed interventions.
The local authoritys early help services has limited remaining capacity, with
by the number of complex and inappropriate cases being passed to early help
that require statutory intervention within childrens social care services.
for families. Required actions do not explain what families need to do to ensure
that children and young people make progress and thrive. Multi-agency
partners attendance at TAFs is poor. However, plans seen show that families
wishes are taken in to account.
operating groups (COGs) know their cases well. They visit families frequently
and there is evidence of success, such as improved school attendance. Early
help assessments seen by inspectors are detailed. However, timescales for
improvement are often not clear enough and the actions contained within plans
do not sufficiently consider how outcomes for children will be improved.
were rated as good or outstanding at their last inspection. Families had
received help promptly and support was coordinated effectively. Parents who
spoke to inspectors were positive about the range of early help services
available, such as support for victims of domestic abuse, parenting courses and
access to counselling.
cohort of 1,115 and has been invited to be an early implementer of the next
Troubled Families phase involving a further 3,910 families in 201520.
safeguarding concerns. Education partners report significant improvements in
this initiative, particularly over the past few months, and they find access to
early help services more straightforward than in the past. Where schools have a
referral to social work services accepted, they receive prompt feedback.
However, some staff stated that they are concerned when high-risk cases are
stepped down too quickly to early help.


average. Exclusions are reducing and attendance is improving. Almost all
secondary schools and the majority of primary schools have improved their
attendance rates this year. A comprehensive database records children and
young people missing from schools and shows that numbers of children not on
a school roll are reducing. This academic year, 40 new referrals were received
and, of those, half have now been closed successfully. Currently, 55 children
and young people are on the register of children missing education; none is on
a child protection plan, two are on a child in need plan and three receive early
help support.
with alternative providers. Quality assurance of this provision is undertaken by
the local authority and through Ofsted inspection. A further 61 children attend
the hospital school. Schools are provided with clear guidance on the actions to
take following withdrawal of a child from the school roll. A child missing
education officer is linked to each COG, thus ensuring better tracking in each of
the seven localities.
accuracy requires consolidation. This includes independent schools and
providers of alternative education.
electively home educated. Currently, 141 young people are registered as home
educated. Of these, eight families were judged to provide an unsuitable
programme to their children. Almost all are now either re-integrated into school
or provided with learning with an accredited alternative provider. Two have
moved out of the area. No child educated at home is on a child protection plan,
one is on a child in need plan and 10 receive early help support.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Children do not always become looked after at the right time and some suffer drift
and delay in their needs being appropriately met.
Outcomes for looked after children are not yet good because care planning does not
always support improving the experiences and progress of looked after children.
Inspectors found some instances where children were returned home without a full
assessment and this potentially left some children vulnerable.
When children are on the edge of requiring care from the local authority, the use of
the public law outline (PLO) is improving and families benefit from a range of support
services to enable them to remain at home safely.
Some children had frequent changes of social worker and this contributed to delays
in progressing care plans and securing legal orders.
When children looked after go missing, they do not routinely receive timely
independent return interviews to identify where they have been, whether they have
been harmed or whether they need any additional support.
Life story work for children who are in care is not always completed. This means that
some children do not understand their early life experiences.
Some children experience delay in achieving permanence.
All children looked after have care plans that are regularly reviewed and children and
young people are supported to chair and lead their own review meetings.
Education outcomes for children looked after have improved over time and gaps
between all pupils and those in care are closing. The 2014 GCSE results are above
the national results for pupils looked after.
Some improvements have been made in the quality and timeliness of health
assessments, although children and young people wait too long for services from
Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS).
Adoption is considered for all children looked after, but some children still wait too
long between entering care and going to live with adoptive families.
Services for care leavers have improved over the past 12 months. Most care leavers
are in employment, education or training and live in suitable accommodation.


carers to prevent family breakdown. During 2014, the Family Solutions Team
(FST) worked with 141 families with children on the edge of care and, at the
end of the year, 94% of these children were living at home. The use of family
group conferences (FGC) is increasing and there are some positive examples of
plans made by families to support children remaining at home. Inspectors saw
no cases where children had become looked after unnecessarily. When children
need to be looked after, in a small number of cases inspectors saw drift and
delay in children becoming looked after at an early enough stage.
placements. The weekly placement panel, chaired by a senior manager,
considers whether children should enter care and any plans for them to return
home.
assessments led to delays in instigating legal proceedings. This has resulted in
a lack of confidence in the local authority by the judiciary and the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass). This is particularly evident
in cases of chronic neglect.
childrens needs and social workers do not always update assessments and
plans with significant events in childrens lives. Issues of equality and diversity
such as ethnicity, sexual orientation or faith, are not always fully considered
within assessments and care plans. Historical information is not always fully
utilised and chronologies are often of poor quality or absent from the file.
However, in the vast majority of assessment and plans, the wishes and feelings
of children are well recorded.
assessments to contribute to planning for looked after children. This ensures
that the possibility of children living with relatives, or with brothers and sisters
are appropriately considered.
enough. Inspectors saw some good examples of independent reviewing officers
(IROs) challenging care plans. In other cases, actions had drifted and were
deferred to the next review without being effectively dealt with. Permanency
planning meetings routinely consider the best way of achieving permanence for
every child although plans are not always in place by the second looked after
statutory review. For some children, this has caused delay in planning for their
future.
Effective arrangements are in place to encourage young people to chair and
lead their own review meetings. This has increased month on month, from 13%
in May 2014 to 37% in January 2015.


involve parents. In a review meeting observed during the inspection, the IRO
ensured that the meeting was child-focused and that the young person was
fully involved throughout.
worker. However, between September 2014 and February 2015, five children
looked after have had periods without an allocated social worker. This is not
consistent with supporting children well.
parents regulations. In most cases seen by inspectors, these arrangements
were appropriate to meet the needs of the children and young people.
support workers where necessary, who provide comprehensive reports to social
workers. Some creative and persistent direct work by social workers has
resulted in children looked after enjoying contact arrangements where
relationships had previously broken down.
placement moves over a 12-month period had reduced from 13% to 10.3%. A
small cohort of children had experienced a high number of placement moves.
The percentage of children living with their carers for more than two years is
positive, at 69.5%.
dated 2013 to inform future planning and commissioning of placements.
work is not routinely undertaken. This means that some children have
significant gaps in their knowledge and understanding about their past.
permanency and support. This has improved the competence and resilience of
foster carers through good quality supervision and training. The annual foster
carer review process has been strengthened with action taken to address the
backlog of 60 annual reviews. Managers recognise that there is a pressing need
to improve communication and re-engage foster carers.
of their experience. The training is helping carers to better understand the
needs of children looked after and reduce the number of placements that result
in an unplanned ending.
changes of social workers and the impact that the lack of continuity has on the
children and young people in their care.


children living in foster care through special guardianship orders (SGOs).
Although they have been successful in many cases, foster carers expressed
concern about levels of ongoing support and were therefore reluctant to
progress this route to permanence. This resulted in some children in foster care
not achieving permanence through a SGO as planned. Work is being done with
the Family Justice Board to develop a more consistent approach to the use of
SGOs and connected persons assessments.
careful consideration to placing young people out of area and does this based
on an assessment of the children or young peoples needs. In the majority of
cases, arrangements are monitored closely and access to education and health
services is timely. Inspectors found that young people placed out of area were
making good progress.
birthday, they often experience delay in being assessed. This creates anxiety
for parents and carers and uncertainty for the young people, who do not know
what their future holds.
social worker for risks relating to child sexual exploitation. At the time of the
inspection, 10 young people looked after were assessed as high risk or
vulnerable to child sexual exploitation. From July to December 2014, there were
available to identify patterns and trends of absences or missing episodes to
inform decision-making and risk assessments. Children placed out of area do
not consistently receive return interviews following missing episodes.
The resolution of some complaints has not been timely. Children and young
people have access to advocacy and independent visitors but take-up is low.
Only six young people have received effective support from an independent
visitor; 35 received support from advocacy services.
needs. The named nurse liaises with health visitors, school nurses, general
practitioners and CAMHS to obtain a health summary of each child. The
timeliness of health assessments has improved but is still poor, at 73%. Dental
checks are extremely low at 69%.
work, which is limited in availability. Social workers spoke of high thresholds
and lengthy waiting lists for access to CAMHS. My Shield provides a range of
interventions, including intensive support through the B-Well programme and
one-to-one counselling services to young people (aged five to 19) in Sandwell.


about their role and have strong support from a participation officer. Members
of the group sit on the corporate parenting board and this is improving the
influence that children looked after have on decision-making.
children looked after nationally and their results are improving. The most recent
validated results (2014) for a small cohort of 31 pupils show that 75% of
children looked after in primary schools made the expected progress in reading,
with the national results for children looked after. However, they are still well
below the results of all primary-aged pupils in Sandwell. In 2014, over 90% of
all pupils in the borough made the expected progress in these subjects.
the proportion of children looked after achieving five good GCSEs including
English and mathematics (18%) was above the national average for looked
after children (12%). Progress between Key Stages 2 and 4 is also comparable.
The proportion of pupils making the expected progress in English (42%) and in
mathematics (28%) match the national figures for children looked after of 39%
in English and 29% in mathematics. Although closing, there is still a huge
attainment gap at GCSE between pupils who are looked after and all pupils in
Sandwell. Most of the Year 11 pupils (76%) who left school in July 2014
continued their education or training post-16. The use of post-16 personal
education plans is a good development, aiming to increase the number of
students obtaining A-level qualifications and entering higher education.
borough, attend a good or outstanding school. The Looked After Children
Education (LACE) team contributes to decisions about the placement of children
and the choice of schools is given due consideration. Additional scrutiny is given
to arrangements for pupils looked after who attend schools where weaknesses
have been identified. Pupils are not moved unnecessarily.
A bespoke timetable is provided for two children looked after who are not in
full-time education. Students in the pupil referral unit follow a specific
curriculum to improve their attendance and re-engage them in learning.
Over the past few years, success in ensuring no permanent exclusions has been
maintained and, although still above average, the number of fixed-term
exclusions is reducing. The LACE team are strengthening their alert system so
that support is provided as soon as young peoples behaviour patterns change
and risks of exclusion are reduced.


children looked after. The Easter Club offers support for GCSE revision. Eleven
young people attended an intensive mathematics week. Personal tutors are
funded to help students prepare for their GCSEs and post 16-education
provision. Take-up for these opportunities is low. Academic and personal
achievements are celebrated in high-profile events.
up a clear strategic plan for further improvement. He is very aware of the
strengths and areas that require further improvement. These include raising
expectations of carers and school staff, improving the effectiveness of personal
education plans, reducing fixed-term exclusions and monitoring more tightly the
impact of pupil premium funding. The personal education plans completed
(70%) usually provide a good overview of pupils attendance, welfare and
emotional well-being, including the risk of bullying. However, targets for
progress and attainment are often too broad and the impact of pupil premium
funding on raising the achievement of children looked after is not clearly
demonstrated. The local authority provides access to a wide range of leisure
activities to support children and young people.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
children looked after, variability in the quality and timeliness of work in some
cases has led to delay and decisions having to be deferred. The local authority
is taking action to address performance problems and raise practice standards.
It recognises that there is further to go, including improvements to the support
provided to adoptive families.
care proceedings conclude within 29 weeks. This means that 34% of children
have to wait longer than they should for their legal position to be secured and
the local authoritys performance does not meet the national requirement of 26
weeks.
children still wait too long between entering care and going to live with
adoptive families. While the three-year average of 594 days continues to fall
and is now below the national average of 628 days, it is it still 47 days over the
national threshold set out in the adoption scorecard.


agrees on a match by 147 days on average. This is better than the three-year
national average for England and meets the scorecard threshold. Over the last
three years, 50% of children (85) have entered care and moved in with their
adoptive family within 18 months.
adoptive family in 2014. Of these, 19 were not matched within the timeframe
required by the adoption scorecard. This means that too many children wait too
long to be matched with their permanent family.
but have not yet gone to live with their adoptive family are either matched with
prospective adopters or linked with foster carers.
panel, has been effective in driving up practice standards and exerts
appropriate influence and control. Inspectors saw examples of effective
oversight by the adoption panel and agency decision-maker in the adoption
process that led to positive outcomes.
quality of child permanence reports (CPRs) is improving. A concerted effort is
being made to improve the quality of CPRs in order to minimise delays for
children and young people for whom the permanence plan is adoption. The
adoption panel adviser and court officer work closely together and hold CPR
surgeries with individual social workers so that they can rigorously track
progress.
adoptive families and then matching them with children in a timely way. Some
adopters are matched with children from other authorities through local
consortia arrangements.
enhanced the local authoritys ability to reach out to individuals and couples
who are interested in adopting. High quality marketing materials and a rolling
programme of information events and family finding activities provide a steady
flow of prospective adopters. Of the numbers of potential adopters attending
information events, 25% go on to be assessed at stage 1 of the adoption
assessment process.


provided and the thoroughness of the assessment. As part of the matching
process, good use is made of child appreciation days to help adopters develop a
much fuller picture of the lives of the children with whom they are matched and
begin to make an emotional connection with them. Sixteen of the 19 children
who are currently the subject of a placement order but have not yet gone to
live with their adoptive family are either matched with prospective adopters or
are linked with foster carers.
community and provides effective scrutiny and critical challenge. A precondition for panel approval is that prospective adopters are in a position to
make informed choices about fostering to adopt. In the event that prospective
adopters are not approved, they are given information about the independent
review mechanism (IRM). Approximately half of all adoptions made by the local
authority involve inter-agency placements.
Although lower than the previous years figure of 23%, this is in line with the
national average. Between 2011 and 2014, 11% of children who left care as a
result of being adopted were from an ethnic minority background. This was
higher than the proportion in England  8%  over the same period. In 2013
adoption. Currently, there are three sibling groups waiting for an adoptive
family. In the financial year to date, 33 children have been adopted.
means-tested adoption allowances. The looked after children education service
(LACES) provides support to adoptive families. However, the local authority
acknowledges weaknesses in resources, training and capacity. The adoption
team manager has identified access to CAMHS as a key issue. Seven of the 14
respondents to the adoption survey disagreed with the statement, My child has
effective adoption support if and when he or she needs it. Four of them
disagreed strongly.
rights and entitlements and the range of support services available. Service
level agreements with Adoption UK and After Adoption mean, for example,
that: there is a buddy system for those adopters who want to use it; adopted
teenagers can access Talk about adoption groups; and there is support for
birth parents. In 201314, five out of six assessments for post-adoption support
resulted in support being provided. Currently, there are 11 adoptive families
receiving post-adoption support packages funded by the local authority.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
significant number of plans are not completed to a good enough standard.
While all care leavers have an up-to-date review of their plan, inspectors found
that there were significant gaps between the review periods. This does not
support effective planning. Too many young people are not involved in
reviewing their plans. Assessments are not updated once young people transfer
to the 18 Plus team. This is a missed opportunity to record key events, changes
and concerns and to celebrate important progress and achievements in young
peoples lives.
are in tune with care leavers wishes and speak warmly of them and know their
personalities. They demonstrate a rich knowledge of young peoples needs and
goals and any risks within their lives. However, despite the good relationships,
personal advisers do not have records of young peoples histories, so they
cannot help them to understand and make sense of what has happened in their
earlier lives.
substance misuse team, Connexions and the youth offending service means
that this help and advice is readily available to young people. However, services
for older care leavers are limited and CAMHS support is not available to young
people over the age of 18. This is not identified within the local authoritys
looked after children strategic priorities. There are limited facilities within the 18
Plus building for young people to use a computer with their personal adviser.
their health history when they leave care. The existing information provided to
care leavers about their health histories is also too limited. The designated
nurse for care leavers is based within the 18 Plus team but there is no drop-in
service for young people to access advice about their health when they need it.
past year and in particular since additional staff resource was added to the
team in November 2014. Personal advisers receive regular supervision and they
report good access to their managers. The quality of supervision notes is
inconsistent and they contain limited analysis of young peoples previous
experiences. This has been identified within the local authoritys own audits.


training, at 48%, is slightly better than the national average of 45% (201314
figures). Five care leavers are currently engaged in apprenticeship schemes.
There is appropriate support in place for young people who wish to enter
higher education and there are currently 15 care leavers aged 18 to 21
attending university. Those who are not in education, training or employment
are tracked and personal advisers seek to re-engage them as far as possible,
but efforts to re-engage young people age 1618 who are not in education,
employment or training have drifted in some cases.
as they wish. In 201314, the proportion of children looked after aged 16 who
remained looked after when they reached 18 years of age was 76%, which is
young people who turned 18 remained with their foster carers under a staying
put arrangement. This is close to the national average of 52% and is
significantly higher than the previous year in Sandwell when just 12% remained
with their carers beyond their 18th birthday.
the past 12 months and the local authority does not consider this suitable
accommodation for young people of any age. A large majority (91%) of care
leavers live in appropriate accommodation, which is an improvement from 75%
in March 2013 and is slightly higher than the national average. A range of
suitable housing options are available to care leavers including foster care,
supported lodgings, training flats, semi-supported and independent
accommodation. Young people are effectively helped to prepare for their own
tenancy through the intensive and practical support of an apprentice who is
employed by the local authority and based within the 18 Plus team. The eight
care leavers who live in training flats are progressing well towards
independence. A local foundation provides helpful support to care leavers
though the provision of courses in DIY, cooking and healthy eating.
weakness, but care leavers spoken to say that they receive a swift and
proactive response when they are unhappy about something. They feel
confident about contacting managers directly and are pleased with the warm
and helpful response they receive. Personal advisers are knowledgeable about
young peoples entitlements and advocate on their behalf to ensure that they
receive the help and financial support they need. An up-to-date financial
entitlements policy underpins this aspect of supporting care leavers. These
entitlements are outlined clearly in the Sandwell leaving care website. Care
leavers value the role of the welfare rights officer.


Sandwell. Thirteen of these are aged between 18 and 21. The 18 Plus team
benefits from the expertise of a specialist new arrivals manager. This means
that the team remains up to date in their knowledge and that personal advisers
are able to provide targeted help to this group of young people. Inspectors saw
examples of unaccompanied asylum seeking young people sensitively prepared
for the future.
available to young parents and inspectors saw some good examples of support
and intervention.
children and care leavers pledge and are happy that it includes all the key
assurances they need from their corporate parents. The care leavers forum, an
enthusiastic group of young people, is working hard to improve the experiences
of all care leavers in Sandwell. Children told inspectors that senior managers
and leaders within the council take issues that are important to them seriously.
Care leavers valued the involvement of senior leaders at the successful care
leavers event in October 2014, which was attended by 50 young people.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Leaders and managers have failed to recognise situations where children have been
at risk of harm and as such have not ensured appropriate thresholds and the right
balance between when children should receive early help services and when their
needs require a statutory social work response. This has left children at potential risk
of harm.
Leaders have failed to understand and act on the marked reduction in child in need
work identified through performance management information.
Local authority audit activity has not provided senior managers with an accurate
picture of frontline practice. Managers have failed to follow up recommendations
from audit activity.
The local authority and its partners do not have a current clear assessment of the
broad range of needs of children and their families in Sandwell or a clear plan to
deliver services and assess what difference they make.
Work by the local authority and partners to understand the links between child
sexual exploitation and children missing from home or education has not taken place
quickly enough. The local authority has not ensured that all children assessed as at
high risk of child sexual exploitation are receiving services appropriate to their level
of need and risk.
The establishment of the MASH has strengthened joint working between partners.
Early help is well resourced and beginning to make a positive difference for some
children.
Senior managers have failed to act on previous recommendations about
implementing an effective electronic record system. This lack of action is a barrier to
delivering good social work practice and does not support management oversight
and decision-making.
Strategic leaders and members are committed corporate parents and encourage the
participation of children and young people from the Children in Care Board in the
work of the Corporate Parenting Board
Newly qualified social workers are well supported and there has been a significant
reduction in the use of agency workers.


the last inspection, strategic leaders undertook a major reorganisation to drive
improvement. Although strategic and political leaders have resourced the
improvement agenda at a time of severe financial pressure, too many children
in Sandwell continue to be failed. Strategic managers have failed to understand
and effectively act on performance information and audit intelligence that has
consistently identified that a significant number of cases require a higher level
of response. Too many children who require social work statutory intervention
in line with Working Together fail to receive it and are provided with lower
levels of support that fail to meet their needs for protection.
people meet their needs including their need for protection. While the MASH
process provides for a timely response to contacts, the councils performance
management information shows that multiple contacts often occur before cases
progress to a referral. Inspectors identified a number of occasions where
children were left at risk and where opportunities to intervene in an appropriate
and timely manner were missed, resulting in cases being inappropriately dealt
with. This included children who were either homeless or living in a private
fostering arrangement. Strategic leaders took immediate action in response to
issues raised in relation to cases referred back during this inspection. In
addition, the local authority took immediate action to strengthen decisionmaking processes within the MASH in response to findings during this
inspection.
audits in understanding and improving practice has been poor. The audits have
not resulted in senior managers having a clear and accurate picture of service
performance or a clear line of sight on the quality of frontline practice.
Consequently, audit activity has not resulted in appropriate action being taken
to ensure that thresholds and practice are delivered at an appropriate level to
meet childrens needs.
decision-making in 2025% of cases. Action plans have not been progressed in
relation to eight out of 10 local authority audits. While the local authority has
been aware of this failing since September 2014, actions have only recently
been collated into one plan. However, actions from audits do not demonstrate
impact on improving services in 78% of cases and learning and action from
audit findings is not demonstrated.
managers cannot rely on such audits to give them an accurate understanding of
the appropriateness, quality and impact of practice. This is despite the
oversight and scrutiny of the Performance Accountability Board, as directed by
the Secretary of State, and the local authoritys use of external consultancy to
add capacity and direction to improvement planning.


disagreed with the local authoritys rating in nine cases. In these cases, the
local authority assessment of the quality of work was more positive than the
findings of the inspection team. In four cases, inspectors evaluated practice as
inadequate. In three of these, the local authority had evaluated them more
positively. This mirrors the findings of the recent Local Government Association
(LGA)-led peer review, which rated 10 of 21 case audits less positively than the
local authority.
variable and in some cases poor, with too few children benefiting from a robust
plan that ensures that known risks are rigorously monitored and result in
improved outcomes. In one social work case audited by the local authority for
this inspection, there were known serious risks of potential abuse where
children were not protected. In a significant number of other cases referred
back to the local authority, risk was not appropriately identified or acted on.
Managers failed to appropriately identify and act on these issues of known risk.
When this was brought to the local authoritys attention during the inspection,
they took immediate appropriate action.
strategic leaders and partners implemented the MASH, a combination of colocated key partners that includes early help. The early help model and
strategy, delivered across the borough through the local Community Operating
Groups (COGs), is in the early stages of implementation and seeks to support
families before statutory intervention is necessary.
children in Sandwell. The restructuring of teams that followed the creation of
the MASH has created a clearer structure with fewer transfer points for children
receiving services and a stable senior management structure that has been in
place for a year.
the thresholds for intervention within the model result in the local authority
failing to fulfil its statutory duties. Too many contacts are being diverted into
early help without the benefit of an appropriate social work assessment, where
potential risk of harm requires further examination before the appropriate level
of support can be identified. Inspectors identified a number of cases where
there were missed opportunities at the point of initial contact that required an
assessment or child protection enquiry. These cases were wrongly categorised
at a much lower level of need. In some cases seen, action was only taken after
further incidents had occurred. This is a serious failure in management
decision-making and oversight.


statutory intervention is weak. Senior leaders do not have a full understanding
of the strengths and weaknesses of frontline practice. When children and
families are receiving an offer of early help and risks escalate, responses from
statutory social care services have not been effective. Some cases are not
accepted as meeting the threshold for statutory intervention, while others are
not sufficiently scrutinised. This has resulted in children and young people
remaining at known potential risk of significant harm.
circumstances of children and young people at risk of child sexual exploitation
and those who go missing from home, care or education. This information has
not been brought together to create an informed overview of trends and
themes, nor is such information aggregated or cross-referenced with
information about child sexual exploitation to identify themes to inform
strategic planning. This limits the ability of the local authority and its partner
agencies to effectively protect children who may be at risk of child sexual
exploitation or who are at risk as a result of going missing.
through the LSCB to improve how this is done in the future. An updated multiagency child sexual exploitation strategy is due to be finalised by March 2015
and a new multi-agency child sexual exploitation team is almost fully staffed. It
is too early to assess the impact of the new child sexual exploitation team.
Although there have been some recent positive examples of action to disrupt
potential CSE activity, including work with taxi companies, hotels and fast-food
outlets, the impact is yet to be evaluated.
been poor. An audit of the cases of five children at risk of child sexual
exploitation completed by the LSCB on 4 October 2014 raised serious concerns,
including unaddressed risk of harm for all five young people. A series of
recommendations was made to address these. Although action has been taken
to address risk, senior managers had not followed up on four of the five cases
to ensure that recommendations had been followed and children were safe.
This had not been reported back to the LSCB by the time of this inspection
some four months later. This is a serious failing. At the request of inspectors,
an updated report was produced early and is planned to be presented to the
LCSB in February 2015.
understand the nature and level of child sexual exploitation cases open to early
help services, leaving some young people at potential risk. A number of these
cases were referred back to the local authority because the assessed level of
risk was such that the threshold for a statutory social work response was met.
This mirrors the findings of the LSCB audit, which found significant and
repeated concerns about the local authority's threshold decision-making in four
of the five cases.


missing the arrangements for independent return interviews result in children,
including children looked after, being seen by an independent person within 72
hours.
strategy lack a focus on children in need, child protection or child sexual
exploitation. The local authority has clear priorities and an improvement plan.
However, there has not been a strategic multi-agency plan that effectively
supports multi-agency planning and commissioning since the 201314 Children
and Young Peoples Plan.
supported by an implementation plan to deliver a sufficiency strategy and does
not support the effective commissioning of placements for children looked after.
Although the local authority has been successful in recruiting foster carers, it
has been less positive in matching the range of carers recruited with the profile
of childrens needs. This means that children are not always matched with
placement provision that meets their assessed needs.
arrangements. This is regularly considered at strategic and operational levels,
including the improvement board and monthly manager surgeries.
Notwithstanding this, the monitoring of data is not rigorous. Managers had
failed to identify the weaknesses that we identified in this inspection, including
understanding the implications for children in the reduction in child in need
cases. A new quality assurance framework provides a structure to help the local
authority improve how it uses audits and employs learning from feedback and
complaints, but is still too new to have had a significant impact. Information
from complaints and other feedback from children and families is under-utilised
and their voices do not inform the local authoritys understanding of the quality
and impact of the services provided.
the engagement of children and young people from the Children in Care Board
in the work of the Corporate Parenting Board. This has been supported through
the appointment of an effective participation officer. Young people have been
active in shaping the Sandwell Pledge and in providing training for foster
carers.
the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) and Director of Childrens
Services. Work plans align across strategic boards, including Scrutiny
Committee and the LSCB. The Leader of the Council and elected members take
an active interest in frontline practice and regularly visit services such as MASH,
Multi-agency Enquiry Team (MAET), Care Management and Community
Operating Groups (COGs). They ensure that childrens services are financially
prioritised by the council.


authority and, in spite of an upgrade since the last inspection, the system
remains unfit for purpose. The local authority is looking to replace the current
system later this year. Senior leaders are aware that the current system does
not support good social work practice.
evidence of reflective discussion. Not all social workers have had regular
supervision and in some cases, there was limited evidence of annual appraisals.
and development model or by the consistent leadership of a principal social
worker (PSW) to challenge and improve practice. The recent appointment of a
new learning and development strategic lead, the planned rollout of models
such as signs of safety and the planned future appointment of a principal social
worker should support social workers in developing their practice and
understanding what good practice looks like, but these arrangements are not
yet in place.
that existed at the time of the last inspection, when there was a heavy reliance
on temporary agency staff and the variable quality of the staff group had a
negative impact on services for children. The establishment of a more
permanent workforce is a notable achievement. The council now has very few
agency staff and workers benefit from manageable caseloads. However, in
some services, children continue to experience multiple changes of social
worker and this affects childrens ability to form effective relationships with
workers. Newly qualified social workers are well supported with protected
caseloads, mentoring and individual and group supervision. They say that they
feel well supported by these arrangements.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
inadequate

Summary of findings
The LSCB is inadequate because
Scrutiny and challenge
 Since the last inspection, the pace of improvement has been too slow and
resulted in the LSCB not fully discharging its statutory responsibilities. This
includes failing to assess the effectiveness of the help being provided to children
and families, including early help, and assessing whether LSCB partners are
fulfilling their statutory obligations.
 Recent changes made since the appointment of the new independent chair in
August 2014 are having a positive impact on the effectiveness of the LSCB.

Performance and quality
 The LSCB has not regularly scrutinised performance information from across
agencies.
 The LSCB has not effectively used audits to improve multi-agency practice.

Engagement
 The LSCB has not fully engaged lay members, faith groups or young people in the
work of the board.
 The LSCB has not worked with the local Family Justice Board to ensure it
scrutinises outcomes for children within the court system.

Learning
 Learning from the LSCB child sexual exploitation (CSE) audit in October 2014 has
not been acted upon effectively.
 The LSCB has not consistently ensured that learning from local serious case
reviews has been implemented across all partner agencies to help improve
practice.
 The quality and impact of training has not been adequately evaluated by the
LSCB, despite this concern being noted within the 201314 annual report.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Scrutiny and challenge
partnerships are scrutinised and held to account for the quality and impact of
their practice with children and families.
are fulfilling their statutory safeguarding duties.
threshold document in order that all children and young are receiving services
appropriate to their needs.
that agencies fully understand their roles in identifying concerns for children
who are at risk of CSE.

Learning and development
reviews and key national serious case reviews is routinely disseminated across
partner agencies, that it is used to inform the development of policies and
procedures and that learning and recommendations from action plans have
been implemented.
Areas for improvement

Performance and quality
ensure that the LSCB has a clear understanding of the performance of agencies
and the findings from audit. Scrutinise partners use of audits in driving
improvement.

Engagement
LSCB and that the wider community is involved through ensuring that the Board
has active lay members and engages with faith groups.

Learning
and impact of training is assessed and that training available clearly reflects
priorities identified by the LSCB.


Inspection judgement about the LSCB
functions. Progress by the LSCB has been too slow since the time of the last
Ofsted inspection when an area for development was to improve the
functioning of the LSCB. Although progress since the appointment of a new
independent chair has been rapid, it is too recent and at too early a stage to
have had a significant impact on the Boards ability to fulfil its statutory
functions.
performance accountability board (PAB) in October 2014, concluded that at that
point in time the LSCB was not discharging its statutory responsibilities. The
review highlighted similar concerns to those raised by the chair of the PAB and
by the DfE during 2014. These concerns included not assessing whether
partners are discharging their statutory functions; not prioritising key
safeguarding issues or incorporating them into a delivery plan; and limited
auditing that does not identify where improvement is needed. It also identified
an underdeveloped learning and improvement framework, partners not holding
one another to account, not assessing or challenging the effectiveness of local
services and not using its scrutiny role effectively to challenge statutory
partnerships such as the Health and Wellbeing Board (H&WB). Governance
arrangements are now in place and the Chief Executive holds the chair to
account through regular meetings and through reporting to the PAB.
was drifting and had no clear direction. The new chair has brought leadership
and purpose to the work of the board, although impact has yet to be
demonstrated.
structured manner with the use of a broad data set of performance information
have been ineffective. This important function has largely been left to the PAB
and has limited the LSCBs ability to assess the effectiveness of help being
provided to children and their families. Although the LSCB is planning to carry
out a Section 11 Audit during 2015-16 to assess whether agencies are fulfilling
their statutory obligations as set out in chapter two of Working Together 2013,
it has not carried out such an audit in 2014-15. This compounds its failure to
monitor, scrutinise and provide leadership to agencies who provide services to
safeguard children. Although the Boards new performance framework and
dataset are too new to have had an impact yet, they are important documents
that, alongside an improving culture of challenge, mean that the LSCB is now
much better placed to take on this monitoring and scrutiny function in the near
future.


up the quality of practice with children their families is underdeveloped. For
example, although the July 2014, Section 31 threshold audit identified delay
within three of five cases looked at, it is not possible to see how this learning
has been applied to practice and impact assessed by the LSCB. None of the five
actions on a voice of the child audit action plan from April 2014 has been
concluded.
the LSCB is underdeveloped as is engagement with the faith community, an
important consideration in an area of cultural, ethnic and religious diversity.
The board has not benefited from regular attendance by lay members; this also
limits its ability to engage with the wider community and act as an influential
advocate for childrens safeguarding.
However, in relation to how thresholds are applied in practice the LSCB has not
assured itself that the learning from audits, is being used to ensure that they
are consistently and correctly applied and that children are receiving the
services they need. This is a serious gap in the LSCBs scrutiny of front-line
practice.
identified by agencies or that they are receiving appropriate services. It has not
provided sufficiently timely or strong leadership despite having a longstanding
link to the Young People at risk of Sexual Exploitation and Missing group
(YPSEM). The LSCB is in the process of revising and updating its CSE strategy,
but this work is not yet complete.
the Board in October 2014, resulted in the roll out of a CSE screening tool by
the local authority and provided impetus to plans for the new CSE team.
However, four months on from these audits the LSCB has not been assured
that recommendations have been carried out so that young people are
effectively safeguarded.
reviews but has not ensured that learning from these or from key national
serious case reviews is routinely disseminated to staff across agencies, or that it
informs the training programme or the development of policies and procedures.
Although recently collated into an over-arching action plan, recommendations
from these reviews have not been tracked for completion and to assess impact
on practice. Learning has been disseminated to professionals and managers
directly involved in cases reviewed. There has also been training of some
specific staff groups such as housing officers and health visitors, but learning
has not been cascaded across agencies in a co-ordinated way. Two planned
events to share learning more widely were cancelled recently due to a lack of
capacity to deliver them.


been limited. This is noted within the LSCB 2013-14 annual report. Until the
recent publication of a new Learning and Improvement Framework, there has
been no clear mechanism for addressing this area for development in a
structured manner.
new chairs strategic review report. The annual report identifies, but does not
fully explore, some deficits in both the running of the board and in agency
practice. This includes the failure of the policy and procedures sub-group to
meet for 18 months and a failure to identify what the board is doing to
scrutinise private fostering practice. It does however provide detailed
information on the work of some subgroups, such as the Child Death Overview
Panel (CDOP). This group, although without a co-ordinator for some months
last year, is an established and active group that has developed a range of
public health campaigns from through its work, including safer sleeping and
suicide prevention.
and, following the recent review of the board's functioning, the LSCB has a new
structure including a number of appropriate sub-groups. Board members report
that the chairs group, made up of the chairs of the sub-groups, now acts in a
co-ordinating role and drives the work of the Board.
structure to engage representatives of schools (primary, secondary, colleges
and special) and a strengthened approach to S.175 audits providing greater
challenge to schools.
carry out the lead professional role within Team Around the Family meetings
(TAFSs) and challenge to West Midlands police at the December Board in
relation to their practice with missing children following a recent inspection by
Her Majestys Inspectorate of Constabulary (HMIC).
rapid period of development. This is based on a new 2014-15, 10 point
business plan presented to the Board in October 2014. This stemmed from the
strategic review and is aimed at moving the Board to a position where it is able
to fully discharge its statutory functions within six months. A workshop event
for Board members on 15 January 2015 considered how to make this vision a
reality. This provides a clear route map for progress but it remains too soon for
a significant impact to be seen.


document shaped by the chair lays out the roles of LSCB, the local safeguarding
adults board, the H&WB and the Safer Sandwell Partnership. This will support
the LSCB in the exercise of scrutiny of other statutory partnerships in the future
and will assist the LSCB in taking the lead role in providing inter-agency
monitoring challenge and leadership.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professionals work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness of
help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked to
children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Mary Candlin HMI
Deputy lead inspector Dominic Stevens HMI
Team inspectors: Peter McEntee HMI, Linda Steele HMI, Nigel Parkes HMI, Stephanie
Murray HMI, Marianick Ellender-Gele HMI
Quality assurance manager: John Gregg, Senior Her Majestys Inspector


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


