Slough Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 24 November 2015 - 17 December 2015
Report published: 17 February 2016

Childrens services in Slough are inadequate

Children who need help and protection

Inadequate


Children looked after and achieving
permanence

Inadequate



Requires improvement


Inadequate

Leadership, management and governance

Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Slough are inadequate. Leaders in Slough Borough Council
have not achieved enough improvement since the previous Ofsted inspections in
and a considerable amount of work is required before services for children can be
considered good.
At the direction of the Secretary of State, responsibility for childrens services was
transferred to Slough Childrens Services Trust (the trust) on 1 October 2015. The
chief executive of the trust and the councils director of childrens services (DCS)
have made a firm commitment to work together to achieve the necessary
improvements. However, the decision to establish an alternative delivery model and
the process of establishing the trust took too long. Although plans are in place to
resolve the few remaining areas of responsibility, some arrangements, such as who
is to take the lead on commissioning, are yet to be agreed. Much needs to be done
to cement relationships between the council and the trust and to secure an
unwavering focus on the task of improvement.
Despite efforts to reduce the number of agency social workers and managers, the
proportion of these staff in many teams is still too high and not enough permanent
appointments have been made. The level and turnover of agency staff continue to
hamper progress and impact negatively on some childrens experiences.
Partners have not yet developed a truly multi-agency referral hub for sharing
information and making decisions about children. Thresholds for action and
intervention at all levels are unclear, which means children do not always receive the
right help. Services for children and young people on the edge of care and returning
home from care lack focus and structure. Although some early help services are
making a difference to families, this work is not coordinated well enough or
evaluated effectively to inform future planning and service delivery. The quality of
early help assessments is far too variable.
The speed and effectiveness of response to children who are referred to childrens
social care have improved in recent weeks, but many children have been left too
long in situations of risk or where their needs have not been met. Children at risk of
child sexual exploitation have not been effectively identified or protected. The quality
of assessments has improved since the last inspection, but is still too variable.
Decisions to look after children are often delayed and legal advice is not always
sought early enough. However, once children enter the court process, plans and
decisions progress more quickly.
Leaders have not secured sufficient services to meet the needs of children who need
help, protection or care. Advocacy support for children and young people is
underdeveloped and learning from complaints is weak. Leaders have not ensured
that there are enough local foster placements to enable children looked after to live
close to their friends, families, schools and communities. Accommodation for care
leavers is not sufficient and does not always meet young peoples needs. Not enough


young people benefit from remaining with their foster carers into adulthood.
Care leavers receive a disjointed service and they do not have an arena to express
their views. They say that they do not feel safe where they live. Too many care
leavers have frequent changes of worker and go for long periods without seeing their
personal adviser. Pathway plans are not always up to date or useful and managers
have not overseen this work well enough. However, some personal advisers and
social workers develop helpful and meaningful relationships with young people.
Young peoples support workers enable care leavers to access and sustain
employment, education or training and many more care leavers in Slough are
engaged with these activities than in other areas.
Senior and political leaders have not been proactive, interrogative or aspirational
enough about the outcomes and achievements of children looked after. The virtual
school for children looked after has been ineffective for at least a year. A new head
of the virtual school has been appointed very recently and some decisive planning
has begun. The young people who are part of the Children in Care Council (CiCC) are
keen to make a difference, but leaders have not been proactive or creative enough in
helping them to have an influence within the council. The corporate parenting board
has not fulfilled its duty to children looked after well.
Independent reviewing officers (IROs) challenge care plans, but they do not make
enough difference to childrens outcomes. Children looked after say that they have
not been able to develop strong relationships with their social workers, although their
carers are supportive and helpful to them. Careful thought is given to childrens
culture and identity when deciding where they should live. The nurses for children
looked after undertake regular and high-quality health assessments and reviews.
Children who have a plan for adoption are matched quickly with good permanent
families. At the time of the inspection, there were no children waiting for an adoptive
family. Child permanence reports are not of a consistently good standard. Social
workers do not always have the right skills to write helpful letters for children about
their birth families.
Helped by a baseline audit, the trust has quickly established an accurate view of
what needs to change. Managers are rightly prioritising workforce, performance
management and the management oversight of practice. Under the decisive
leadership of the chief executive of the trust, some important areas of poor practice
are being tackled and children are already safer as a result. For example, the
practice of using administrative staff to filter and prioritise new contacts was
appropriately stopped by the trust. Qualified social workers now carry out this task
and oversee next steps.
Over the past two years, the council has made some improvements. Members
agreed a significant financial injection to the service, which has led to reduced social
work caseloads. Newly qualified social workers are better supported. However, the
changes have not been fast or wide ranging enough to improve the experiences of
children sufficiently. The trust has already taken decisive action in a number of key


areas and the pace of improvement has increased but it is too soon to see the
impact of this for children.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)



Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
November 2013. The local authority was judged to be inadequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in November 2013. The local authority was judged to be inadequate.
 The local authoritys safeguarding arrangements and services for children looked
after were also inspected in April 2011. The local authority was judged to be
inadequate for its safeguarding arrangements and adequate for services for its
services for children looked after.
 The local authority operates two childrens homes. Both were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since January 2015 on
an interim basis and is part time.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since November 2014.
 The Secretary of State issued a direction in October 2014 appointing a
Commissioner to secure improvement in childrens social care pending transfer,
and requiring the local authority to cooperate with the Commissioner to establish
a trust to deliver its childrens social care services.
 The local authority was directed by the Secretary of State to establish a trust to
run its social care services. The Slough Childrens Services Trust was launched on
Children living in this area
 Approximately 39,867 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Slough. This is 27.6% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 21.6% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 12.2% (the national level is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 11.6% (the national level is 13.9%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 65.5% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian and Asian British (44.1%) and Black and Black British (11.8%).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 58.7% (the national level is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 44.9% (the national level is 15%).
Additional contextual information
 Population density is the 29th highest across England and Wales, at 43.1 people
per hectare compared with just 4.1 across England.
 Official population projections predict further population growth in both the
numbers of children and young people and the proportion of the total number of
residents accounted for by this age group. This increase in numbers clearly has
implications for future demands for all services required by this age group.
 About 20% of dwellings are social rented (13.1% from the council, 7.5% from
other landlords). About 24% of dwellings are privately rented compared with just
Child protection in this area
 At 31 October 2015, 1,172 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 October 2015, 150 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 234 at 31 March 2015.3
 At 31 October 2015, three children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from two at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, six serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted; three of these were submitted since 1 October 2015. One serious case
review was ongoing at the time of the inspection.


This figure of 150 differs from published data from the Department for Education due to a data
processing error in local authority submission to the annual children in need census.


Children looked after in this area
 At 31 October 2015, 183 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 45.9 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 196 (49.2 per
 Of this number:
for adoption)
 eight live in residential childrens homes, of whom six live out of the
authority area
 one lives in a residential special school; this child lives out of the
authority area
area
 three live with parents, of whom one lives out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
returned to be looked after
independent living
living in houses of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Quality and effectiveness of practice
 In line with longstanding plans, develop and embed a genuinely multiagency response to concerns about children. This should be rooted in clear
and up-to-date threshold guidance rolled out across the partnership and
regularly reviewed in conjunction with the LSCB.
 Ensure that contingency arrangements and escalation processes are
reviewed, monitored and understood at all levels of need and concern. This
should include thresholds for step up and step down arrangements.
 Ensure that all children and young people at risk of significant harm benefit
from strategy discussions and meetings that meet minimum statutory
requirements.
 Improve the coordination and quality of support offered to children and
young people on the edge of care and returning home from care.
 Ensure that assessments, care plans and pathway plans for children looked
after and care leavers are up to date, relevant to the individual child or
young person and based on a thorough analysis of children and young
peoples needs and aspirations so that consequent action planning is
effective.
 Significantly improve the quality and regularity of contact with and support
for care leavers, ensuring that managers oversee the frequency, quality and
impact of contact effectively.
 Ensure that staff have the knowledge and capacity to complete good-quality
and timely life story work and letters for later life.


Oversight and scrutiny by senior and political leaders
 Through ambitious and innovative means, prioritise the establishment of a
stable and skilled permanent workforce.
 Evaluate the quality and effectiveness of early help processes and services
to inform and improve future planning and service delivery.
 Revise the corporate parenting strategy to ensure that it sets out a clear
vision and process for improving outcomes for children looked after and care
leavers.
 Review the terms of reference of the corporate parenting panel to ensure
that it includes wider partner representation and provides rigorous scrutiny
and challenge.
 Broaden the range of children and young people who participate in the CiCC
and create a care leavers focus group. Embed consultation processes
systematically across the service.


 Strengthen and monitor the effectiveness of the role of IROs in challenging
and escalating concerns about childrens plans.
 Ensure that learning from complaints, audits and other sources is used
effectively to influence service development.

Children who go missing or who are at risk of child sexual exploitation
 With key partners, take decisive action to ensure that the local extent of
child sexual exploitation is known and understood and that intelligence
information is used proactively to inform risk management and disruption
activities.
 Be tenacious about ensuring that all children who go missing from home or
care are offered a timely return home interview that properly explores and
addresses risk and need.
 Take urgent steps to ensure that all children who are identified as being at
risk of going missing or being sexually exploited are subject to a risk
assessment and are offered responsive and appropriate help.


Provision and sufficiency of key services
 Finalise, as a matter of urgency, which body is responsible for
commissioning individual functions and services.
 Ensure that children and young people have access to an advocacy service
that enables the children and young people to express their views,
particularly in important meetings about them.
 Review the range and quality of accommodation for children looked after
and care leavers, including staying put arrangements.
 Improve the educational support provided to children looked after and
strengthen significantly all services offered by the virtual school.
 Review the effectiveness and organisation of support to care leavers.


Summary for children and young people
 Ofsted previously found that children in Slough do not get help that is good
enough. Too many things have still not improved since the last inspection.
 As a result, a year ago, the government decided to find a different organisation to
run services for children in Slough. It took too long to sort these arrangements
out. The new organisation, Slough Childrens Services Trust, took over on 1
October 2015. Most people who worked for the council now work for the trust.
 Social workers do not have as many children to work with, so they can now
spend more time with children and get to know them better. Social workers care
about the children they are helping and know them well.
 When social workers work with the court to make plans for children, this work is
now completed in good time. Most children who need to be adopted move to
their new families quickly. Young peoples support workers do a good job helping
young people with their problems and supporting them to make good choices.
 However, some very important things have not changed enough or at all. A great
deal of money has been spent on social workers but too many do not stay in
Slough for long enough. This means that children and families have too many
different people to get to know. This has made it harder for managers to improve
things. Too many children are not getting the right help and some are at risk of
harm.
 Since the trust took over, managers have better and more up-to-date
information. This is helping them to work out how well children and families are
being helped. They are making good decisions about the things that need sorting
out first.
 When children run away from home or care, more help is provided by the trust to
support them when they return. Better decisions are being made by social
workers and managers to protect children who have been neglected by their
families. But there are many more things that need to improve before services for
children are good enough.
 It is very important that the trust, the council and partners, like the police, work
together better. This will help them to understand how many children are being
sexually exploited in Slough and to make sure these children are safe. There is a
great deal to be done.
 Managers and political leaders need to be better corporate parents to the children
and young people in their care. They need to listen to these children more closely
and act more quickly to improve their lives. They also need to care more about
how well they do at school. They need to find more local foster families so that
children do not have to live too far from their families and friends.
 It is good that so many care leavers are in education or have a job, but too many
do not feel happy or safe where they live. Not enough personal advisers have
good relationships with care leavers. Pathway plans are not helpful enough to
care leavers in improving their lives.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
Services for children in need of help and protection continue to be inadequate
overall, although inspectors found a more positive picture emerging over the past
few months. The direction of travel is positive and accelerating. However, over the
time period looked at during the inspection, too many cases were seen that had
serious weaknesses. When children are at risk of significant harm, they do not
always benefit from a strategy discussion. In addition, too many strategy discussions
only include the police and childrens social care. In some cases, agencies have
delayed referring children, leaving them in potentially harmful situations for too long.
The multi-agency safeguarding hub is significantly underdeveloped; the first contact
service consists solely of trust staff. Police are co-located but joint working is
minimal. Overall, these relationships require improvement. Threshold guidance and
referral and assessment pathways are partial and out of date. Understanding and
application across the partnership is weak. The out-of-hours service has insufficient
capacity to meet local demand.
Arrangements to protect children who go missing or who are at risk of child sexual
exploitation are underdeveloped, with many improvements only being made in the
few weeks prior to the inspection. Too many risk assessments relating to child sexual
exploitation are weak and do not consider the most important risk factors.
The quality of social work assessments, plans, interventions and reviews are too
variable, ranging from good to inadequate. Inspectors findings largely mirror those
of a recent audit commissioned by the trust, where half of the cases analysed were
found to be inadequate. Where assessments are weak, plans and reviews are less
effective and risks for these children do not reduce quickly enough. The quality of
plans has improved over the past year, but there is more to do to ensure that they
are clear and helpful documents for families. Not enough children are helped to
share their views at important meetings, such as child protection conferences. The
ethnicity and cultural heritage of children is not considered well enough in too many
cases.
Step up and step down arrangements are not consistently robust. Inspectors found
that children who should have been assessed by a social worker had been passed to
early help services. Some of these children were at risk of potential harm. Some
children are stepped down from a child protection plan prematurely. Too many early
help assessments are poor and the impact of early help services overall is unclear.
Despite much awareness-raising, there is more to do to ensure that children at risk
of female genital mutilation are identified given the diverse population. Such cases,
when referred to childrens social care, are assessed well.


Inspection findings

Children, young people and families who need early help services do not always
receive support quickly enough. Additional needs are not consistently identified
or met by professionals. The quality and timeliness of referrals from some
agencies, including the police, who refer most often, is poor. Too many
referrals are hard to understand and miss key information. This means that
much remedial action is required by the staff, who screen contacts in order to
decide what to do next. This wastes staff time and delays a response in
meeting childrens needs.


Too many early help assessments are inadequate. In some, presenting risk
factors warranted an intervention from statutory services; in others the
recording of interventions was too poor to measure change. There were
examples where the reason for an early help assessment being undertaken was
unclear. Records of team around the family meetings were poor overall.
Although a range of services are on offer, the overall impact and effectiveness
of early help is unknown. (Recommendation)


The first contact service has improved very recently. Six weeks before the
inspection, there were multiple routes by which agencies could refer children,
increasing the likelihood of referrals being overlooked. There is now a single
inbox, which is better. The practice of using administrative staff to filter and
prioritise new contacts was, quite correctly, ceased by the trust. Qualified social
workers now carry out this task and oversee next steps. The timeliness of
response to contacts has been poor, although has significantly improved in
recent weeks.


Thresholds for statutory and early help services are not clear across the
partnership, leading to some confusion about how children should be helped.
Much work was undertaken by the LSCB in 2014 to launch the threshold
guidance but it has not been updated in line with the most recent statutory
framework (Working together to safeguard children, 2015). Threshold and
single assessment guidance does not reflect current practice arrangements,
which leads to further confusion within the partnership. (Recommendation)


Multi-agency arrangements to consider contacts and requests for services are
significantly underdeveloped, limiting the effectiveness of initial decision
making. The first contact service is staffed by agency social workers and
managers and is co-located with, but not yet integrated with, the police. There
are no other child welfare agencies participating in front door screening
arrangements, although for some time discussions have been taking place
about how to achieve this. (Recommendation)

disagreements about what action should be taken, without evidence of
resolution. Social workers do not reliably consult with the right professionals
when deciding how to respond to concerns about children, even when parents


have given their consent for information to be shared. This means that
decisions about how to help children are not always informed by all the
available information. In contrast, in some child protection and team around
the family meetings, information sharing between agencies is of better quality.
(Recommendation)
outside office hours. This service, jointly commissioned for six neighbouring
boroughs, is not always able to meet demand in Slough, particularly at
weekends. Cases were seen where the service was unable to undertake
important actions, such as checking the whereabouts of a looked after child.
There are increasing difficulties in reaching agreement with the police about
undertaking welfare checks on vulnerable children out of hours, reducing
partners ability to be assured of childrens safety during these times. Children
and young people who require urgent accommodation have very little choice,
particularly those who are at risk of homelessness. Information sharing
between daytime and out-of-hours services is good, with actions being
recorded promptly.
childrens needs being met promptly. For the year ending 31 March 2015 few
assessments took longer than 45 days, but 21% were completed between days
data are still concerning. Managers do not routinely give clear enough guidance
to social workers about how long an assessment should take based on risk and
need, although a few good examples were seen. Managers receive regular
performance information on assessment timescales but this does not include
whether children have been seen and assessed in the right timescale for them.
enough. Too many do not consider risk factors, such as those relating to adult
mental ill health or significant adults, including non-resident fathers. Historical
concerns are not consistently taken into account and, overall, there is
insufficient attention to childrens ethnicity. Too few chronologies summarise
the childs journey well enough to inform decisions and plans; many are not up
to date or miss key information. Some assessments lack chronologies
altogether. Inspectors saw some good assessments, with detailed and careful
analysis and clear recommendations. (Recommendation)


Not all children who require a strategy meeting to protect them have one;
cases were seen where children had been harmed but strategy discussions had
not been held. The majority of strategy meetings are telephone conversations
between team managers and the police. This does not meet minimum statutory
requirements and means that background information from other agencies is
not considered. A minority of strategy meetings are held face to face and, those
observed, promoted good information sharing. Strategy meetings are recorded
but too many lack timescales for actions. (Recommendation)

of the child protection process, including the threshold for convening a child
protection conference. Some child protection assessments are good, but overall
the quality is too variable. Fewer child protection assessments were started in
the past 12 months than during the previous year, and a lower proportion led
to a child protection conference. As at 31 October 2015, 150 children were
subject to a child protection plan. This is 84 fewer than at 31 March 2015.
Senior managers have not sufficiently explored the reasons for this reduction in
child protection work. The trusts initial analysis is that it is likely be a
consequence of inconsistent application of child protection thresholds, as well
as plans ending too early.
without any evidence of their outcomes improving or of changes being
sustained. In other cases, child protection plans are not sufficiently clear about
necessary changes and lack contingencies. Risks and concerns about some
children have not been responded to early enough, or have not been escalated
through legal processes. This is most evident in cases of long-term child
neglect, although in recent weeks managers have taken increasingly decisive
action to safeguard these children. According to the local authoritys own data,
neglect was a feature in 43% of child protection plans, emotional abuse in
services (CAMHS) staff, youth offending team workers and the adult community
mental health team, do not routinely attend child protection conferences. This
reduces the effectiveness of the conference in understanding and addressing
risk and need within families. Not all agencies provide reports or share reports
with family members before the conference. This makes it difficult to plan for
the conference or to prepare family members properly.
lacked specificity and were not sufficiently clear about actions or timescales.
They did not consistently follow up incomplete actions from previous plans. The
introduction of a new plan format in May 2015 has improved this. However,
most plans do not set out in plain language what will happen if risks do not
reduce or the childs situation does not improve.
the voice of the child and children are not routinely supported to attend.
Conference chairpersons report that social workers and other professionals do
not use creative ways to present childrens wishes and feelings often enough.
Social workers can purchase advocacy support for children on a case by case
basis but this is yet to be embedded across the service. Some good cases were
seen where childrens wishes and feelings were at the core of meetings and
plans because of sensitive practice by individual social workers, but this is not
true for the majority of cases. (Recommendation)



Children benefit from increasingly timely statutory visits from social workers.
The brevity of recording means that it is not always clear whether children have
been spoken to and seen on their own when visited by social workers.
Inspectors saw good examples of social workers and early help staff being
tenacious and creative in developing meaningful relationships with children and
families. However, too often children have experienced multiple changes of
social worker, reducing the impact of work to help and protect them. This is
attributed to the turnover of permanent and agency staff and to children
transferring between teams when they need different levels of support.

protection plans to child in need plans before required changes have been
achieved or sustained. The quality of ongoing help provided to them and their
families is too variable. Managers are not assured that all children and families
receive the right support for long enough once risks and needs are judged to
have reduced sufficiently.
protected. Over the past year Engage workers within the Young Peoples
Service have undertaken individual and group work with 75 children at risk of
child sexual exploitation. However, this work has not been coordinated well
enough, and too many children have not been assessed by social workers using
the local risk assessment tool. The service has not received any referrals for
boys or young men. The majority of risk assessments include shortcomings
such as language that blames children for being in risky situations or do not
sufficiently consider risks to boys. Potential risks associated with gang
involvement are not sufficiently explored. Currently, there are no specialist
post-abuse therapeutic services or parental support groups available to children
and families. The role of the child sexual exploitation coordinator has been
disjointed and ineffective due to frequent changes of personnel and periods
where the post was vacant. Not all post holders have had responsibility for
missing children, meaning that these two issues were not consistently crossreferenced. This is now being addressed, but the new coordinator has only
been in place for three weeks. Until recently, most children who went missing
did not receive a return home interview. Having swiftly identified this important
weakness, the trust is now ensuring these interviews take place. Work to map
links between children has begun but is overdue. (Recommendation)
education services to consolidate information about children missing education
with information about children going missing from other settings.
Arrangements to share information with the council team responsible for young
people who are not in education, employment or training (NEET) temporarily
lapsed during the transition to the new trust arrangements.
rate of referrals, approximately 400 per annum, reflects the high mobility of
children in and out of the borough. Notifications to the children missing


education coordinator are prompt and appropriate, as are the subsequent
actions. The whereabouts of these children are comprehensively recorded and
communication with other local authorities is efficient. In the few cases where
children are taken abroad, this is investigated in depth.
Appropriate steps are taken to build positive relationships with educators,
although some families choose not to accept this support. Where there are
concerns about childrens welfare, they are referred to childrens social care.
mutilation. The NHS acute trust identifies approximately six women per month
through the mandatory antenatal reporting system. This route has also
identified three children subjected to female genital mutilation before entering
the UK, with appropriate use of child protection procedures and good social
work assessments. Prevalence mapping has identified the geographical area
with the highest risk. Awareness-raising activities have encouraged community
engagement. However, no cases have been identified by means other than the
antenatal reporting system, suggesting limited impact so far.
(MARACs) where plans to protect children, young people and parents who are
at risk from serious domestic violence are considered. In all cases sampled
appropriate action had been taken. However, meetings do not benefit from
consistent engagement from childrens social care, and inspectors were unable
to assure themselves of the overall effectiveness of these arrangements as no
data or annual reports were provided.
vulnerable victims and children has not been sufficiently analysed or understood
by partners. Victims and perpetrators have access to a range of local services
although there are insufficient perpetrator programmes for the culturally
diverse local population. The trust acknowledges that it does not yet have a
clear picture of what support is available and how effective this is.
level two meetings has improved in the last 18 months. However, no one
childrens social care representative attends consistently, leading to delays in
some actions being carried out. The MAPPA chair has had to follow these
actions up on occasion.
in place to meet Slough Councils duty to address the risk of radicalisation in
response to its designation as a Tier 2 Prevent priority area. Partnership
arrangements are developing well and have been strengthened through the
appointment of a local Prevent coordinator. Community cohesion work and
awareness-raising is ongoing, with two community conferences in 2015. The
support of council members has been instrumental in ensuring the need for a


cohesive community is understood. Appropriate training is provided, although
to date approximately half of the relevant staff have yet to attend. Appropriate
systems and processes are in place and risk assessments are informed by local
profiles, but high-level police security considerations mean that assessments
are not always complete. During the past year, one young person has been
considered through the Channel process, the multi-agency approach used to
identify and provide support to individuals who are at risk of becoming involved
in terrorism. Since March 2015 there have been nine referrals, none of which
required further escalation.
people aged 16 or 17 who are homeless or imminently homeless. The joint
protocol between childrens social care and housing has been in place for 18
months and is clear and helpful. However, managers acknowledge that young
people are not always supported to understand what being looked after means
in terms of where they can choose to live. Managers have not sufficiently
analysed or quality assured the level and quality of help and accommodation
provided to these young people.

Children with disabilities benefit from appropriate early help packages of
support or specialist multidisciplinary support from a specialist team. These
children receive a consistent service because the team undertakes the full
range of social work tasks relating to need, risk and permanence. In cases
seen, assessments were analytical, with timely multi-agency strategy meetings
leading to appropriate plans including child protection plans. Use of short
breaks is appropriate, using a variety of providers.

who oversees referrals about adults working in a position of trust with children
needs to be strengthened, although recent work with schools has helped to
raise awareness. The police assess all referrals to the designated officer to
determine whether a strategy meeting is needed, but this is a solo decision,
which should be multi-agency. In the cases sampled, arrangements were
operating effectively, with timely responses and appropriate action taken to
protect children. Records would benefit from greater clarity about the rationale
for some decisions.
Currently, the number of privately fostered children remains low, at three.
Assessments and DBS checks are not consistently undertaken quickly enough to
assure these children are properly safeguarded.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Inadequate

Summary
Often, decisions to look after children are not timely or well assessed. Too many
children who are now looked after have been left in situations where their needs
have not been met or where they have experienced further harm. Decisions to start
legal proceedings are often delayed, although once proceedings commence they
progress quickly. Very recently, social workers and managers have taken decisive
action to protect children who have experienced long-term neglect.
In Slough, there is a lack of targeted multi-agency edge-of-care support to enable
children to remain at home or to return home. Where the plan is for a child to return
home, the support provided is not consistently robust.
Social workers do not always know children well enough to be able to ensure their
needs are met and that their lives improve. Assessments and care plans are often
not up to date or do not sufficiently reflect childrens individual needs. When children
go missing from care or are at risk of being sexually exploited, risks are not
comprehensively known, tracked or followed up, leaving these children and young
people at risk of further harm.
The virtual school is ineffective and has been for at least a year. The council has not
afforded the role of head of the virtual school sufficient status or priority. Children
looked after do not receive the support and guidance they need to do well in school.
Statutory reviews are regular and detailed, but involvement of children is poor.
Independent Reviewing Officers (IROs) are not influential enough in challenging or
changing plans for children. Leaders have not helped the Children in Care Council to
be as effective as it could be. The views of children looked after are not
systematically heard or acted upon and commissioning arrangements for advocacy
and the independent visitor service are weak. Local placement choice is very limited
and too many children live too far from home.
Although most children move to their adoptive families quickly, some children who
are older, have complex needs or who need families together with their brothers and
sisters wait too long. Not all child permanence reports are good enough. Some
children do not receive life story books at the right time. Letters for later life are
detailed but not all are written well. Post-adoption support is a strength.
Support for care leavers is not sufficiently comprehensive or integrated. Too many
care leavers do not feel safe, and do not receive the help, advice and guidance they
need and are entitled to. This means that they are not consistently safeguarded or
empowered to achieve all they are capable of. Pathway planning is weak overall.
Care leavers are effectively helped to access employment, education or training.


Inspection findings
become looked after or legal action had commenced, social workers and
managers had waited too long to make these decisions. Although the vast
majority of these children are now safeguarded, they had been left in situations
where their needs had not been met and risks had not reduced. For too many
children facing significant issues, such as chronic neglect, unexplained physical
injuries and lack of parental engagement had not been responded to quickly
enough. Inspectors found a significant change in response in recent weeks,
with legal surgeries agreeing decisive action to safeguard children, particularly
those who have experienced long-term neglect. In a small minority of the cases
seen by inspectors where children had recently become looked after, good
practice was identified. For example, appropriate and valuable respite care was
being provided under short break regulations.
inspectors found significant shortcomings in assessment and care planning, and
delays in achieving permanence. This has impacted negatively on childrens
lives and experiences. The minority, once placed with longer-term carers,
become settled and begin to make progress at school and in other areas of
their lives.
return to care (4%). Inspectors found that where the plan is for a child to
return home, the support provided through a child in need plan or subsequent
child protection plan is not robust enough. There is a lack of targeted,
wraparound and flexible support for children and their families to enable
children to stay at home or return home from care. Family group conferences
are used effectively in some cases but commissioning arrangements are not
robust. Leaders acknowledge that edge of care family support needs to improve
and plans are in place to develop and coordinate these services from January
which includes all parts of the pre-proceedings and proceedings process, is too
variable. Inspectors saw significant delays in the seeking of legal advice about
whether the care threshold had been met. This means that children are not
always safeguarded as quickly as they should be. The PLO tracker is a useful
tool for managers to oversee plans for children once legal advice has been
sought. It is beginning to have a positive impact, leading to appropriate
permanence plans for a number of children, and since April 2015, 11 adoption
orders and 25 special guardianship orders have been granted. However, for
almost third of children whose plans are overseen via the PLO tracker there is
still significant delay. There are a range of reasons for this, many of which are
preventable, such as delays in making applications to court.


majority accepted by the courts. Unnecessary delay is avoided. In the last 18
months, a case supervising manager has proactively tracked and monitored all
children in pre-proceedings and care proceedings. A pre-proceedings protocol,
introduced in September 2015, is helping to embed better practice.
timeliness of legal proceedings in 201415, where on average this process took
weeks. Once adoption is considered as an option for a child, parallel planning
begins, but social workers and managers do not consider adoption early
enough for all children. In the majority of cases seen by inspectors, social
workers had not waited for one assessment to be completed before starting
another. This helps to ensure that plans are progressed in good time. Viability
assessments of family and friends carers are undertaken appropriately to
minimise delay for children.
many cases, social workers understanding of childrens needs and their
relationships with children and young people are not strong enough. For these
children, plans are too often not progressed well. Children looked after told
inspectors that frequent changes of worker had prevented them from building
or sustaining meaningful relationships with them. They said that their views
were not always heard and agreed actions were not always carried out. These
children and young people were, however, more positive about their carers,
saying that they were supportive and helpful to them; some said this had made
up for inconsistent social worker relationships. For some children and young
people, other professionals are providing good support, and one young person
described her youth worker as brilliant.
been effectively commissioned. This is now being appropriately addressed by
senior managers. Managers and children looked after created a complaints
leaflet two weeks before the start of the inspection, but young people told
inspectors that they did not know how to complain. Managers have not collated
information about complaints from children looked after, so any learning has
been lost. (Recommendation)
or are not comprehensive, current or of sufficient quality. They do not always
include the contributions of children and their families to ensure that the
support provided is appropriate for their needs. Most care plans do not
comprehensively address the needs of children and young people. This means
that carers are unable to check that actions are completed and progress cannot
be effectively measured. (Recommendation)
files, accurately reflecting the work being undertaken with children and young


people. Some of these records were warm and thoughtful accounts of the time
social workers spend with children looked after. These will be helpful to children
who decide to view their files as they seek to understand their care experience
in later life.
on time. Reviews are comprehensive overall, covering the important aspects of
care plans and the key details of childrens daily lives. However, approximately
half of children looked after do not see their IRO before their review, reducing
the likelihood that trusting relationships will be formed. IROs understanding of
childrens views and feelings is significantly hampered by the very low rate
(15%) of reviews where children and young peoples views are formally shared
through the consultation booklet designed for this purpose. Too often reports
for reviews are not provided in a timely way. When IROs challenge or escalate
their concerns about care plans, the resolution of issues is weak leading to little
or no change for children. (Recommendation)
being sexually exploited are not comprehensively known, tracked or followed
up, leaving these children and young people at risk of further harm. In the vast
majority of cases where children looked after have gone missing, return home
interviews have either not been undertaken at all, taken place too long after
the young person returned, not included a useful description of what has
happened or have not sufficiently analysed risk. This is a serious weakness.
Trust managers have recognised the significance of this gap and have very
recently put more robust arrangements in place. However, there is still a
considerable amount of work to be done before these risks are properly
understood and children looked after are effectively safeguarded.
(Recommendation)
children looked after who have been convicted of or cautioned for an offence.
Managers have not sufficiently collated or analysed information about children
looked after who may be putting themselves at risk through drugs or alcohol
abuse. This limits managers ability to ensure that these children and young
people are effectively helped. Services to support young people with these
difficulties lack coordination.
to ensure that all young people, regardless of their placement address, have
their health assessments on time and that actions are progressed in between
health reviews. As a result, the vast majority of children looked after benefit
from comprehensive and tailor-made health plans, which address their physical,
emotional and mental health needs alongside issues relating to relationships
and sexual health. Childrens emotional needs are understood and responded to
through the provision of appropriate services.


year. The role of the head of the virtual school has not been given sufficient
status or priority by the council. Wide-ranging improvement actions identified
over a year ago to improve fundamental aspects of the virtual school have not
been implemented. The trust has taken some very recent action to deal with
the many deficiencies of the virtual school; specifically, appointing a new
interim head of the virtual school in November 2015. The newly appointed
headteacher has quickly produced a new, well-structured and very specific
improvement action plan, but it is too soon for it to have had any impact.
(Recommendation)
are sparse in detail; they lack well-defined actions relating specifically to the
childs educational development needs, aspirations or skills. They either do not
involve the child at all or do not involve them directly, and most have not been
reviewed in a timely fashion. A new online system for personal education
planning is not used well. (Recommendation)
out of borough is poor and lacks coordination, despite some initiatives to
address this. While the vast majority of children looked after who are educated
in Slough attend good schools, only around two thirds of children looked after
who are educated out of borough are attending good or better schools.
the educational performance of children looked after in and out of the borough.
This includes data on their attainment at all key stages including GCSE results,
their incremental progress, attendance and any interventions offered in
support. A narrow dataset on the performance of children looked after in
Slough at GCSE shows very poor performance. During 2014, none of the 13
children looked after achieved five A* to C grades. Of these 13 children, 10
achieved at least one pass at grade D to G. In 2015, one of the 10 entered
achieved five A* to C grades at GCSE, including in English and mathematics and
a further eight children achieved at least one pass at grade D to G.
(Recommendation)
support and initiatives for children looked after, has been slow and too many
schools have received only half their full entitlement. The remainder of the
funding has been retained for training and awareness-raising sessions; the
frequency of such sessions has been limited. (Recommendation)
are good, including for the seven children looked after who have achieved well
in their vocational courses and made progress in their personal development,
behaviour and well-being. The Children Missing Education service does not
track any children looked after, on the assumption that this cohort is dealt with


by social workers or the virtual school, and this is a deficiency.
(Recommendation)
support for children looked after who are being bullied or discriminated against,
or who are at risk of being so. Schools report that the virtual school has not
been sufficiently involved in this work to promote the needs of children looked
after. (Recommendation)
although delegated authority for arrangements for individual children are not
always evident on foster carer files. Arrangements for children looked after to
spend time with their families are run and managed well by a specific contact
service. Sensitive work is undertaken with children and their families, endorsed
by positive feedback from foster carers, social workers and childrens guardians.
and there are no in-house specialist fostering schemes. The supported lodgings
scheme provides just one placement and is significantly underdeveloped. Three
quarters of all children looked after live outside Slough and over 29% live more
than 20 miles away from their home address. Too many children are living
away from their families, friends, schools and communities. (Recommendation)
acknowledge is far too few. The council and the trust have identified foster
carer recruitment as a key priority and the recently written sufficiency strategy
has set ambitious targets to rectify this deficit. Support services for Slough
foster carers, such as a support line, have previously been cut back and as a
result foster carers feel insufficiently supported. Developments since June 2015
are beginning to address this and foster carer payments have been reviewed.
diversity when matching children with placements, with consideration of
childrens ethnic, linguistic and religious needs. Where these placements are
trans-racial, social workers and managers have carefully thought about how
carers should be supported to meet childrens diverse needs. However, because
local placement choice is very limited, many children are not initially wellmatched. First placements are often emergency arrangements and in these
cases, a further placement move is usually needed. Managers acknowledge this
is not good enough, but they are restricted by poor placement choice.
fostering, and for these children appropriate and thorough matching by foster
panel is in place.
declined in recent months. As at 31 March 2015, 10% had experienced more
than three placement moves within a year. This is in line with England figures.


According to the trusts data, in October 2015 this figure had increased to 15%.
Longer-term placements for children are stable; in October 2015, 67% had
been in placement for more than two years, an improvement from 58% in
residential placements are monitored and RAG-rated monthly for signs of
instability and pressures, enabling managers to increase oversight and support
where needed. Where providers are found by Ofsted to be inadequate, there is
an appropriate process in place to review placements, but inspectors saw
examples where this process had not been applied rigorously enough.
for the separation of siblings, and this requires further work in order to improve
future support and matching for children looked after.
are delays in completing annual reviews and some records in foster carer files
such as placement plans or delegated authority are missing or blank. Foster
carer records highlight lapses in the regulatory process for viability and family
and friends assessments.
contribute their views to service development are underdeveloped. Insufficient
resources and staff are in place to support this. The CiCC is not representative
of all children looked after; for example, there is currently no care leavers
group or juniors group. Despite this, these young people have worked hard to
make a difference. They made an important contribution to the recent
successful celebration of achievement and have renamed and rebranded the
group.
issues that are important for them and in some cases senior and political
leaders have been slow to take action. For example, it took a year for funding
to be agreed for the CiCC to have a tablet to use in the group; since one has
been provided the young people have made very good and creative use of it.
The trust has very recently written an action plan outlining how they plan to
work with the CiCC to increase their effectiveness. (Recommendation)
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
given to other forms of permanence including adoption. However, adoption is
not always considered at an early enough stage, where plans for permanence
through other options are being explored.
last three years. In 2015, 23 children were adopted in comparison with 17 in


made and 10 children placed with their prospective adoptive families. Two
children have been placed with fostering to adopt carers. At the time of the
inspection no children were waiting for an adoptive family.
between entering care and being placed for adoption. Although this does not
meet the national threshold of 547 days, it is better than both the England
average of 628 days and that of Sloughs neighbours at 647 days.
receiving court authority to place a child and a suitable match being made. This
is a better performance than the average for England of 217 days and in line
with performance of statistical neighbours, but does not meet the national
threshold of 152 days.
sibling groups wait too long for adoption. Fewer children, 37%, were placed for
adoption within 18 months of coming into care than the average for England of
brothers and sisters with plans to be placed together, which were changed as a
result of their complex needs. This indicates that insufficient attention was
given to whether these childrens needs could be met through adoption if
placed together.
order being made once they have moved to their adoptive families. This is
attributed to a lack of social work capacity in the protection and care teams.
number of children whose plans have changed away from adoption but whose
placement orders had not been revoked. Twelve children have had their plans
changed from adoption, the vast majority having waited for some years, being
older or having complex needs. At the time of this inspection, eight children
have had their placement orders revoked; three remain with their foster carers
under special guardianship orders and five remain in long-term foster care with
the carers they have lived with for some time. Plans are in place to revoke
orders for the remaining four children. Decisions to change plans are given
appropriate consideration by senior managers and confirmed at childrens
reviews.
this year. The timeliness of the approval process of adopters has been
significantly hampered by delays in the return of Disclosure and Barring Service
(DBS) checks. Inspectors saw examples of delays of up to six months. This
means that the target of two months for the completion of stage one of the
assessment cannot be met. Adopters and staff told inspectors of the frustration
this causes. Once stage one is completed, or where adopters are being


assessed for a second time, assessments are completed promptly. Adopters are
appropriately referred to the national Adoption Register and adopters spoken to
are positive about the support they receive from social workers while seeking
suitable matches with children.
adopters for older children and sibling groups and increasing the number of
fostering to adopt carers. A recruitment initiative, including the development of
a recruitment microsite, is due to start in January 2016.
serves six local authorities across the county and has appropriate membership.
The panel chair is independent and appropriately qualified. The panel meets
twice monthly and provides effective scrutiny and feedback on the quality of
reports received.
examples seen by inspectors contained typographical errors and would have
been improved by being more engaging and by using less professional jargon.
Better examples seen were detailed, used clear language and were balanced in
describing birth family circumstances.
are suitably detailed, with all relevant references and checks completed. In one
example, good use was made of a family and friends meeting to observe the
adopters interaction with children, discuss the impact of adoption with the
wider family and assess the couples support network. The quality of reports
presented to the adoption panel means that the panel has sufficient information
to make robust recommendations and there is no delay caused by requests for
further information.
example seen by inspectors, there was a delay of almost four weeks between
the decision being made and the adopters being informed. Since the
establishment of the trust, changes have been made to strengthen the rigour
and timeliness of the decision-making processes. Although this is very recent,
panel minutes show an increase in detail of assurance given by the agency
decision maker before a decision is made.
understand and support them in moving to their new family. The quality of life
story books seen by inspectors was variable. Those produced in the adoption
team are more detailed and professionally produced. While some children in
long-term foster placements or in special guardianship arrangements have life
story books, this is inconsistent and in some cases special guardians are
inappropriately expected to produce these books themselves. Children moving
to their adoptive home benefit from a We wish you well DVD produced by their


foster carers, which supports their move to their new homes.
(Recommendation)
used is not always suitable; some examples were seen where letters were
overly sentimental and in others professional jargon was used. Better examples
avoided jargon and used simple, clear language that is likely to be understood
by a child reading it in the future. (Recommendation)
their social workers, who are available and supportive. Post-adoption support is
a strength. Children and families benefit from a range of financial, therapeutic
and practical post-adoption support. Currently, 14 children are receiving
therapeutic help and there have been three successful applications to the
adoption support fund. Adopters welcome a new initiative, provided by a social
enterprise company sponsored by the Department for Education, which offers a
range of pre- and post-approval support. This includes specialist individual
support, therapeutic parenting and group training. No children or families are
waiting to receive support. Few adoptions break down; there has been only one
this year and none in the previous two years.
birth families. Thirteen new letterbox arrangements began in 201415, with a
total of 153 arrangements in place.
birth family members referred increased from nine in 201213 to 18 in 2014
group for birth fathers.
The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is inadequate
advisers is inconsistent and too often poor; this accords with the trusts own
audits. It is due, in part, to high turnover among the staff supporting these
young people. Managers do not always know whether care leavers welfare is
safeguarded because the frequency and quality of each social worker or
personal advisers contact with young people is not routinely monitored.
(Recommendation)
meaningful contact with a personal adviser or social worker for lengthy periods
of up to 10 months, with significant events in their lives going unnoticed. One
care leaver had recently been visited by a new personal adviser after a long
gap. Inspectors spoke to care leavers in semi-independent accommodation who
said that they relied heavily on guidance and emotional support from their


onsite key workers. These young people depend on their keyworkers and on
the unmoderated advice of friends for help with life choices, budgeting, staying
safe, independence skills and offending. Key workers in semi-independent
accommodation, social workers and personal advisers do not routinely share
historical or current information about each care leaver and this reduces their
ability to work together effectively to meet young peoples needs. However,
where relationships between young people and their personal advisors are
enduring and meaningful these are helpful to care leavers. One young person
said, I know shes busy but she always makes me feel as if I am her only
young person. She has helped me through some really difficult times. She
always gets back to me when she says she will. I really need her  she does
the stuff that other peoples parents do. (Recommendation)
too often incomplete and not coordinated well enough. Care leavers are
allocated to a personal adviser or social worker in one of the two looked after
childrens teams. Staff acknowledge that the absence of a dedicated multiagency service for care leavers is significantly reducing their ability to provide a
seamless offer of guidance, advice and support on aspects including housing,
careers, finance, employment, education and training. Social workers and
personal advisors also say that it is difficult for their teams to prioritise care
leavers needs when they are so busy with the other children on their
caseloads.
evaluated by inspectors are poor. The summary analysis and action plan do not
provide a specific, action-oriented or time-bound evaluation of need, direction
or support to care leavers. They do not sufficiently address young peoples
diverse needs or sufficiently outline how young people will be helped in their
journey towards independence. A new system and format for pathway planning
has been introduced in recent months; the plans are comprehensive but most
care leavers are unimpressed by them. Young people say that they take far too
long to finish them and some young people are unwilling to attempt to
complete them at all. One care leaver commented that the pathway plans
seemed to be based on a presumption of failure rather than aspiration.
Inspectors did see examples where pathway plan workbooks were being used
interactively, with evidence that this was proving to be helpful to care leavers.
The underlying pathway planning software does not support the process well.
(Recommendation)
historically been weak. A 10-week life skills course was piloted in October 2015,
with plans to roll this out from February 2016. Although this is a positive step, it
is too early to judge the impact of this support.
initiatives for care leavers, with some positive impact. However, there is still a
very long way to go before these arrangements are applied consistently in


practice or are fully effective. For example, a useful new booklet was produced
a few weeks prior to the inspection to provide a single source of comprehensive
information about care leavers various entitlements for use by care leavers,
social workers, personal advisers and IROs.
education and vocational training programmes is on a case-by-case basis rather
than through a planned system of contact. Care leavers receive appropriate
financial help to attend university and at the time of the inspection nine of
these young people age 1821 were in higher education, which is in line with
comparable local authorities. Only three are in apprenticeships. Care leavers
told inspectors that their enrolment onto a course or gaining employment was
largely due to their own initiatives rather than as a result of the help they had
received from their social worker or personal adviser.
employment or training (EET), or not (NEET), were not recorded or monitored
accurately enough. Since July, the Slough young peoples service (YPS) has
played an increasingly effective role in ensuring that information about care
leavers in and out of the borough is up to date and that care leavers are better
informed about the education, training and employment options available to
them. Each NEET care leaver has access to a support worker from the YPS who
helps them to achieve their goals. These workers provide counselling and
support with issues such as relationships with family members and sexuality as
well as practical support to enter and sustain work, training or education.
the YPS, social workers and personal advisers. In some cases, the YPS
information is better informed and more up to date than social workers and
personal advisers case notes, and in other cases the reverse is true. There is
no common database or formal means of liaison between these professionals to
ensure that all relevant information on each individual is aligned and fully
current. (Recommendation)
education, including 60% of 1921 year olds. The proportion of 1618-year-old
care leavers in some form of EET is also high, at over 80%.
safe living in Slough or in their accommodation, particularly at night-time. Care
leavers are keen to avoid placements in certain semi-independent
accommodation. These young people were not confident that the social
workers, personal advisers or managers recognised or understood their
concerns.
are significantly underdeveloped. There is only one supported lodgings carer


within the trusts fostering service and as at November 2015 there were 21
young people who the trust believed would benefit from such provision. The
trust recognises the need to urgently recruit at least 20 supported lodgings
carers in 201516, and 10 each year thereafter. The trust identifies that 88% of
care leavers aged 1921 are considered to be in suitable accommodation
including in and out of borough semi-independent, independent council and
private accommodation.
and breakfast accommodation for over a year. A practice manager from the
care leavers team has visited each of the few houses of multiple occupation
used and assessed that they are fit for purpose. However, during the
inspection, inspectors raised concerns about the location and risks associated
with one of the local providers of supported accommodation. The trust agreed
to review this provision.
occasion, allowed only one offer at a time in their life when many are making
daunting long-term decisions; the councils housing department is not
consistently flexible enough in its dealings with care leavers.
underdeveloped, with only three staying on in foster care after their 18th
birthday. This is an in-year priority for the trust. (Recommendation)
health history pack is assessed by the children looked afters nurse and is
completed and shared in depth with them before they reach 18 years of age.
Pathways into adult mental health are progressed by CAMHS and, where
feasible, by the children looked afters nurse. There is no specific transition
team in place for disabled young people aged between 18 and 25 or those with
complex needs. However, the nurse for children looked after does some followup with these young people locally and is available to support the social work
team, if needed, for young people placed out of borough.
children in care council service was written during the inspection. The vast
majority of care leavers that inspectors spoke with reported that their views on
the quality of service they had received had not been sought.
was the eleventh of its kind. Children and young people consider it to have
been a great success.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Leaders have not improved services enough since the last inspection in 2013. Key
aspects of childrens social care services are still inadequate. The Secretary of State
directed the council to enter into a formal agreement with an independent body for
the delivery of childrens social care. It took a long time for the council and the
Department for Education to reach agreement about the precise nature of the
arrangements and to implement the changes. Responsibility transferred to the new
body, Slough Childrens Services Trust, on 1 October 2015. Although plans are in
place to resolve the remaining details, some arrangements, such as how
commissioning will be done, are still to be agreed.
The intervening period saw some improvement in the quality of provision under the
council, particularly in cases involving legal proceedings. However, the pace of
change was insufficient overall and not enough children received good enough help.
The council acknowledges that it channelled leadership resources into the transition
to the trust at the expense of a focus on the necessary practice improvements. A
lack of rigour in the use of performance information, and differing internal and
external messages about the quality of services for children, meant that the council
lacked a clear picture of service quality.
The council has not been a good corporate parent. The Corporate Parenting Strategy
lacks ambition and rigour, and the Corporate Parenting Panel has not received and
scrutinised comprehensive performance information. Some key aspects of support for
children looked after, including the virtual school, have been weak. The views of
children looked after and care leavers have not been sought and analysed actively
enough, and so they have not influenced the shape and quality of services.
The pace of improvement has accelerated in the short period since the trust began
operations. The response to new referrals is now better than at the time of the last
inspection. The trust has consolidated and extended the improvements in
management oversight of cases that started under the council. Most records show
clear management decisions. The trust has a coherent plan to develop a well-trained
stable workforce and to reduce its legacy dependence on agency staff. It is
establishing a more rigorous approach to performance monitoring and management.
It is too early for the trust to have made enough improvement in all areas that need
it. However, there are clear signs that it knows what needs to change and early
emerging evidence that it can deliver improvements for Sloughs children.


Inspection findings
independent review, published in July 2014, to advise on how best to deliver
childrens social care services in Slough. In October 2014, the Secretary of State
intervened under s497A of the Education Act 1996 and directed that an
independent trust should be appointed to deliver childrens services in Slough.
arrangement, with the council at first proposing a model which the Secretary of
State concluded would not put the services in question sufficiently out of
council control to secure the necessary improvements. However, the timeframe
set by the Secretary of State was achieved, and, on 1 October 2015 an
independent childrens trust, Slough Childrens Services Trust, took over all
council-run childrens social care services under a contract with the council. This
was almost two years after the most recent inspection. Among the functions
transferred are the fostering and adoption agencies. These have been
established as a registered independent fostering agency (IFA) and voluntary
adoption agency (VAA) respectively.
quickly enough. Agreement between the council, the Commissioner and the
Department for Education about the shape of the new structures and
governance arrangements took a long time to achieve. This was due, in part, to
the multiple parties and complexity of the arrangements. Governance is now
largely clear, although there are important areas such as commissioning where
partners have yet to resolve the detail.
improvement on the very low baseline found in the 2013 inspection. There has
been progress, both under the council and now under the trust, but the
trajectory has been too shallow and the pace too slow. The lengthy discussions
about the future of services created uncertainty and impeded progress. The
council acknowledges that the need to manage the transition to the trust
distracted it from making necessary improvements. In particular, the part-time
interim DCS understandably became increasingly involved in the transition
project. This left a capacity and capability gap in senior leadership that the
council chose not to fill at a time when the transfer to the trust was imminent.
This meant that improvements were slight and piecemeal.
means that there is no profile or mapping of the scale and type of child sexual
exploitation in Slough. Effective awareness-raising has been undertaken, and
some helpful direct work with young people. However, gaps in coordination and
a lack of a coherent strategic approach have significantly hampered progress.
(Recommendation)


enough on the detail of performance and so has been ineffective in driving up
standards. The council has not fully discharged its responsibilities for improving
services and quality remains too low.
developing positively. This is aiding the transition and beginning to resolve
some of the inevitable uncertainties about boundaries, roles and
responsibilities. However, the DCS is interim. The council is considering
succession arrangements, but continued uncertainty risks undermining
confidence in the new partnership.
from a firm understanding of the local population. For example, there is a broad
range of early help provision, though there are delays in accessing it for some
children and families, impact has not been sufficiently analysed and provision
lacks coordination. However, other areas of work do not reflect an
understanding of the levels and range of need. For example, there are not
enough in-house foster carers to meet need, and there is no formal structure
for the reliable and cost-effective procurement of foster placements in the
independent sector. (Recommendation)
front line. They are actively overseeing work, identifying strengths and
weaknesses and taking action to improve. A baseline audit conducted shortly
after the transfer of provision indicated that services were in a worse shape
than had previously been understood. In the year prior to transfer, the council
commissioned two reviews of services, including a Local Government
Association diagnostic. Each of these reported significant progress. It is unclear
whether they presented an accurate picture formed at times when quality was
at a temporary peak, or whether they were overoptimistic. It is clear, though,
that the council did not have a comprehensive and realistic view about quality
and consistency.
five-year plan, Slough Story, children and young peoples needs assessment
and plan and the clinical commissioning group (CCG) five-year plan, share some
priorities. However, other than the children and young peoples plan they have
little focus on childrens social care issues, despite the very high level of
concerns from the last inspection. The joint strategic needs analysis (JSNA)
uses old data and does not reflect the 2013 inspection. It does address
safeguarding and children looked after but is largely narrative, with no
comparative or trended data. It is difficult to see how it could inform
projections and planning.
good corporate parent. Inspectors agree with them. The corporate parenting
strategy is a superficial document that uses old data and priorities, and includes


no action plan. The corporate parenting panel has not received comprehensive
performance information. This has limited its ability to provide scrutiny and
challenge. IROs have not monitored the councils performance as a corporate
parent effectively. The council has not provided the CiCC with enough support
to be as representative and influential as it should be. Since taking over, the
trust has recognised these shortcomings and is taking action with the council to
remedy them. (Recommendation)
the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB). Until recently there has been no
formal written record of these meetings, so it is not clear to what extent the
Chief Executive has used them to hold the chair to account for the conduct and
activity of the LSCB. There are also quarterly meetings between the Chief
Executive, the DCS and the independent chair to discuss the LSCBs work. The
chief executive of Slough Childrens Services Trust now joins these meetings.
Again, there have until recently been no formal minutes, but there is evidence
of challenge to the council over a number of issues, including the strategic
response to female genital mutilation.
and families. There has been no detailed analysis of findings from complaints to
learn lessons and make improvements. Nor has there been routine collation or
analysis of childrens views to inform service development, planning and
commissioning. It is too early to tell if the trust will be more of a learning
organisation, but initial signs are hopeful. Its leaders intend to move to an
evidence-based, systemic model of service delivery, and it is already analysing
and using performance information. (Recommendation)
corporate performance team. There was a lack of rigour in the gathering and
analysis of this information. Managers and staff below head of service level did
not receive regular performance reports. This meant that they did not develop
a full comparative picture of organisational performance and their own role in
it. The trust has appointed its own Head of Performance, and is revising and
refining data collection. It has established clear expectations of staff and
managers for accurate, timely and comprehensive data recording. It uses
performance information to identify anomalies, trends and patterns and enable
corrective action and learning. There are helpful links between performance
data and workforce development initiatives such as the new staff recognition
scheme.
October 2015. In particular, the initial response to new referrals is now more
secure than at the time of the last inspection. Overall, the quality of practice at
the time of this inspection was mixed, with some good work but too much that
was poor.


the councils ability to recruit a stable workforce. The council recognised that
improving recruitment and retention was central to improvement. Senior
managers, including the Council DCS, took steps to address this, including the
appointment of a workforce lead who ran three national campaigns to attract
staff to what was soon to be the trust. Despite these efforts, agency rates
remain worryingly high. The trust has an assertive and coherent plan for
recruitment and retention. It is revising its relationship with recruitment
agencies and is actively seeking to persuade good temporary staff to apply for
permanent roles, with a small number of early successes. Its offer to staff
includes comprehensive induction and continuing professional development
frameworks. Training is available to agency staff, which is a strength. Most staff
have caseloads that are manageable, though a small number were too large.
There are arrangements in place with universities and independent
organisations to help attract staff. Some staff told inspectors that their move to
Slough or decision to stay was because of the trust arrangements. Although it is
too early to know how successful the trust will be in establishing good-quality
provision, it has made a solid start, prioritising workforce, performance
management and the management oversight of practice. Inspectors are in
broad agreement with the trust about the areas it should prioritise for
improvement. (Recommendation)
been some significant changes in more senior roles. The trust has developed a
clear offer to staff and managers that sets out both expectations and
professional development opportunities and pathways. Senior trust leaders
have invested time in keeping staff informed and there is extensive consultation
about the future shape of the organisation. Social workers say that they are
excited by the opportunity to work in the new organisation and that senior
leaders in the trust listen to their views. Morale is good, which is crucial at this
stage, and there is a clear sense of momentum.
enable it to apply a high level of management oversight at senior levels. Case
files now show clear evidence of first-line managers making decisions and there
are in many cases clear rationales for them. This improvement has clearly
accelerated since the trust took over services. Prior to that, while case files did
show decisions, the reason for them was not made clear and they were not
always acted upon. For example, in one case the failure to follow a
management decision led to a seven-month delay in initiating the Public Law
Outline.
clear expectations and entitlements as well as links with performance
frameworks and quality assurance. All social workers asked about supervision
by inspectors report that it has been regular and of good quality, with
improvements pre-dating the operational launch of the trust. However,
supervision files seen do not reflect this. None of the supervision files that


inspectors saw reflected sustained good practice. There were long gaps
between staff supervision meetings, actions identified in one meeting were not
followed up in the next and there was little evidence of critical reflection and
challenge. It is too early to say how effective the trust will be in improving and
sustaining this but there are early signs of progress.
They have a clear intention to move to a systemic model and are currently
examining models in successful local authorities.
Justice Board. The Designated Judge for Berkshire reports improvement in the
quality of court work since the last inspection, with good social work statements
and no undue delay. The local Children and Family Court Advisory and Support
Service (Cafcass) manager describes working relationships between childrens
guardians and Slough staff as good. This includes the periods before and after
the transition to the trust.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
Executive summary
The LSCB has not made sufficient progress against the recommendations from the
previous inspection in 2013. The independent chair has brought increased focus and
challenge to work of the Board. However, the LSCB has not been sufficiently
effective in scrutinising or challenging the significant weaknesses in the delivery of
front-line services to children in need of help, protection and care. The poor
engagement of some partners has been a barrier to progress. The LSCB has failed to
strengthen the review of practice through case audits, has not ensured that
thresholds are regularly reviewed and has not developed arrangements to evaluate
and report on the experiences of children missing from care, home and education.
The threshold document is no longer compliant with statutory guidance and,
significantly, does not reflect the current arrangements in place across the
partnership. The Board has not reviewed the quality or effectiveness of threshold
decision making.
Although some progress has been made by the LSCB in recent months in developing
more effective arrangements to oversee and scrutinise data and audit front-line
practice, it is yet to provide rigorous evaluation and analysis of local practice and
performance.
The strategic child sexual exploitation subgroup has overseen some proactive work
such as awareness raising with local businesses. However, overall, the Board has not
been effective in reviewing front-line practice in response to children missing and
those at risk of sexual exploitation. As a result, it has not assured itself that these
children are effectively safeguarded.
The female genital mutilation task and finish subgroup has made good progress, for
example in understanding prevalence, developing a draft strategy and pathways and
undertaking an audit of cases.
The Boards training programme has not been formulated based on a needs analysis.
Although there is good take-up of training, the Board has not evaluated impact or
assured itself that training leads to improvements in practice and service delivery.
There are no lay members on the LSCB currently and therefore it is not duly
constituted.
The chair is actively seeking a sufficient multi-agency funding arrangement for the
work of the Board, but to date a funding formula has not been agreed. This is
required in order to ensure that the Board is able to deliver its core functions.


Recommendations
application of thresholds at all levels.
information, section 11 audits and internal partner agency audits, as well as
multi-agency auditing led by the LSCB.
of the local multi-agency response to children at risk of sexual exploitation and
children who go missing.
sufficient resources to undertake its core business.
impact of training (including e-learning).
Board has lay member representation and thorough engagement with local
faith groups.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
the Children and Young Peoples Partnership Board and the Health and Wellbeing Board are well established. The independent chair is a member of the
Children and Young Peoples Partnership Board. The lead member for childrens
services is also chair of the Children and Young Peoples Partnership Board, as
well as being a participating observer of the LSCB, which helps to ensure that
safeguarding themes are aligned and key strategies communicated. The
independent chair of the LSCB meets regularly with the DCS and the councils
chief executive. These meetings have included the chief executive of the trust
since its launch in October 2015.
partnership working is undeveloped and has not been effective in ensuring
sufficient scrutiny and oversight of safeguarding arrangements. The
appointment of the independent chair in November 2014 was positive for the
Board. However, overall, instability and change in staffing arrangements during
exacerbated by frequent changes in key appointments across the partnership,
particularly the DCS, the councils quality assurance manager and child sexual
exploitation coordinator. Consequently, several subgroups have been unable to
progress work, contributing to the difficulties the LSCB has experienced in
establishing an understanding and analysis of local performance.


ownership of the improvement journey since the last inspection. The impact of
this is the continued lack of progress in delivering key areas of work. There
have been improvements in the level of challenge across the partnership but
there is still more work to do to ensure that partners hold each other to account
and share ownership of the safeguarding agenda. The independent chair has
highlighted to partners that the Board is not sufficiently resourced given the
scale of the improvement journey. The previously reduced police funding has
been temporarily reinstated by the local police commander, but work is still
needed to agree and develop a funding approach, which will enable the Board
to deliver its core functions in the future.
September 2014 weakened its ability to ensure effective oversight and analysis
of front-line practice. This included a period at the start of 2015 when Berkshire
Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust was the only partner submitting performance
data and the LSCB undertook no effective performance monitoring. Since this
time, all partners have provided the LSCB with performance information, but
the quality of this is variable and analysis is not always included. This limits the
Boards capacity to analyse what performance data mean for local vulnerable
children and this important aspect of the Boards work is still in its infancy. No
multi-agency auditing took place during 2014. Only a small number of cases
were audited in 2015 and the Board has questioned the quality and reliability of
those audits. Partners have not consistently submitted findings from their own
internal audits to the LSCB despite requests from the independent chair. As a
consequence, the LSCB has failed to fulfil its core statutory function of
monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of front-line practice.
been strengthened by using the findings of section 11 audits reviewed as part
of the pan-Berkshire arrangement. LSCB partners across the six Berkshire areas
provide assurances to a joint LSCB Berkshire-wide section 11 audit panel and
subgroup on a three-yearly cycle. However, the feedback loop in respect of this
function has not been sufficiently robust, and there has been no section 11
audit of the council for several years. More recently, the LSCB has refreshed
planning in respect of section 11 requirements. Schools are currently submitting
section 175 audits and the council is in the process of undertaking its audit,
with a plan for the trust to complete one in 2016.
performance function, ensuring agencies submit performance data and
negotiating the reinstatement of the quality assurance subgroup in September
approach to the Boards scrutiny function in the future. The extent of the
difficulties across the partnership at the start of the independent chairs tenure
meant that these developments have taken time to achieve. As a result, the
LSCB has experienced a considerable period without sufficiently monitoring and
evaluating the effectiveness of arrangements to safeguard and promote the


welfare of children. For example, the LSCB still does not have a clear
understanding of the extent of child sexual exploitation across the borough.
While the child sexual exploitation strategy has been implemented, work to
progress the action plan has been slow. The work of the child sexual
exploitation subgroup has been hampered by changes in key personnel, and
work to map cross-agency data and identify themes and hotspots has not
progressed. Earlier in 2015, the LSCB completed a multi-agency audit; however,
the sample was not representative and the LSCB does not have confidence in
the audit methodology employed. Consequently, the quality or effectiveness of
intervention for children and young people at risk of sexual exploitation is not
understood.
exploitation risk assessment conference process (SERAC), which oversees
individual childrens cases. Governance arrangements are now appropriate and
are beginning to strengthen the oversight of child sexual exploitation at a
strategic and operational level. However, during the transition period some
important systems, processes and practice were not effective. This was
exacerbated by periods when child sexual exploitation coordinator post was
vacant.
group. During 201415, this group undertook awareness-raising visits to hotels
and bed and breakfasts across Slough, as well as visiting businesses, licenced
and fast food premises under the banner of the say something if you see
something campaign, to raise awareness of child sexual exploitation. In
addition, the group ran a taxi driver campaign, with cabs displaying stickers
regarding human trafficking. The work undertaken has been featured in a best
practice article in an LGA publication.
sexual exploitation and female genital mutilation conference in 2014.
Subsequent work in respect of female genital mutilation has been driven by the
task and finish subgroup. This subgroup has made good progress carrying out
scoping work to understand the prevalence of female genital mutilation,
identifying potential hotspots, developing a strategy and pathways (currently in
draft), as well as undertaking an audit of cases. The LSCB has made progress in
moving the female genital mutilation agenda forward after some initial delay by
the council. The council has now agreed to lead the next stage of work in
implementing the strategy.
children who go missing. Performance information relating to missing episodes
is being scrutinised by the executive subgroup, but this has not yet resulted in a
joined-up response. During 2015, the LSCB became aware that return home
interviews were not taking place for all children missing from home or care.
Although the LSCB has taken some action to assure itself that the
arrangements to protect vulnerable children who go missing are effective, these


steps have not been sufficient. Since the trust came into effect, the trusts chief
executive has highlighted to the LSCB that the response to missing children is a
significant vulnerability and has put in place a robust action plan, including the
need to ensure return home interviews are undertaken for all missing episodes.
LSCBs work during 201415 has been discussed in public meetings of the
Wellbeing Board and Scrutiny Committee but is slow to be published on the
Boards website. The report explores key practice areas, but too little
consideration is given to the evaluation of the effectiveness of front-line
practice. For example, there has been insufficient analysis of the poor
partnership response to missing children, particularly in respect of the absence
of return home interviews. The revised business plan provides increased focus
on core priorities.
member. The Boards engagement with the faith community is underdeveloped,
as is the involvement of children and young people, and these combined
shortfalls limit the LSCBs ability to engage with the wider community. The LSCB
has a plan to address these shortfalls, including work to recruit two lay
members. The independent chair has begun to engage with children and young
people through the Children and Young Persons Partnership Board and plans to
use the findings from a recent survey by young people to inform audit planning
for the year ahead.
Despite efforts to raise awareness, private fostering notifications remain low.
The LSCB has highlighted this as an area of concern and has satisfied itself that
there is a plan in place across partner agencies to address this.
provider and updated through the pan-Berkshire policy and procedures
subgroup. The procedures are currently being updated after some delays, due
to the complexity of the Pan-Berkshire arrangement. Critically, the threshold
document, although extensively rolled out across agencies in 2014, is no longer
compliant with statutory guidance and does not reflect current arrangements
across the partnership. Combined with the lack of evaluation of front-line
practice, this is a key weakness, particularly given that inspectors identified that
thresholds for statutory intervention and early help are not fully understood or
consistently applied across the partnership. Although the Board has had some
oversight of early help, the lack of multi-agency auditing means that it has not
reviewed the quality or effectiveness of threshold decision making. This is a
significant shortfall given that the need to ensure regular review of thresholds
was a recommendation from the previous inspection in 2013.
programme is in place, but this is not yet driven by a training needs analysis.
There is good take-up of multi-agency training, which is provided through a


pan-East Berkshire arrangement. This is evaluated at an individual level, but
the lack of strategic evaluation of outcomes means that the LSCB is unable to
fully understand the impact of the training it delivers. Completion rates of elearning courses during 2014 were extremely poor (only 21% completed), but
no work has been undertaken to address this weakness due to gaps in the
capacity of training coordinators who support the Board. The Board recently
hosted a well-attended conference with a focus on neglect.
review is currently in progress after some delay due to the complexities of
running alongside a mental health homicide review. One critical case review has
taken place in the last year, which resulted in a learning lessons briefing to a
small multi-agency group. A further critical case review, now underway, has
been significantly delayed because the council had not provided a chronology.
The serious case review subgroup has not been consistently effective in
challenging concerns and needs strengthening to ensure that actions are
progressed and that progress across the partnership is monitored consistently.
well attended. The panel has undertaken some proactive work in seeking to
reduce the incidence of preventable child deaths, including awareness-raising
regarding safe sleeping; developing a viral wheeze and asthma website; a
healthy eating campaign; and significant work in response to the high infant
mortality due to genetic issues, which has resulted in a training programme
being rolled out to all schools across the area.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Stephanie Murray
Deputy lead inspector: Sheena Doyle
Team inspectors: Louise Warren, Simon Rushall, Janet Fraser, Donna Mariott, Nick
Crombie, Linda Steele.
Senior data analyst: Donna Neill
Quality assurance manager: Pauline Turner


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for children looked after and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


