Somerset County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 20 January 2015  11 February 2015
Report published: 27 March 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services are inadequate
There are widespread or serious failures which cause children to be harmed or at risk
of harm and in the delivery of services for looked after children and care leavers
which result in their welfare not being safeguarded and promoted. Leaders and
managers have not been able to demonstrate sufficient understanding of failures and
have been ineffective in prioritising, challenging and making improvements.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.2
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Inadequate

permanence

Inadequate


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Somerset are inadequate because:
Leadership, management and governance
 There has been a corporate failure to keep children safe in Somerset. The
continual churn in the senior leadership team over the last ten years, including
eight different Directors of Childrens Services, has inhibited the development of
the service, severely restricted the local authoritys progress and, as a
consequence, is seriously affecting the quality of services to children and families.
 Oversight, scrutiny and challenge from corporate leaders has not been sufficiently
robust. Chronic instability at all levels of the organisation, poor practice and a
culture of mistrust have been allowed to persist.
 The Improvement Board has been ineffective. Four changes of Improvement
Board chairs over a period of two years have contributed to a lack of a rapid and
purposeful response to the findings from previous Ofsted inspections and the
Department for Education (DfE) Improvement Notice.
 A high number of locum staff used to cover managerial and social work posts,
and the continual changes in the workforce, have limited the authoritys ability to
achieve a consistently acceptable standard and quality of social work practice.
 Services to protect children at risk of child sexual exploitation are
underdeveloped; the scale and the prevalence of the problem are not sufficiently
understood across the partnership. When children go missing, return home visits
are not routinely undertaken and findings are not used to prepare and plan for
better interventions and services.
 Partners are not fully committed or contributing effectively to the safety and
protection of children and families. The partnership has failed to establish a
shared understanding of the arrangements for early help and thresholds for
childrens social care are set too high.

Quality of Practice
 High caseloads, unassessed risk, poor management oversight, children not being
seen often enough by their social workers and cases closed too soon, are
illustrative of some of the serious and widespread failures to adequately protect
children in Somerset.
 Achieving permanency for children lacks direction and purposeful oversight from
the Independent Reviewing Officer service. A heavy reliance on the use of locum
staff and high caseloads means that there is considerable delay and drift in
achieving permanency for some children.
 Support to help care leavers into education and employment is insufficiently
coordinated and the number of care leavers who are not in education
employment or training (NEET) is high.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Leadership, management and governance

Provide stability, quality and experience in the senior leadership team and
strengthen corporate governance arrangements and scrutiny to ensure a better
oversight of childrens social care.


Provide sufficient capacity across the workforce to ensure that case loads are
reduced, risk is appropriately assessed and acted upon, and social workers have
sufficient time to spend with children and families.


Strengthen management oversight of social work practice to ensure that all
children receive a service which is sufficient to address their identified need.

Partnership

Ensure that all partner agencies fulfil their statutory duties and safeguarding
responsibilities toward vulnerable children.


Strengthen the partnerships approach to children missing from home, care or
education and at risk of child sexual exploitation and ensure that information is
collated, shared and tracked so that the scale of the problem is well
understood, and that there is a sufficient range of interventions in place to
support children and young people at risk.


Ensure that police safe and well checks and return home interviews are
routinely undertaken to enable sufficient information to be gathered to improve
the protection of vulnerable young people and to support the disruption of child
sexual exploitation activities.


Progress the early help strategy more swiftly, ensure that it is well embedded in
practice across the partnership and that thresholds for services are better
understood and implemented to reduce the number of inappropriate referrals
and re-referrals to childrens services.

Quality of Practice

Provide a sufficient range of placement choices for children to achieve a better
match, reduce the need for them to move school and enable them to stay
closer to their families.


Ensure that the Independent Reviewing Officer (IRO) service has a better
oversight and provides effective challenge where children are experiencing too
much delay and drift in achieving a permanent family.


Areas for improvement

Quality of Practice
Officer (LADO) service to deal with the increase in the number of referrals and
ensure that all decisions made are supported by a clear rationale.
assessed separately.
partner agencies are informed.
concerns such as strategy meetings, child protection conferences, core groups
and Public Law Outline and legal planning meetings, clearly document the
decisions made and actions to be taken.
ensure that privately fostered children are identified, their needs are assessed
and, where necessary, action is taken to ensure that they are safe and to
promote their wellbeing.

Adoption
skilled to deal with complex adoption cases.
timely adoption medical advice and consistent attendance at adoption panel
meetings.

Care leavers
Learning Review may be used to improve services for care leavers in Somerset.
geographical spread of accommodation for care leavers.
timescales which they can contribute to and understand.

Provide health history and information for all care leavers.

number of young people who are not in education, employment or training.


The local authoritys strengths
workers work hard and have remained resilient and determined to improve
outcomes for children and families,
children, it is supported by clear management oversight, and case notes are
detailed, analytical and help to inform decisions about children.
needs to be done to make Somerset a safer and better place for children and
families, and are starting to make progress to secure better outcomes for
children.
the lives of 870 families.
young people involved can easily identify where they have had influence and
where they know they have made a difference, including helping to appoint a
new Director of Childrens Services and informing foster carer training. Two
councillors and members of the corporate parenting board help to run groups
on Sundays.
placements for looked after children. The fostering service offers a range of
specialised fostering schemes for looked after children. These services are
providing a strong, specialist resource for children with the most complex
needs, and are achieving some good outcomes. Every foster carer spoken to
said they would recommend fostering for Somerset council.
looked after children.
quickly in placements that could become their long-term adoptive homes,
minimising placement moves.
in keeping brothers and sisters together.


Progress since the last inspection
children was in June 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Services for these children have deteriorated since that time and are judged to
be inadequate in this inspection.
children was undertaken in June 2013. The arrangements were judged to be
inadequate, and they are still found to be inadequate in this inspection.
been addressed.
young people. The permanent appointment of a new Chief Executive in May
appointment in September 2014 of a new Improvement Board chair are
showing some early signs of leading to recovery. Whilst the scale of the
challenge for childrens services remains significant, there is a sharper focus on
reducing organisational churn, strengthening performance management and
championing the needs of children.
safeguarding agenda, and a collective response to protect children at risk is
lacking. Shortfalls in the quality of practice are still evident in a number of
cases.
ensure that thresholds for early help and social care services are clearly defined
and widely understood so that children and their families benefit from the right
help at the right time. Access to early help services is unclear and thresholds
for accessing services are not widely understood across the partnership.
teams in four geographical areas in 2013 has resulted in greater clarity of roles
within childrens services.
quality child focused work. A recent restructuring of childrens services, and the
introduction of the Signs of Safety model of managing risk, have enhanced the
quality of some of the work undertaken.
recent months as a result of more focused management support.
progress in strengthening fostering services since the last inspection. The
fostering service has a strong team of skilled, committed carers.


Summary for children and young people
 Somerset County Council is not providing good enough services for the children
and young people they need to support, protect and care for. However, since
new bosses came into the council last year things have started to improve, but
there is still a lot to do and everyone who works with, or has responsibility for
children and young people, needs to work better with the council to improve
things.
 The difficulty in recruiting permanent staff has meant that children experience too
many changes of social worker and, as a consequence, they are not always able
to build a strong relationship with them. Social workers are too busy and have too
many children to care for, so they are sometimes not able to visit children as
often as they should. When social workers do have enough time, inspectors have
seen that children are listened to and that what they think matters.
 Inspectors know that some children receiving services from Somerset County
Council experience too many changes in their lives. For example, they experience
too many placement and school moves and, for some children, this has involved
long journeys to get to school.
 Children and families do not always get the support they need at the time when
they most need it.
 Social workers, police officers and health care workers do not always have a
shared understanding of how to protect children from risk, and they need to work
better together.
 It takes too long for decisions to be made, to make sure that children have a
permanent family.
 The virtual school, and the schools that children and young people attend need to
make sure that they support children better and that they are well prepared for
their exams, so that they can get good results to help them to get jobs and gain
training or places at college or university.
 There should be a better range of accommodation available for those young
people who are ready to leave care.
 When children make a complaint, the local authority needs to respond much
more quickly to try to resolve problems.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area
 Approximately 109,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Somerset. This is 20.2% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 15% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 11.5% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 10.3% (the national average is 14.6%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 3.5% of all
children living in the area, compared with 19.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
White Other, Mixed and Asian/Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with a first language other than
English:
 in primary schools is 5.0% (the national average is 18.7%).
 in secondary schools is 3.6% (the national average is 14.3%).
 Polish is the most common non-UK nationality in all Somerset districts and Polishborn residents now account for 1% of Somersets overall population. There are
significant pockets of Polish-heritage residents in parts of Shepton Mallet, Yeovil,
Minehead, Taunton and Bridgwater. A large traveller and Eastern European
population seeks seasonal work in the agricultural parts of the county, but is not
resident.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 January 2015, 3,607 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 January 2015, 472 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 412 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 January 2015, no children were reported as living in a privately arranged
fostering placement. The number at 31 March 2014 was too low to be reported
and was suppressed.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Children looked after in this area
 At 31 January 2015, 482 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 44 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 488 (45 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014. Of this number:
authority area
area
area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 56 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. None were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection. Two were judged to be
inadequate.
 A recent multi-remit inspection took place in September and October 2014. The
review found that services for the most vulnerable children and families in the
local area were not of a good enough standard.
Other information about this area
 The Interim Director of Childrens Services has been in post since November
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since September 2012.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
There are serious and widespread weaknesses in the provision of services to
safeguard children in Somerset. Since the last Ofsted inspection in 2013, services
have not improved sufficiently and, as a result, some children are not adequately
safeguarded and protected.
Early help services are not developing quickly enough despite this being identified as
a concern in the last Ofsted inspection. Thresholds to social work services are set too
high, referrals are not accepted or are quickly closed despite risk remaining, and
there is a lack of preventative services across the partnership to support vulnerable
families.
Poor quality decision making and assessments, lack of management oversight and a
high number of short-term staff in the local authority contribute to unassessed risk,
and a high number of repeat incidents of harm.
The response to child sexual exploitation across the partnership is poor. Coordination
of this issue has only recently begun. Information from across the partnership
relating to children missing from home, care and education is not aligned, making it
difficult to meet children and young peoples needs for support and protection or to
know the scale of the problem in Somerset.
Private fostering arrangements are not being identified and action to raise awareness
of the need to notify childrens services of such arrangements is underdeveloped.
Partner agencies are not fully taking on their responsibility for supporting vulnerable
children and young people in the community. There are very serious concerns about
the lack of availability of Avon and Somerset Police to work with the local authority to
protect children. Delays by a local hospital in communicating its concerns about
children further compound the lack of a joined up approach to safeguarding children.
Despite this, there are examples of good work, with some social workers delivering
high quality child focused work. A recent restructuring of childrens services, and the
introduction of the Signs of Safety model of managing risk, have enhanced the
quality of some of the work undertaken.
There is improved work in the Children with Disability team. There is also good work
to address domestic abuse through the Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference
(MARAC) meetings, and to prevent homelessness amongst young people across the
partnership.


help services continue to be insufficiently developed to provide a satisfactory
level of additional support to the thousands of children and young people living
in Somerset who are likely to need it. Early help hubs, part of a local authority
initiative Get Set, are developing, though progress in achieving full staffing has
been slow and is not yet complete. Access to resources to help families, and
prevent their needs rising to levels when social workers should intervene, is
patchy around the county. For instance, multi-agency One Teams enabling
families to access small grants and local guidance to access universal services,
only operate in two areas of Somerset.
to help identify needs and ensure that the right services are commissioned, is
proving a challenge for the authority. Ofsted inspections of two childrens
centre groups, last year, showed a further deterioration in those services, which
are now judged to be inadequate. Although there has been some improvement
in the take up of the Common Assessment Framework (CAF) since a multiagency re-launch of this way of working in April 2014, the wider group of
agencies, including health and schools, are not consistently taking responsibility
for supporting vulnerable children and young people. This contributes to the
escalation of need within families and adds to the pressures on childrens social
care services.
national Troubled Families programme (TFP) is good, successfully improving
the lives of 870 families as at August 2014. For instance, there is evidence of
effective, stable relationships with families. Information sharing about risks is
routine in participating agencies, including the police, Department of Work and
Pensions, health services, schools, local and district authorities. Data shared
between the partners involved show that targeted intervention has brought
measurable reduction of risk of harm for children in the programme, including
improved school attendance and reduction in offending. The Somerset
programme is now an early adopter of the next phase, in which it aims to help
over 2,900 families in the next five years.
raised with Somerset County Council through Somerset Direct, and acted upon
by experienced social workers. However, inspectors identified a significant
number of cases where a decision to take no further action was inappropriate,
being based on too little information. In a few cases, this left children at risk of
further harm. Although the local authority had identified poor practice, it had
not been addressed in sufficient depth. As a result of inspectors findings, the
local authority immediately reviewed decision making in over 2,500 closed
cases from the previous two months through which they found over 200 cases
which they needed to re-open. Inspectors sampled a number of the decisions
that the council had reviewed and found that the process was not robust in
identifying all of the cases needing further work.


and the challenges in getting childrens services across the partnership to
accept referrals. Many of the referred cases had complex factors underlying the
concerns for the children including domestic abuse and parental violence,
substance misuse and poor mental health. Inspectors found a lack of
understanding amongst some social work staff and managers of the significant
impact a combination of these issues can have on families. Some very worrying
cases were not being accepted by childrens social care services, with an
unrealistic expectation that sufficient support would be provided by universal
services. This results in childrens needs not being met in a timely manner, and
a significant number of re-referrals as family situations continue to be left
unaddressed. Specialist support services are available, for example, to address
substance misuse, but these are not readily accessible. In particular, families in
South Somerset have limited access to some of the good support available
elsewhere in the county.
health and childrens social care takes place every day to discuss cases
referred. The capacity within the team to look appropriately at the volume of
concerns referred each day is insufficient. The practice of the Avon and
Somerset Police of referring every case which may have some relevance to
children, without risk assessment and triage, deluges childrens social care in a
high number of inappropriate referrals. Many of these contacts do not specify
whether children were involved or witnessed the incident. This makes it harder
for the local authority to prioritise the families of those children who are most in
need. During the inspection, inspectors also saw a large number (36) of cases
of concern referred together in one batch from the Royal United Hospital Bath
to Somerset Direct. These cases had not been referred in a timely manner to
address need or any safeguarding concerns.
assessment, safeguarding and looked after children teams in four geographical
areas. This has resulted in improved clarity of roles within childrens services.
Assessment work is therefore carried out in eight different teams. Some
assessments are good and describe the views of children and young people
well; other work does not consider all relevant risks.
many months. The practice of including every child in the family in the same
assessment does not help the understanding of each childs individual needs.
The impact of cultural and diversity issues is not always recorded. However, in
some cases, good consideration of the needs of Gypsy and traveller families
was noted by inspectors.


agencies employed across the local authority. The quality of some of their work
is good but some is not of a good enough standard. A critical feature of many
of the cases seen was the number of changes of key workers in a short
timescale. Examples were seen of social workers carrying out visits and
accepting explanations from parents which would undoubtedly have been
challenged more robustly if the worker had a better awareness of the case.
Many of the cases scrutinised by inspectors show significant gaps in visits to
children and families and in contact with other agencies. This has made it
harder for children and parents to build up meaningful relationships with social
workers and undermined efforts to support families to make the changes
required of them. There have also been numerous changes in the managers
providing oversight of the cases which makes it more difficult to drive forward
plans for children in a consistent way.
the lack of availability of the Avon and Somerset Police to participate in strategy
discussions and respond to urgent child protection matters. Inspectors saw two
serious incidents in one day where the police were not available to respond.
This lack of availability results in some children not being visited within the 24hour maximum recommended in the Working Together to Safeguard Children
national guidance. Local authority staff reported that there were a number of
occasions where this had compromised childrens safety.
children but it is not yet fully embedded. In some cases, Signs of Safety work is
completed well and is used to engage parents effectively. However, there is not
a consistent understanding amongst social workers and other agencies of how
this is to work, and some of the casework lacks rigour. In the main, the
resulting plans are not sufficiently specific, lack consideration of all of the risks,
and show poor prioritisation and no timescales. In a number of cases seen by
inspectors, social workers and multi-agency colleagues had been over-optimistic
about the potential for change or the capacity and willingness of parents to do
so. Parents claims that domestic abuse situations have recently been resolved,
despite long histories of violence and intimidation, were too readily accepted.
effective engagement with parents and good multi-agency contributions; others
lack direction and challenge. Conferences are not always minuted well, so in
some cases there is no record of discussions or differences of opinion. With the
frequent changes of social workers and managers, these meetings and their
minutes are vital to ensure that plans are taken forward to protect children.


There has been an increase in the use of the advocacy support service to
children and their families, from 331 children in 201213 to 545 children in
conferences and 349 at review conferences between January 2013 and
December 2014. Signs of Safety assessments are completed during the
conference and this improves the involvement of parents. However, there is
variation on how this work is undertaken, in particular in how it is recorded.
This does not assist the monitoring of progress.
duplication of recording between reports for different children in the same
household who are being considered at core group meetings. Also, it is
sometimes difficult to understand whether there have been any further
incidents, what has been discussed, and whether there have been any changes
to the plan to protect the child.
increase since 31 March 2012, when there were 282, and since 31 March 2014,
when there were 412. The March 2014 figure represents 37.9 children per
identified that the increase is due to greater consistency in child protection
decision making in two of the offices, bringing them in line with the other two
offices. Figures seen by inspectors confirm that most of the increase in
numbers relates to these two offices. Eighteen per cent of child protection plans
show that children are living in households where mental health issues, drugs
and alcohol are significantly affecting the care that children receive. Emotional
abuse, at 43%, is the highest category for children placed on a plan, with 34%
of plans showing neglect as the main reason.
second time: 17.6% across Somerset in December 2014, an increase from 13%
in December 2013. These plans are currently being reviewed so that the
authority can satisfy itself that progress is being made and, where it is not,
consider alternative action to protect the children. In December 2014, 3.4%
(12) of child protection plans show that children have been subject to a plan for
over two years; this is an increase on last years performance, of 1.4%, though
remains lower than statistical neighbours at 4.1% and the England average at
that they continue to meet the protective needs of the children.


subject to a child protection plan is at least once every twenty-eight days. This
pattern of monthly visits was seen to occur in many of the cases reviewed, but
local authority data shows that in December 2014 only 63% of children had
received all of their visits in accordance with this minimum standard, and in one
office this was only 38% of children. In many cases, this means that social
workers are not visiting children often enough to engage in effective direct
work to promote change within their families. Recording of visits generally
focuses on talking to children and observing how they present. Whilst this is
important, it has resulted in many visits being solely welfare checks on families.
One parent described only having announced visits, having his children spoken
to and not him, and having no meaningful work done to help him in protecting
his children. Recent audits describe purposeless visits which fail to take
forward child protection plans.
child protection plan by helping to improve parenting skills, with Talking
Therapies, Triple P and Parent Assertiveness courses running regularly. The size
and rural nature of the local authority make accessing groups difficult for some
families.
challenged by the work they are expected to do. However, in many cases, the
current level of involvement by social workers and partner agencies is
insufficient to ensure that children are safe and plans are progressed. This is
partly due to the need to improve the quality of visits and engage in direct and
meaningful work with families. This is not a consistent picture however as
inspectors did see some very good direct work by social workers. Social work
assistants also provide good practical help for families. Consultant social work
posts have been introduced and these are assisting less experienced workers to
assess and formulate plans. These posts have only recently been filled across
the county, and there are some inconsistencies in how they work. However,
social workers are reporting how useful consultant social workers are to them,
in particular the training they run to help improve practice.
examples of records of visits, including seeking childrens views, observations of
behaviours and relationships in the family, and evidence of social workers trying
to understand what it is like for a child to live in the household. The majority of
assessments lack detail of the experience of children and young people and a
robust consideration of risk. In a small number of cases, assessments are
written to a high standard. In the main, reports completed to record multiagency meetings such as strategy meetings, child protection conferences, core
groups, PLO (Public Law Outline) and legal planning meetings have insufficient
detail to clearly explain the reason for decisions taken. Chronologies and
genograms, to enable understanding of the childs history and background, are
not consistently completed and those on files vary in quality.


sufficient consultation with other agencies or with the families concerned. For
example, in some cases seen by inspectors where children had been subject to
a child protection plan, decisions had been made to bring the plan to an end
and close the case immediately when there were no further reported incidents,
even though children continued to be at risk and had unmet wider need.
Consequently, a high proportion of cases (29%) are re-referred due to similar
concerns re-emerging; this is well above the England average of 25%. Local
authority performance data show that this has been a consistent pattern for the
previous two years.
examples of management involvement in the assessment and safeguarding
teams, but it is not consistent. Supervision does occur but it is not always
regular. Over the last year, there has sometimes been a gap of many months in
workers supervision. Some supervision recording have good analysis of risk,
consideration of support and planning whilst other supervision is limited.
Managers do not focus sufficiently on providing reflective supervision, nor on
ensuring that the basic social work tasks are completed. For example, regular
visits in a timescales that reflects the concerns, direct work with parents,
consideration of cultural issues, seeing and talking to children and young
people, reduction of risk and taking forward the plan, core groups occurring,
liaison with other agencies and good quality recording.
Children with Disability teams was of a good standard, with risks well assessed,
acted upon and recorded. Cases sampled by inspectors indicated that, up until
six months ago, work in these teams typically involved delays in actions being
taken, gaps in recording and poor supervision, resulting in children not having
their needs met in a timely manner. The quality of these services has improved
as a result of more focused management support.
children missing from education. Arrangements to collate and track information
about children missing from education are coordinated within schools, and
children's whereabouts are tracked and recorded by the Education Attendance
Service. Good use is made of the School2School register for exchanging
information with other authorities and checking school transfers within the
county. However, this information is not shared or linked to police and
children's social care data, and staff in the Education Attendance Service do not
routinely refer children to the police or children's services when they have
completed all their enquiries and cannot find a child. This leaves children in
unassessed situations and potentially at risk of harm.


the child sexual exploitation MASH group, but this is a new process and is not
yet fully embedded in practice. The collation of information from the education
service for the meeting was crude and relied heavily on someone telephoning
schools for names of children known to go missing or considered at risk. This
lack of a coordinated response across the partnership is inadequate in meeting
the safeguarding needs of children missing education.
whom 13 are subject to a child in need plan and are being regularly monitored
by childrens services. Twenty children are not in full-time education; none are
looked after children. The Education Attendance Service is monitoring these
children closely. In some cases the Traveller Education Service is supporting
children of a school age to access formal education.
Partnership arrangements are being strengthened through the LSCB, but it is
too early to see the impact of this. A multi-agency group has been established
to coordinate action to safeguard individual children at risk of child sexual
exploitation but it has only recently met for the first time. The intention is to
provide an environment in which professionals can take complex cases for
discussion to ensure a more coordinated approach across the partnership, with
known associates being linked, hot spots identified and effective action taken to
disrupt child sexual exploitation activities. Avon and Somerset police have been
successful in prosecuting known offenders.
missing notifications is reducing. However, despite this, the scale of the
problem is still not fully understood across the partnership. Data and lists about
children missing from care, home and education are not aligned. A total of 364
missing from home, education or care notifications were received by the police
in 2014. Safe and well visits by police do occur, and provide some insight into
what is happening across the county, but they are not systematically evaluated
and, consequently, the outcomes of these visits do not robustly inform practice.
cases (9%) did they agree. This low number makes it less likely that
individually focused, effective safety plans are put in place. .It also does not
support the timely identification of possible patterns and trends of activity
emerging, to enable a robust partnership response to protect children. The local
authority has not evaluated the outcomes from return home interviews to
assess any patterns and trends that are emerging, to enable it to prepare and
plan for better interventions and services. Without knowledge of childrens
views, experience and activities whilst missing, it is not possible to plan to
improve their safety.


need plan show that 17 children and young people are considered at risk from
repeat episodes of missing. The local authority list shows that the police are not
routinely informing childrens services of missing episodes. In some cases seen
by inspectors, there has been a good response to child sexual exploitation and
missing concerns using screening tools to assess risk, including use of a
screening tool with some parents to enable them to identify potential risk
factors. In other cases, including some involving children subject to a child
protection plan where child sexual exploitation has been identified as a risk,
screening tools have not been fully utilised and actions have not been taken to
ensure that children and young people are safe. Where the screening tools
have been used, inspectors saw some very good practice.
and looked after teams were being reviewed using the child sexual exploitation
screening and risk assessment tool to identify any concerning factors. Any
children identified through the process are to be referred to the child sexual
exploitation MASH group for a more coordinated response across the
partnership. However, this process will only address the needs of those children
known about. Further consideration is being given to how the group can
identify those children who are at risk but are not open or known to any
agency. It is early days, so the scale of the problem remains unclear until this
review and further work is completed.
young people is limited. For example, there are too few support groups for all
of the young people identified as at risk of going missing and of child sexual
exploitation. However, a multi-agency child sexual exploitation conference was
held in December 2014 to raise awareness, and training is ongoing to improve
knowledge and skills across the workforce. Disruption activities and harbouring
notices have been used by Avon and Somerset Police and are starting to make
an impact to secure the safety of children and young people, and there have
been successful prosecutions. The police have secured additional resources to
support the child sexual exploitation MASH in tracking known associates and
linking them to activity across Somerset, including links to particular children
and groups. Social workers and partner agencies are now beginning to talk
about the issue and are working together to better identify the scale of the
problem. The police have carried out work with the licensing authority on taxis,
and this is being extended to hotels and bed and breakfast accommodation.
are privately fostered in the local authority are inadequate. Awareness-raising
about this key group of vulnerable children who are not living with family
members is poor, resulting in no children being identified and safeguarded
through these arrangements for the last two years.


work with children, has had a significant increase in allegations received, from
Some LADO cases are robustly managed with timely, clear decision making and
action planning. In others, where it has been decided to take no further action,
decisions are not supported by a clear rationale and records lack detail.
Somerset to identify support for victims of serious domestic abuse incidents.
Operational managers report significant improvements in multi-agency
commitment. However, probation service representatives do not attend
meetings as often as they should, and the quality of ongoing work with families
by all partners between meetings is variable. Minutes of MARAC meetings show
that full discussions take place at the monthly meetings, with risks identified
and actions put in place to support highly vulnerable victims of domestic abuse.
These actions include contacting other local authorities where adults may have
contact with children from previous relationships. Drug and alcohol misuse
features in many of the cases discussed. Drug and alcohol services are
commissioned to provide a good range of support services to parents, including
outreach services and structured treatment programmes. Local authority data
show that drug misuse is more prevalent across the county with 715 parents
accessing a structured drug treatment programme, in comparison to 208
parents accessing a structured alcohol dependency programme.
emergency duty social work team, covering adult and childrens services, and
the adolescent intervention team (Team AIT) provide out-of-hours support
across the county. These services have seen a significant rise in referrals due to
family breakdowns and young people presenting challenging behaviour. Team
AIT reports considerable success (in 92% of cases) in responding to crisis and
preventing young people from becoming homeless. There are monthly
homelessness prevention panels, Night Stop emergency accommodation and
supported lodgings. Link social workers also work with the young people and,
when appropriate, with their families, to create the conditions for a return
home. A commissioned service provides accommodation and has a non-eviction
policy. The service assesses the level of support young people need and can
offer a range of solutions. For example, Frome Foyer has 12 beds and two
emergency beds for those in need of high levels of support. Some of the young
people here move on to a supported accommodation service for adults with
mental health difficulties.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Inadequate

Summary
There are promising signs of improvement and some positive individual work has
been seen. However, serious and widespread failings remain in the local authority
and these leave looked after children at risk. There are currently 482 looked after
children in Somerset and this figure has remained fairly static, dropping slightly from
Children experience too many changes in their lives. The high turnover of staff at
social worker and team manager level means that children are unable to form
meaningful and long-term relationships with significant people in their lives. The
management of their needs, including high risk issues such as going missing or child
sexual exploitation, are weakened as a result of these changes.
Management awareness and the availability of accurate data on children who go
missing from care and who are at risk of child sexual exploitation are poor, and lists
are not aligned across partnerships. Local information held is not always accurate by
area or for individual cases. As a result, these risks are not managed well.
There is no clear, agreed process for permanency planning for children, resulting in
drift and delay in the majority of cases. Not all staff feel confident in undertaking
complex work and the workforce is insufficiently experienced in permanency planning
to secure consistent and timely outcomes for all looked after children.
There is insufficient management oversight in case work and insufficient challenge
by the IROs in relation to care planning.
Placement stability data on three moves or more is showing an improving picture,
and stability data for children who have been in a continuous placement for over two
years has also improved.
Insufficient progress has been made to improve educational outcomes and progress
and attendance for children in care fall off sharply as they go into secondary school.
Support to help care leavers into education and employment is not sufficiently
robust. The proportion of care leavers in Somerset who are not in education
employment or training (NEET) is significantly high.
The quality of assessments, care plans for looked after children, pathway plans and
the recording of visits requires improvement. Too many care plans lack sufficient
detail, or are unclear about the required outcome and the actions needed to achieve
this.


This figure has remained fairly static, dropping slightly from 515 in December
looked after children who are, or could be, at risk of child sexual exploitation or
of going missing. Systems to ensure oversight of these risks are not in place
and management on a case by case basis is not consistently accurate. This
seriously compromises the capacity for childrens services to understand the
scale and prevalence of the issue and to be able to successfully target
resources to support children at risk of harm.
build consistent and enduring relationships with their social workers. Although
senior managers have recognised the need to prioritise permanent staff for
looked after children, in practice this has not happened due to staff shortages.
Frequent changes of social worker were the key concern of the foster carers
who met inspectors. They gave examples of children they had cared for having
had seven social workers in two years, three social workers in five months and
three social workers in ten weeks. Many of the young people who met with
inspectors confirmed that they had experienced this level of disruption.
led to a poor social work experience for many children. However, in cases seen
where looked after children did have a permanent social worker over a
sustained period of time, inspectors saw evidence of good relationships for
children, with social workers knowing children well and undertaking more
accurate assessments and developing more effective plans for them.
Inexperienced or newly qualified social workers are holding too many high risk
cases, including missing and child sexual exploitation. In some cases seen, they
have managed to undertake this work very well despite frequent changes of
line manager and a lack of management oversight.
with oversight and decision making being too variable and some staff reporting
feeling unsafe and unsupported. These are issues relating to workloads,
pressures and the general working environment for social workers. Not all staff
receive consistent, reflective supervision or feel appreciated and supported.
Some social workers report having had three team managers since April 2014.
In another area, there has been a turnover of 14 different managers over the
last two years, which had been unsettling for staff and has further hindered the
improvement of practice.
cases seen, and the children were found appropriate placements to meet their
needs. This demonstrates a strong understanding of the threshold into care in
recent practice, although intervention was not always timely. In a few cases
seen, children were left too long before being accommodated or were returned
home too quickly to situations where risk remained.


progressing plans for children and young people. Permanency planning
processes are unclear and the quality of work in this area is too variable. Senior
managers have recognised this difficulty and put in two new family finding
posts and established a Permanence Panel, but, at the time of the inspection,
the process for determining a permanence pathway for a looked after child
remained unclear. It is uncertain who will call and chair a permanency planning
meeting. Given the relatively inexperienced staff group within the looked after
children teams, changes of managers, and the lack of a structure for an agreed
permanency planning process, risks remain in achieving permanence for some
children.
reviews, but not always in a purposeful way that identifies what actions are
required when and by whom. Assessments to establish whether family
members or friends could provide a viable alternative to the child being looked
after are discussed at reviews, but these are not always conducted
concurrently. The quality of these viability assessments is too variable and they
do not always reach a firm conclusion about a placement that could offer
permanence. As a result, potential alternatives to care which could enable
children to be brought up within their wider family and friends networks are not
being explored quickly or thoroughly enough.
proceedings, from 56 weeks in 201213 to 40 weeks in 201314. The timescale
for current cases is between 35 and 45 weeks against a target of 26 weeks, so
children still face delays in decisions being made about their futures. The
Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) has raised
concerns about the quality of work being submitted to court. However, court
work sampled by inspectors is of an adequate quality and is supported and
quality assured through close overview and advice from designated solicitors in
the local authority. PLO work is generally being undertaken well, with PLO
letters written by social workers that are clear and well evidenced. However,
some cases seen showed a repeat initiation of the PLO process within a short
timescale.
been in their current placements for more than two years without permanence
plans being made for them. The lack of drive through the review process to
secure permanence for these children has been inadequate and remains a
worrying feature. The use of Special Guardianship Orders (SGO) is very low,
with 10 children leaving care through SGOs during 201314; at 3% of those
leaving care, this is well below the national average of 11% and places the local
authority in the bottom performing 5% of authorities against this measure.
Foster carers spoke of their concern about having to negotiate a package of
support individually, although an agreed standard support package is currently
being finalised for special guardians.


children return or are placed back at home on a care order. Some work seen by
inspectors was reactive, and assessments were not always thorough and did
not show clearly where changes have been made to support a return home.
Management oversight is not always robust. This is of concern where some
teenagers have removed themselves from being accommodated. Inspectors
saw some worrying cases where the local authority has been passive in its
response to the risks experienced by teenagers, including one young girl
returning home and becoming homeless and having to rely on friends.
being met, but not to the required level of quality that could deliver an effective
service for children. Children are visited regularly, with the proportion of looked
after children without a recorded visit in December 2014 being just 1.8%.
However, it is not always clear if they are seen alone, and the recording of
visits varies too widely. Action required as a result of visits is not always clear.
Although inspectors saw some good assessment and care plans, many of those
seen were too simplistic and basic, without achievable targets to secure better
outcomes for children.
children, including in some high risk cases. Some social work practice shows
childrens needs are known and responded to, for example, a social worker who
ensured that a young person had a night light for their first night in a new
placement, and another helping a young person to write out their aims for the
next month, six months and year. Some good examples were also seen of
supporting issues relating to diversity, including joint work with a traveller
liaison officer and the provision of a transgender support group for young
people.
although there has been a slight downturn in performance, from 98% in
December 2013 to 95.6% in December 2014. IROs cite high caseloads in
excess of 80 as being a contributory factor in this decline. The quality of
reviews is too variable, though some good examples were observed, and many
children experience more stable relationships with the IRO service than with
their social workers. Greater challenge needs to be evident on the progress of
care plans during the review process. However, IROs report that the practice
culture is one that does not support open challenge as it is seen as criticism by
some social workers. In a small number of cases, young people have chaired
their own reviews, and they feel this has worked well.


picture, from 15% of children at 31 March 2013, to 12% at 31 March 2014 and
continuous placement for over two years has also improved, from 53% of
children at 31 March 2013 to 61% at 31 March 2014. However, this latter figure
is still well below the England average of 67% of children and, on its average
performance over the last three years, the local authority is within the worst
improvement in the last year, but this is early improvement which needs to be
accelerated and embedded.
to ensure that all children make their expected progress and achieve their
potential in education, or progress to employment by the time they leave care.
The virtual school has been slow in developing a rigorous and robust approach
to the educational needs of looked after children. With the appointment of a
new headteacher in September 2014, some improvements have been made,
although looked after children continue to experience too many school moves
when changing care placements. Data is not robust enough to ensure that
childrens attainment and attendance are consistently monitored and supported.
the very low figure of 19% for 2013, it was still well below national and
regional averages of 48% and 43% respectively. Key Stage 4 results improved
in 2014 from poor results in 2013, although the achievement gap between
children in care and other young people in the county by the time they leave
school is not closing quickly enough. According to the local authoritys own
data, the gap is above the national average, at 41% compared to 31%
nationally for those achieving five good GCSEs including English and maths.
end of Key Stage 2 in primary school, but progress and attendance for looked
after children all off sharply as they go into secondary school. Not enough
support is in place to make sure that looked after children do not miss out on
their education. Absence rates for looked after children are high in comparison
to other local authorities, with 6.2% of children looked after children identified
as persistent absentees in 2013, compared to statistical neighbours at 5.9%
and the national average of 5%. Improving these rates is a key objective of the
virtual schools development plan for 2014-2017.


plans of looked after children including absences from school, with a
determination to improve outcomes. Too many looked after children (15%) are
missing education through not having full-time provision in place; some have
been on part-time timetables for two years or more, and the virtual school is
looking into this for each individual. While there have been no permanent
exclusions of looked after children since 2010, 14% had at least one fixed term
exclusion in 2013/14, which is considerably worse than the national average of
five children, their quality remains too variable and some do not drive childrens
achievement well enough. Examples seen did not show what had made a
difference to the child or young persons achievements. The process does not
ask children and young people about their interests and ambitions in enough
depth to make a difference for each individual. PEPs are not systematically
quality assured and do not yet provide a secure system to monitor and evaluate
the effectiveness of Pupil Premium funding.
easily identify where they have made a difference. Some of the young people
who spoke to inspectors did not feel that their social workers made good
decisions on their behalf, expressing concern about distant placements and
unreliable transport making it harder for them to see their brothers and sisters.
They knew how to make a complaint, and a number had done so. The children
in care council has made changes to the complaint leaflet to make it more user
friendly for children and young people. It is delivered in the quarterly mailing of
the Who Cares magazine to all looked after children and care leavers, including
two young people who are in youth offending institutions.
shows that children made 32 complaints in 20132014; 10 of these children
were supported by an advocate. Complaints show that children are unhappy at
the number of placement moves they have experienced, a view confirmed by
inspectors findings that children are experiencing too many moves. Complaints
are not always responded to in a timely manner.
children. In the last year, 331 young people were referred, and currently 50
looked after young people have an advocate mentor allocated to them. The
local authority plans to increase this number.
model for ensuring that childrens services have enough suitable placements to
meet demand, but sufficiency plans are not yet specific enough and do not
include targets or timescales. The local authority is beginning to improve the
sufficiency and choice of foster placements. The quality of materials used to
recruit foster carers is high; these include a new website and leaflets that
provide case studies on the target groups of young people where greater
capacity is required.


target by two carers, up overall from 45 in 2013 to 62 in 2014. Every foster
carer spoken to said that they would recommend fostering for Somerset. They
value both the training they receive. One carer told inspectors that they have
every opportunity to do any amount of training. Another said Ive been
praised and Ive been questioned. I found this useful. It helps me reflect and
become better. Foster carer assessments and annual reviews are generally of a
good quality.
outcomes, including placing children with attachment difficulties. The local
authority has demonstrated strong performance in foster to adopt work,
resulting in some very young babies being placed quickly in placements that
could become their long-term adoptive homes, minimising placement moves for
these children. There has been a reduction in the use of residential placements
for looked after children, from 65 young people in residential provision in
December 2013 to 46 young people in December 2014.
looked after children since the last inspection, although the recording of health
information needs to be improved. Nationally published data as at 31 March
in Somerset at 86% of children than the England average of 84%. As of
January 2015, 91.6% of initial and review health assessments combined were
up to date. Use of the Strengths and Difficulty Questionnaires (SDQ) to monitor
childrens emotional wellbeing has increased steadily, rising from a very low
unvalidated local authority figures, to 58% in December 2014. The outcomes
from these SDQs are now helping to inform a more targeted approach to
childrens wellbeing. The local authority has also introduced an interactive
sexual health app that can be used directly with young people, and is in the
process of finalising a health passport.
looked after children. The specialist CAMHS team, education support teams and
social workers work together to support childrens mental health and wellbeing,
seeking to ensure timely access to an appropriate level of service. Social
workers and foster carers report that it can be difficult to access appointments
speedily. In 2014, 162 looked after children were referred for specialist
services. Urgent assessments are carried out where children and young people
are showing significant symptoms of depression, suicidal thoughts, and
symptoms of Anorexia Nervosa or deterioration in their emotional well-being.
CAMHS social workers attend the monthly looked after tracking panels to
support better identification and responses to children needing a CAMHS
service.


support and contact from their social workers. Children say that when they do
have contact, it is good. They say that they have access to education and
health services and to opportunities to attend leisure activities. Contact with
family and friends is arranged through the home where they are living, and one
young person was pleased that her new placement was closer to where her
mother lived, so keeping in contact was made easier for her.
people placed some distance from Somerset, to assure themselves that children
were being visited regularly and to assess the quality of social work practice
children were receiving. The audit showed that social workers were visiting
children placed at a distance regularly. However, this was not always the view
of children living away from home. The audit found improvements in the
recording of why the placements are made. Challenges remain in ensuring that
carers have sufficient information about the children in their care to enable
them to understand and fully support their needs.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
year, bringing its performance close to comparable authorities. Figures for
after due to an adoption order being made, 31% were aged five years and over
and in one case, siblings aged three and six years were matched with adopters
within six months of their Placement Orders being granted. The overall
percentage of looked after children adopted during the year increased from 6%
in 201213 to 16% of children in 201314, although this level of performance
was below the England average of 17%.
(December 2014) is good. It shows that across all three indicators Somerset is
performing as well as or better than the England average. The three-year
average time between a child entering care and moving in with its adoptive
family (for children adopted) is shorter in Somerset at 560 days than the
England average of 628 days. Figures show this is a year on year improving
picture for Somerset.
adversely affected by an inconsistent quality of practice. There is an absence of
robust family finding arrangements, and this has caused delay in some cases.
There are no formal family finding meetings to evidence the progress made,
the interest being generated or what strategies need to be employed to secure
an adoption placement. In a few cases seen, there is a lack of urgency in
adoption work, with sequential rather than parallel planning taking place. Social
workers have commented on the low number of Prospective Adopter Reports
(PARs) sent to them to consider and the lack of placement choice.


exploration of diversity was seen in one PAR of a prospective adopter from a
traveller background, but most assessments lacked sufficient analysis of the
information presented. Language and terminology were not always appropriate
for a formal report and potential vulnerabilities were insufficiently considered.
Permanency options were well set out in CPRs, but diversity was not adequately
considered. Some CPRs lacked information on siblings who were also looked
after by the local authority. Descriptions of children were often reported to
come from foster carers, suggesting that social workers do not know their
children well.
workers affect the suitability and timeliness of matches. One adopter talked
about the lack of experience of both the childs social worker and adoption
social worker, and the need for them to continually seek guidance from their
managers.
minutes from one case reflect a lack of experience and understanding in
adoption work and poor social work support. For example, the minutes noted
periods without an allocated social worker, social workers not knowing the child
well enough, differing perceptions of agencies responsibilities and foster carers
taking the lead.
from that point managers monitor childrens progress along the adoption
journey. The adoption team manager attends tracking panels to consider
children who may need an adoption placement, so that links with family finders
can be made at an early stage.
agency refers children to the Adoption Register and the South West Adoption
Consortium and it advertises in publications such as Be My Parent. The local
authority was involved in two Adoption Activity days last year, but adopters and
workers involved did not regard them as helpful in securing links. Adopters
have access to childrens profiles via a secure electronic link.
households. Foster to Adopt is being explored with adopters during their
assessments and, in some cases seen by the inspection team, the issue had
been given careful consideration. Inspectors saw good pieces of work, enabling
babies to be placed with their permanent carers at an early stage, and in one
case a baby was placed with an older sibling.


have a potential match with adopters. The local authority is actively seeking
prospective families for the remaining five children waiting. Some children are
currently being fostered with Multi-Treatment Foster Carers and receiving
intensive support intended to bring about greater emotional stability and a
reduction in problem behaviours, with a view to them being able to move
successfully into adoption placements in a timely manner.
considered for links. This leaves only four in-house adopters available to be
considered for a match until numbers increase.
authority to place a child and deciding on a match to an adoptive family was
shorter at 156 days than the England average of 217 days.
within the required six month timescale is not good. Not all prospective
adopters go through the assessment and approval process in a timely manner.
Figures show that since the introduction of the process, of families who had
completed both stages, only 24% had completed stage one within the two
month timescale and 89% within the four month timescale at stage two.
Adopters spoken to have had mixed experiences. For example, one adopter
described a clunky and elongated process where she had had three social
workers prior to panel. Another adopter had progressed through both stages
swiftly, but said she was aware of other prospective adopters from stage one
who were still waiting for an assessment social worker to be allocated to
undertake their assessment. All adopters spoken to valued the preparation
course and had a good experience at the adoption panel.
show clear and careful consideration of the issues relating to approval and
matching. The panel has a range of members on the central list, including
adopters and adoptees. It was noted that the medical adviser had only
attended one out of seven recent panels, and one adopter spoken to talked of a
delay in matching due to lack of clarity regarding a medical issue.
recommendations, which are considered by the agency decision maker (ADM)
within timescales. The panel chair and agency decision maker work closely
together to discuss any emerging practice issues.


is limited. One adopter talked of the lack of support, purchasing therapy herself
for her adopted child, and a lack of training provided for adopters. She felt that
the post-adoption support helpline was impersonal and did not encourage
adopters to seek help at times of crisis. Adoption figures for 201314 show that
agency has not been able to supply current figures for the number of requests
for assessment of post-adoption support and how many have been declined.
This lack of management information makes it more difficult for the authority to
evaluate and plan services.
approximately 350 of these. This leaves a high percentage of families at risk of
not receiving any level of service to support contact with birth children. Fifteen
families are receiving support in supervised direct contact, and birth parents are
offered counselling and support through a commissioned service following the
making of an adoption order.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is inadequate
unclear what plans are in place for their futures, including suitable
accommodation and employment opportunities. The proportion of pathway
plans completed for care leavers aged 18 years and over has increased, to 91%
of care leavers from 85.1% (November 2014). The proportion of completed
plans for young people aged 16 to 18 years remains much lower, at 65%. Most
care leavers spoken to said that they had been involved in compiling their plan,
but this does not always happen and the level of young peoples involvement is
not clear from the paperwork. In one case, the team manager reported that the
young person had been the least involved in his plan, but it read as though
he had participated fully.
described well, but actions and timescales to drive plans forward are not
specific enough. Pathway plans are not independently reviewed, which means
that decisions lack scrutiny and challenge. The date of the last review of the
plan is not recorded. These weaknesses make it difficult to see if reviews are
happening, if they are happening on time and if progress is being made against
the targets agreed for young people.


accommodation vacancies, rather than the assessed needs of young people,
determining the options available. There are significant gaps in provision. For
example, 75 care leavers are parents, caring for 83 children, but only one
dedicated mother and baby flat is provided in one of the local authority units.
Not all care leavers are suited to large hostel provision, and one care leaver
spoke of feeling unsafe and antagonised by other residents. Four providers are
contracted to provide housing support and services for 16 to 25 year-olds.
Leaving care workers concurred with the service Annual Report, which noted
that there is a need for a better geographical spread of accommodation, and
that support staff need more training to assist young people regarding abuse,
mental health, sexual exploitation and domestic abuse. Inspectors agreed with
the services own assessment and saw examples of care leavers repeatedly
losing accommodation as a result of poor support from providers or issues such
as drug use or criminal behaviours not being addressed.
local authority data for January 2015 show that 44 (9.7%) out of the 454 care
leavers are not in suitable accommodation. The authority knows this is too
many and is working with housing providers to improve the range and
geographical spread of accommodation for care leavers. At the time of the
inspection, two young people were in custody, four in bed and breakfast, 17
(3.7%) of no fixed abode/sofa surfing and 12 (2.6%) were not in touch with
the local authority. Sixteen (3.5%) young people were reported to be living in
houses of multiple occupation which are deemed as suitable by the local
authority. Those care leavers in bed and breakfast accommodation are visited
daily by professionals to ensure that they are receiving sufficient support.
are working well and, through the work of a newly appointed county lead for
Staying Put, a possible 30 more young people have been identified who could
benefit from these arrangements during the next year. A comprehensive
information pack for carers and young people has been developed. The worker
has started to visit foster carers to ensure that they understand the
arrangement and can give full consideration to the young persons future
stability.


robust. The proportion of care leavers in who are not in education, employment
or training was slightly higher, at 47% at 31 March 2014, than the national
average of 45%. The local authoritys own data shows a continual decline in the
number of care leavers not in education, employment and training throughout
in education or training, and plans to secure their future economic stability are
insufficiently detailed, coordinated and monitored to support their ambitions.
Although care leavers are given encouragement to be ambitious, services are
insufficiently focused to help them overcome the barriers that have built up
through poor guidance in the past. The pathway plans seen by inspectors do
not track or take account of young peoples achievements, nor do they always
make clear what financial and practical support is available to sustain their
education or training.
employment, such as apprenticeships, are limited, with only seven care leavers
in local authority apprenticeships at the time of the inspection. Some smallscale initiatives provided by targeted youth support services and partners
include care leavers among vulnerable young people, but they do not tailor
their services specifically for care leavers. The Jobs, Education and Training
(JET) scheme and the Re-Engage initiative, to re-engage all young people who
gained one GCSE, have had some success with a very limited number of care
leavers, encouraging eight back into education in 2014. Ten care leavers are in
higher education, which is a very low number compared with other similar
authorities, although 13 more are likely to go to university in 2015.
ensure that their health needs are met. Details of GPs, dentists and opticians
are regularly recorded. In some cases, care leavers have had adult mental
health assessments which have led to direct support and signposting to other
relevant services. Case recordings show that some young people benefit from
focused pieces of work with the CAMHS service, such as the Emerging
Personality Disorder team. Leaving care workers report that not all care leavers
are able to access adult mental health services due to different thresholds being
employed; this may result in care leavers needs not always being met.
on early deaths among vulnerable young adults and has prompted the local
authority to reflect on its practice. At the time of the inspection, the report
remained unpublished. However, its findings are informing the local authority
planning on how best to respond to vulnerable young people more effectively.
A protocol for transitions is being devised alongside a panel to consider adult
safeguarding cases. The learning from this local review will be published to
support national learning.


disabilities were transferred to adult social care teams, there was evidence of
social workers co-ordinating services well. A commissioned service also provides
mentors who work with care leavers to support their social development and
encourage attendance at social groups for care leavers, such as the Womens
Activity Group.
certificates and passports. Case records show that if the young person does not
have these documents then there is action in place to obtain them or ascertain
their whereabouts. Care leavers do not have a letter detailing their health
history. This is an important omission for those seeking medical treatment. The
local authority is aware of this concern and is currently piloting a health
passport for care leavers.
their phone numbers and those of managers when they need help or support.
The local authority reports that they are in touch with all but 12 (2.6%) of their
care leavers.
drug and alcohol misuse, mental health, self-harming, benefits and
entitlements. This suite of training courses assists them to offer guidance and
good support to care leavers. Workers are trained in the use of screening tools
to gain an understanding of care leavers knowledge and ability regarding their
needs relating to health, education, training, employment, and identity and
independence skills. Scores from these tools are used to assess risk and
indicate when to refer to specialist support.
drop ins, job clubs and social groups. However, the provision is patchy with
young people in some areas, such as Shepton Mallet and Frome, having little or
no provision. Some commissioned providers offer group work support for care
leavers to develop independence skills, and leaving care workers tailor
individual packages of support.
consider changes and improvements needed to leaving care services. They
meet with managers and attend the Corporate Parenting Board to present their
views. They know they are beginning to have an influence and make a
difference. For example, they are helping to raise awareness about the need to
improve accommodation for care leavers including a better geographical spread
of housing options across Somerset. They are confident in raising issues.
Achievements are celebrated at an annual event along with looked after
children.


including A Guide To Leaving Care in Somerset. The local authority website
also contains useful documents on rights and benefits, finances, support in
education and training, emergency accommodation, accessing files, the
corporate parenting pledge and Get Set (early help and support). Care leavers
spoken to are aware of how to make a complaint, and had used this process.


Key judgement
Leadership, management and
governance

Judgement grade
Inadequate

Summary
The scale and depth of the weaknesses identified in the local authoritys childrens
services are significant.
Ofsted inspections, which identified services as being adequate in 2012 and
inadequate in 2013, a multi-remit inspection in 2014 which confirmed services were
not at the required level, a DfE Improvement Notice in 2013 and numerous actions
plans, have ensured that leaders are aware of the significant failings in childrens
services. However, despite knowing of these failings, progress to improve outcomes
for children over a period of time has been slow and laboured.
A legacy of continual changes within the senior leadership team over the past ten
years, a pattern of instability across the workforce, an over-reliance on the use of
agency staff and an absence of effective partnership working have led to a service
that has struggled to draw together a cohesive and strategic approach to improve
services for children. Throughout this time, poor management oversight throughout
all levels of the organisation, weak practice, stagnation in early help and a culture
that managers and social workers say has inhibited change have been allowed to
permeate into childrens services. These are seriously affecting the lives of children
and families.
Oversight, scrutiny and challenge from corporate leaders have not been sufficiently
robust and embedded in the governance arrangements for childrens services.
Consequently, chronic instability at all levels of the organisation, poor practice and a
culture of mistrust have been allowed to become embedded.
Appointments of a new Chief Executive in May 2014, a new interim Director of
Children Services in November 2014 and a new Improvement Board chair in
September 2014 have led to some very early but promising signs of recovery. Whilst
the scale and challenge for childrens services remain far-reaching, there is a sharper
focus on reducing organisational churn, stemming the flow of movement,
performance management and championing the needs of children.
A detailed assessment, which has just been completed, of what it is like for children
in families who are experiencing significant drug and alcohol problems, will inform
the development of targeted services for children and families living in highly
vulnerable situations. The Health and Wellbeing strategy 20132018, which sets out
the partnerships shared vision, has the potential to add weight to the need for a
better coordinated approach to service provision for children and families.


years, and in particular since the last inspection, has disrupted any prospect of
improving services for children. As a consequence, there has been a lack of
sustained improvement in most areas of children services. Children are
experiencing too many changes in their lives. Until recently, social workers have
not been confident to raise issues within the organisation, which has seen a
high number of whistle-blowing concerns raised with Ofsted. Children have
complained to inspectors, and were seen to be still carrying their frustrations at
the decisions made about their care. Families have been angry at the lack of
consideration given to their views and have said so to inspectors. Partner
agencies have felt excluded and describe a culture that has put barriers in the
way of progress.
leadership team, and say that progress against the improvement plan over the
last four months is starting to take shape and that change is now tangible. Staff
report that morale is improving, the culture is more open and that they feel less
threatened. Partner agencies say that communication and practice is better and
more focused.
Notice, childrens services are starting to know and understand what has to be
done to ensure that children receive a better and more consistent approach to
their needs. The improvement plan has recently become sharper, more focused
on specific and measurable targets and is being used well to pick up pace. It is
still early days and, as a consequence, any change achieved remains fragile,
but staff report hopeful signs.
Somersets Childrens Trust and Scrutiny panel have not been sufficiently
robust. As a consequence, chronic instability at all levels of the organisation,
poor practice and a culture of mistrust have been allowed to persist.
many children have to wait until their circumstances become worse before they
receive help, and in many cases are subject to repeat referrals, which at 29%
were higher than the England average level of 25% at 31 March 2014.
understanding across the partnership of how and where to access them is
limited. Early help hubs across the four localities and the recent appointment of
a CAF coordinator are helping to drive this work forward. The use of the CAF
has increased significantly since September 2014 and the number of lead
professionals from different agencies is also showing an improving picture,
ensuring a better understanding of a shared responsibility across the
partnership to the early needs of children and families.


there is a lack of collaborative practice across the partnership to safeguard
children. Some partners are absent from critical case and planning meetings. As
a consequence, managers and social workers feel the responsibility to
safeguard and protect children at risk of exploitation remains solely theirs.
Multi-agency approaches to the planning and delivery of services is beginning
to develop, for example, through the child sexual exploitation sub group, but
this is at an early stage and has yet to demonstrate sustained involvement from
all partners to improve outcomes for children. Thresholds are not consistently
understood or applied by all partner agencies, including the police and health
partners, and more work needs to be done to improve this.
that it requires a more integrated approach from across the partnership, to
provide effective services and improve outcomes for children and families,. A
legacy of poor partnership working over a number of years has restricted the
development of such an approach. The voluntary sector confirms a different
attitude is now evident in more recent practice and is beginning to regard
themselves as part of a more cohesive approach to supporting families.
Contracts are now evidence based with commissioned services reporting on
how interventions and support are improving outcomes for children and
families. There is a range of county wide services to support children under 18
living with substance misusing parents, children living with domestic violence,
support groups for young carers and advice and support for care leavers. Some
tensions exist between the local authority, health partners and the voluntary
sector in ensuring there is sufficient mental health support for children and
families. There is some confusion about the current referral pathways in place
to access mental health services and a view that thresholds for mental health
services are too high.
and, crucially, at team manager level means that social workers do not benefit
from good supervision or the opportunity to develop trusting relationships with
their managers. There are few opportunities for coaching and modelling good
practice by managers, which is important for social workers if they are to
develop positive practice. Decision making and the oversight of social work
practice by team managers is not consistent. This means that practice
standards have not been established and the quality of social work remains too
variable.
workers mean that there has been a delay in applying the PLO process in a
number of cases. Difficulties in getting cases listed at court, assessments not
always completed on time, change of professional midway through the process,
and change of case direction have all added to delay and drift in court
proceedings. Decisions about childrens future plans take too long. Cafcass and
legal services report inconsistencies in the quality of paperwork submitted by
the local authority and are concerned by the number of changes in social
workers on some cases.


evidence of increased capacity within the team, there remains a heavy reliance
on the use of agency staff to plug the gaps. Children are not always seen
before reviews and actions are not always progressed between reviews. The
challenge that the IRO service brings to case work and social work practice is
not always seen as a positive contribution to the improvement of social work
practice. Developing and strengthening the role to enable IROs to progress
plans in a purposeful way for children and to improve practice is critical to
supporting the improvement agenda.
positive impact on practice. For example, the replacement of the pod structure
with assessment, safeguarding and looked after teams has improved how work
flows through the system. The Signs of Safety model has been adopted and is
now starting to be embedded well across the service. It has given social
workers a strong framework on which to develop their practice, to challenge
their thinking and better consider risks.
and young people and has involved them in setting priorities through surveys in
schools and colleges. The JSNA is used to highlight issues to which
commissioners respond, for example, a road safety campaign to reduce the
number of traffic accidents involving 11 to 17 year-olds. Supporting the JSNA
report, a Hidden Harm assessment shows that 18% of the 465 children with a
child protection plan in place are living in families where drugs, alcohol, mental
health and domestic abuse present as significant factors in their lives. The
assessment shows that it is estimated that 6,300 children are living in
households were domestic abuse is a regular occurrence, and 800 of these
households are considered high risk. Targeting resources and progressing the
early help agenda now requires a swifter response to ensure that vulnerable
families are better supported.
vision for improving the health and wellbeing of children and families living in
Somerset. It sits alongside other key documents to support the improvement of
services across the partnership. It recognises that a more integrated way of
working is required between childrens services and health partners to reduce
the need for numerous assessments and achieve a better coordinated approach
to service provision for families, but there is little evidence of these ideals being
implemented.
model for ensuring that childrens services have enough suitable placements to
meet demand, but sufficiency plans are not yet specific enough, and do not
include targets or timescales.


been a reduction in the use of locum staff over the last four months. Whilst the
overall staff turnover rate stands at 18%, the highest turnover is amongst
frontline staff. A number of initiatives are in place to secure better retention of
staff and reduce the continual churn within the workforce. A number of
experienced staff have been supported to gain social work degrees through the
Open University, and social workers from a USA international social work
programme have helped to build capacity in the workforce. The support
package offered to newly qualified social workers has attracted a number of
new staff into the organisation. They are benefiting from smaller case loads,
reflective practice sessions and a programme of training and development. One
social worker described her training as inspirational.
as a stable presence in the authority. He knows that progress to improve
services and outcomes for children has been too slow and that the authority
has been too inward-looking. Since his permanent appointment, he has sought
support from outside the organisation and has shown, and led, willingness for
the organisation to learn best practice from other local authority childrens
services, including how to recruit and retain staff and what a good quality
assurance model looks like. He is eager to help staff to know what good looks
like, and knows that the organisation has to be more outward looking if
services are to move forward much more effectively than they have in the past.
services. She knows that progress to improve services in the past has been too
slow and that a rapid response is now required by the partnership to secure
better outcomes for children and families. Elected members have knowledge
about the role of the Corporate Parenting Board and understand the
responsibilities involved, but need to strengthen this through more focused
scrutiny and action.
potential to provide a robust case auditing and management oversight model
for the department. However, it is not yet delivering a much needed level of
scrutiny to performance management.
that they felt listened to. They meet regularly with members of the Corporate
Parenting Board and are involved in changing and improving services. They
gave examples of influencing changes to the clothing allowances for children in
care, increasing apprenticeships in the authority and assisting in the leaflets
developed for young people. They expressed frustration at the number of
changes in their lives and the number of moves they are expected to tolerate.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children is inadequate
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
inadequate.

Summary of findings
The LSCB is inadequate because:
Scrutiny and assurance
 The LSCB has failed to successfully challenge the lack of a collaborative
partnership approach to Somersets safeguarding agenda.
 The LSCB has not assured itself that the Children Missing and Child Sexual
Exploitation strategy has been effectively implemented in a timely and robust
way. The Board does not know the scale and prevalence of these issues and the
impact on children and young people living in Somerset.
 Whilst the Boards performance management and quality assurance activity is
making improvements in some areas, its challenge and scrutiny are not yet
having sufficient impact on the persistent shortfalls inspectors have found in
frontline safeguarding services.
 The Boards failure to successfully challenge poor police attendance at child
protection strategy meetings is inadequate, and has led to delays in decision
making and investigations into potential risk to some children.
 Thresholds for intervention in Somerset have not been effectively explained and
are not consistently applied across the partnership.
 The early help strategy has not been effectively implemented or well-coordinated
and the Board has not ensured that pathways to early help services are well
understood or promoted.

Learning
 Frontline workers in Somerset were not able to identify learning from serious case
reviews and audit activity. While learning has been disseminated, the Board has
not effectively evaluated the impact of these lessons on practice.
 The Board has not routinely used the views of children and families to inform its
work or measure improvement or impact. Professionals are not able to fully
articulate how the LSCB has influenced their practice.
 The Board has not, until recently, evaluated the impact of training and assured
itself that training leads to improvements in service delivery and outcomes for
children and young people.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
statutory responsibilities to safeguard children.
partnership in relation to children missing and children at risk of sexual
exploitation. The Board needs to drives this agenda more purposefully and that
identification and prevention are well coordinated.
understood and applied across the partnership and results in a well-coordinated
early help offer to children and their families.
strategy meetings and investigations.
Areas for Improvement

Data and performance management
is received and that this is used to effectively scrutinise safeguarding
performance across the partnership.
improvements in outcomes for children and young people in Somerset.
in the work of the Board.

Quality of Practice
intervention consistently when professionals are referring children and their
families to childrens social care services.
improvements in safeguarding practice.
young people in Somerset are further developed and that these are used to
inform the work of the Board.


Inspection judgement about the LSCB
Board is effective. While the chair regularly meets with the Director of
Childrens Services and the Chief Executive, the Board has not successfully
challenged the widespread and serious failings that inspectors identified in help,
protection and care for children and young people.
(HWB) and the Childrens Trust. The Chair of the LSCB is a participating
observer of the Childrens Trust as well as a member of the Childrens
Improvement Board. This ensures that key strategies for improvement and
implementation processes are effectively communicated to the wider Board in a
timely manner.
and Improvement Framework, Quality Assurance Framework and Training
Strategy have provided a clear foundation for the Board to support the
improvement agenda. A revision of the LSCB constitution and action by the
Chair has led to improved attendance from most members at the board.
However, ensuring the consistent attendance by all partners still remains a
challenge.
agencies discharge their child protection and safeguarding functions. The report
identifies areas of poor performance through evaluation of social care and
partners data and the results of audit and quality assurance activity. The report
is user friendly, clear and comprehensive and incorporates both the private
fostering annual report and the LADO annual report. While the Board has
identified key priorities, such as the need to strengthen the early help offer and
improve police support for child protection, progress being achieved in these
critical areas is too slow and this is having a serious impact on childrens safety
and wellbeing.


the LSCB sub-group to drive this strategy forward and implement the action
plan has been far too slow. The scale and prevalence of the issue is not fully
known and understood across the partnership. The profile of alleged
perpetrators, and how well victims are identified, safeguarded and supported
require urgent attention to ensure that the LSCB has a greater influence in
driving a more strategic approach to the work of the partnership going forward.
Arrangements by the LSCB to oversee effective information sharing to help
build a greater understanding of the problem and drive forward a robust multiagency action plan are underdeveloped. The LSCB has completed a multiagency audit; however, work has not been effectively targeted, coordinated or
evaluated until very recently. The impact of this closer focus on child sexual
exploitation has yet to be reflected in consistent practice across the partnership.
The LSCB has, however, ensured that a significant level of awareness raising
regarding child sexual exploitation has taken place across Somerset through
training, and this is resulting in a shared and better understanding of the issues
of child sexual exploitation.
annual LSCB report. Despite some awareness raising across the county,
notifications remain lower than might be expected given the size of the county,
the number of boarding schools in the local authority area and the number of
students attending language courses. The LSCB remains concerned at the low
levels of reporting and continues to raise this as an issue across the
partnership. However, there is no evidence that holding the partnership to
account and raising these concerns is having any impact on improving the
number of notifications and therefore outcomes for children.
reviewed effectively and are updated appropriately to incorporate statutory
responsibilities and changes to practice. However, despite the LSCB promoting
the newly-revised thresholds document, front line workers across the
partnership do not consistently apply these thresholds effectively.
introduced by the LSCB through the work of the Quality and Performance subgroup. Whilst the Board is now providing a sharper scrutiny function and
evaluation of practice, this is a recent improvement and it is not yet making
sufficient impact on poor performance within social care services, the police and
health partners. Persistent weaknesses in key areas continue. For example,
repeat referrals in Somerset continue to rise, and the quality of assessments
and plans remains inconsistent despite ongoing challenge by the LSCB.
significant number of changes to the senior leadership team within the local
authority, as well as the high number of agency social workers. However,
progress has been made in some areas, for example, establishing a multiagency dataset and themed assurance reports to ensure that the Board has a
better oversight of performance across safeguarding services.


now challenges partner agencies performance through a range of activities,
including Section 11 audits, case reviews and action plans arising from Serious
Case Reviews. This focus has resulted in some improvements, for example, the
police, youth offending service and childrens social care have been challenged
over young people being held in police custody overnight. This practice has
now stopped. Additionally, the LSCB has identified shortfalls in safeguarding
practice across maintained schools. However, critical weaknesses remain and
the Boards influence has not been sufficient to successfully challenge poor
police attendance at strategy meetings and their routine involvement in child
protection investigations continues to be inadequate. A recent audit of 12
strategy discussions show that records of five of them failed to identify who
took part in the discussion. Thresholds for services are not widely understood
by some partners and timely contacts and referrals are not always made. For
example, where a large number (36) of cases of concern were referred
together in one batch from the Royal United Hospital Bath to Somerset Direct.
improvements to safeguarding practice. Partners have not worked
collaboratively in a sustained way to ensure that improvements are
implemented across key areas of safeguarding. There are, however, examples
of well-coordinated and targeted work by the LSCB. For example, the LSCB has
worked closely with partners to ensure that the Signs of Safety model has been
successfully implemented; although not fully embedded in practice, it is
providing a framework to support practice development.
Board. The LSCB has successfully engaged a wide range of voluntary sector
representatives as well as three lay members.
people, these are not systematically collected or evaluated and do not
sufficiently inform the work of the LSCB. The Board has identified this as an
area for development and is in the process of developing a programme of
events to better engage children and young people.
notified Ofsted of two other serious incidents which did not meet the serious
case review criteria. Decision making is both timely and robust. Whilst learning
is becoming established and lessons identified are disseminated by the LSCB
through the Salutary Tales briefing, social workers were unable to readily
articulate to inspectors how this has helped to influence service improvement or
their practice. Monitoring of whether lessons learnt lead to improvements in
practice is not robust.


Adults Board in light of a number of unexpected early deaths of vulnerable
young adults aged over 18. The review found that care leavers were
disproportionately represented. The review focused on the effectiveness of
service coordination and delivery and resulted in a number of well targeted
recommendations. For example, the need for better communication with young
people, improved preparation for independence as well as ensuring that they
people know their rights and options. Learning from this review has not been
published to date and whilst there is no comparative data nationally, it is hoped
the publication will inform a greater debate and national learning.
including themed audits on areas such as the childrens workforce and children
looked after as well as early help and safeguarding. However, the quality and
impact of audit activity has been insufficient to ensure meaningful change at
the front line. For example, an early help audit has identified that fundamental
weaknesses persist, through contacts continuing to rise as well as the number
of early help assessments completed remaining low and partner engagement
being poor, despite these issues having been clearly highlighted in previous
inspections. Whilst there are clear mechanisms in place to disseminate key
messages and learning from audit activity, this is not consistently influencing
frontline performance nor leading to sustained improvements in practice.
case audits, and research and quality assurance. The Learning and
Improvement Framework supports agencies to identify and address the
safeguarding training needs of their workforce on a single and inter-agency
basis.
safeguarding training and undertakes an annual training needs analysis that
results in comprehensive and robust pathways to training. However, evaluation
of the impact of this training is underdeveloped. The LSCB has recognised this
shortfall and the framework now has a developing emphasis on evaluating the
impact of learning on practice. This is a recent improvement, the impact of
which is not yet evident.
comprised of appropriate professionals and is well attended and has clear terms
of reference for work undertaken. Regular reports are made to the LSCB as well
as contributions from the annual Child Death Overview Panel being presented
to the Board. Reports identify issues of concern and themes, for example,
obesity, the prevalence of parental mental and emotional health as well as the
risks associated with co-sleeping with infants. These reports have resulted in
well targeted preventative strategies as well as promoting public awareness
across Somerset.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Helen Cawston HMI
Deputy lead inspector Susan Myers HMI
Team inspectors: Neil Penswick HMI, Louise Hocking HMI, Karen Wareing HMI,
Christine Davies HMI, Emmy Tomsett HMI
Quality assurance manager: John Mitchell Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


