South Gloucestershire
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 21 November15 December 2016
Report published: 13 February 2017

Childrens services in South Gloucestershire are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Services for children in South Gloucestershire who need help and protection are
inadequate. Performance management and quality assurance systems have not been
robust enough to alert political and senior leaders to critical weaknesses. In
particular, leaders have not ensured that children with disabilities receive a safe
service that meets their needs and protects them from harm. Despite a recent and
much sharper focus on this service, too many vulnerable children with disabilities
have been left without adequate help or protection. As a result, children have been
left in situations of unmet need and unassessed risk.
A turnaround board, established in 2014, has driven a number of positive and muchneeded changes in childrens services. Strong political support and financial
investment have strengthened the progress that has been made in most areas of the
service. Staff and partners report a further shift in momentum during the past year.
However, practice remains highly variable. Quality assurance systems, improvement
plans and the analysis of performance information have been only partially effective.
Senior and political leaders have not properly understood or appropriately prioritised
the well-being of all children who require help and protection. Senior and operational
managers have not ensured that core social work practice is reliably in place, such as
in the application of child protection thresholds.
For children at risk of harm, strategy meetings are almost always held when they are
needed and, overall, agencies engage well in the initial discussions that take place to
protect children. However, the police do not always attend strategy meetings when
they should. Child protection thresholds are not consistently applied across the
partnership, and this has left some children at risk of harm. The head of service is
reviewing these thresholds, but the review is yet to have an impact. Social workers
are alert to the risk of child sexual exploitation and a commissioned service provides
helpful support, but the analysis of, and response to, the risk of child sexual
exploitation for individual children is inconsistent and confusing. The response to
care leavers at risk of sexual exploitation is weak, and most staff within the leaving
care service have yet to receive training in this area of practice. Appropriate strategic
arrangements and partnerships to understand the local profile of sexual exploitation
are in place, but a lack of coordinated multi-agency operational oversight limits the
partnerships understanding of emerging patterns or trends. When children go
missing from home or care, return home interviews take place and most are helpful,
but children are not seen quickly enough.
When children whose needs are clear are referred to the access and response team,
triage social workers and managers swiftly refer them to the right service. When
childrens needs are less clear, some children experience delays in receiving the help
that they need. Family and young people workers provide helpful support to families
who do not meet the social care threshold, but not enough children have their needs
assessed via an early help assessment. The prevalence of single-agency assessments
and plans means that childrens holistic needs are not fully considered. The impact of
early help is not systematically analysed. Overall, childrens views are heard and


those who are in need receive appropriate support. However, childrens diverse
needs are not well considered in assessments. When 16- and 17-year-olds become
homeless, they receive a timely response and helpful support. Privately fostered
children are not properly assessed and their needs are not adequately managed.
Children who cannot live with their birth families are routinely considered for
adoption and are found caring homes quickly. Children looked after live in good and
stable placements with family members or foster carers. Social workers care about
children and know them well. The Children in Care Council is a lively and engaging
forum at which political and senior leaders listen to the childrens views, but the
group needs to be expanded to increase its impact for all children looked after.
Written assessments for children looked after are seldom in place. Care plans for
children looked after are not always clear about what children need. Risk is not
always responded to well by social workers. Contingency or parallel plans are not
consistently in place for children who live with family or friends. Children looked after
are engaged with their reviews, but independent reviewing officers do not ensure
that all these meetings happen on time, or challenge social workers and managers
sufficiently when plans are delayed. Some foster carers told inspectors that delays in
agreeing delegated authority adversely affect the children in their care.
Management oversight, supervision and decision making vary considerably between
managers. When these are weak, plans for children are not progressed swiftly
enough.
Pathway planning is not meaningful enough. In particular, plans do not help young
people to develop their independence skills and not all care leavers are aware of
their entitlements. Almost all live in suitable accommodation. They are in touch with
their personal advisors, and these relationships are helpful to young people. More
care leavers need to be engaged in employment, education and training, particularly
within council services.
Governance arrangements are in place, although they have not been effective in
identifying and addressing some key service weaknesses. Plans and priorities across
the partnership are becoming increasingly aligned and performance reports are now
shared with the right forums. The collation of performance information is made more
difficult by weaknesses in the client record system. The oversight of caseloads,
including the practice of allocating childrens cases to managers, is not robust.
Practitioners are proud to work for South Gloucestershire and consistently say that
services are improving. They feel well supported and cared for by visible and
approachable managers. They value the training that they receive, particularly in
relation to the chosen model of practice, but the analysis of training needs across the
service is not systematic enough. Social workers do not have sufficient
understanding of domestic abuse within families.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home. It was judged to be good at its
most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
August 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
August 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since January 2013.
 The DCS is also responsible for education, adult and housing services, and public
health and well-being.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is currently vacant,
due to the unexpected resignation of the independent chair, effective from 31
October 2016.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 57,888 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in South Gloucestershire. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 11% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in nursery and primary schools is 11% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 11% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 7.2% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Mixed and Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 7.4% (the national average is 20.1%)
 in secondary schools is 6% (the national average is 15.7%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data, when this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 October 2016, 973 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service during the previous 12
months. This is a reduction from 1,721 at 31 March 2016.
 At 31 October 2016, 153 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 173 at 31 March 2016.
 At 31 October 2016, nine children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement.
 Since the last inspection, four serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and one serious case review has been completed.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 October 2016, the local authority is looking after 168 children (a rate of
at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
authority area
 three live in residential special schools, of whom two live out of the
authority area
area
 three live with parents, none of whom live out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been nine adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after or are now living
in houses in multiple occupation.
The casework model used in this area
 Signs of Safety.


Recommendations

Urgently review all cases currently or recently allocated to managers within
the 025s disability service, ensuring that all children receive a timely service
commensurate to their needs from staff and managers who have the right
skills and experience to help them.


Strengthen arrangements to identify patterns, trends and links for children
who are at risk of sexual exploitation.


With the South Gloucestershire Local Safeguarding Board (SGLSB), implement
clear guidance for staff and managers to ensure that they understand the
steps required to identify, assess and reduce the risk of child sexual
exploitation.


Ensure that the completion of welfare checks in the access and response team
does not delay the provision of help to families and that decision-making is
timely. Strengthen management information systems in the service to enable
managers to monitor timescales more closely.


Ensure that child protection thresholds and decisions, including the application
of the significant harm threshold, are known and understood across the
partnership. Review local procedures and training for staff to ensure that
these, and practice, comply with the requirements of guidance and legislation
and that comprehensive multi-agency information relating to all members of
childrens households inform the analysis of risk. Ensure that all agencies, in
particular the police, engage fully in all relevant child protection processes.


Improve the timeliness of return home interviews for children who go missing
from home or care to understand more quickly why they went missing and
what happened while they were away.


Review the use of South Gloucestershires early help assessment process and
take steps to ensure that agencies work closely together to meet the needs of
individual families. Ensure that, when appropriate, early help plans are in
place, shared with families and informed by an assessment of need.


With the SGLSB and relevant partners, take steps to evaluate the impact of
the provision of early help support for families, using this information to
inform the development of early help services.


Ensure that the new client record system is implemented as quickly as
possible. Ensure that in the intervening period childrens electronic files


properly evidence the work undertaken with children and families and enable
proper sharing of information between teams and agencies.

Improve social workers knowledge and understanding of domestic abuse to
ensure that risks are identified and understood, and lead to the provision of
appropriate support.


Take steps to improve the consistency and timeliness of response to children
who are privately fostered.


Ensure that the diverse needs of children and their families are considered
through assessments and, when appropriate, inform plans for children.


Improve the quality of assessments and plans for children looked after to
ensure that they reflect childrens changing circumstances and needs, and that
they are clear, analytical and focused on improving outcomes.


Improve the early consideration of permanence options for all children who
cannot live with their birth families. Ensure that parallel planning and
contingency plans for children are clearly recorded in their case files.


Undertake a review of the training undertaken by all staff within the service to
ensure that support workers, social workers and managers are properly
equipped to understand the risks and needs relating to, for instance, missing
protocols, child sexual exploitation and domestic abuse.


Implement clear standards for recording within the children in care team, to
include the recording of management decisions and supervision. Ensure that
regular and good-quality supervision and performance appraisal are evident
across all teams within the service.


Improve the timeliness of childrens looked after reviews and strengthen the
role of the independent reviewing officer service in challenging plans that are
not progressed quickly enough for children.


In partnership with care leavers, review the pathway planning process so that
it is meaningful to young people and is more helpful in ensuring that their
outcomes improve.


Take further steps to close the gap between care leavers and all local young
people in relation to employment, education and training. Increase
opportunities for care leavers to work, train and gain employment experience
within the council.



Make sure that all care leavers are aware of, and are regularly reminded
about, their entitlements as care leavers.


Ensure that the quality assurance framework is effective in ensuring that
managers and leaders at all levels understand strengths and weaknesses in
the provision of help, protection and care of children in every part of the
service. Make sure that quality assurance activity, including complaints,
properly informs actions and plans. Ensure that whole and individual service
plans properly prioritise actions to address critical weaknesses.


Implement caseload management guidance, including clear standards relating
to the allocation of work to managers.


Summary for children and young people
 Ofsted last inspected services for South Gloucestershire children who need help,
protection or care in 2012. At that time, inspectors judged services to be
adequate. In 2014, senior managers decided that they needed to make some big
changes and set up a turnaround board. Some improvements have been made.
 This inspection found that too many children, particularly those with disabilities,
are not being properly protected or helped. These families have experienced
distress due to delays in accessing help. Because this is so serious, the
judgement for this inspection is inadequate. Other children, like those who are
adopted, children looked after and care leavers, receive better support.
 Children who are referred to childrens social care because they are at risk are
helped quickly. Families who have problems that are less serious receive support
to stop their difficulties getting worse, although professionals from different
agencies often dont talk to each other to work out what these families need.
 When it is not clear how serious the problems are, it sometimes takes social
workers too long to decide what is needed, and these families have to wait to be
helped.
 When children go missing they arent always seen quickly enough when they
return, to find out why they ran away. When children are seen, the conversations
are helpful.
 Managers and other agencies have worked hard to understand how many local
children are at risk of sexual exploitation. Help is provided to most of these
children, but social workers and managers dont always do the right things to
understand the risks for these children. This means that children are not always
protected well enough.
 When it isnt possible for children to live with their parents, they live in good
homes with family members or foster parents. They go to school regularly, have
fun and talk about the things that worry them. Social workers care about children
and know them well.
 Professionals think carefully about whether children who cant live with their own
families should be found an adoptive family. These children are found loving
homes quickly.
 When young people leave care, they are helped by personal advisors who see
them often and work hard to support them. Pathway plans are long documents
that are often not useful to young people. The office where personal advisors
work isnt a warm or welcoming place for young people to visit.
 Too many care leavers are not in education, employment and training. Senior
managers need to offer these young people more training and job opportunities
within the council.
 Senior managers and local politicians take an active interest in children looked
after and care leavers. They listen to what children say and try to make their lives
happier. They need to help the Children in Care Council grow so that it can better
represent all children in care.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Inadequate

Summary
Senior managers have not taken sufficient and timely action to ensure that
children are safeguarded. Too many children have been left at risk of harm or
without their needs being met.
Serious and widespread weaknesses in the 025 disabilities service have resulted
in large numbers of vulnerable children not receiving the help and protection that
they need. Some 172 children with disabilities have been nominally allocated to
managers yet not had their needs properly assessed, reviewed or met. Many of
these children have high-level needs or require statutory intervention. Some
children and families had not been seen by a social worker for many months.
Some areas of child protection practice are weak. When children are at risk of
harm, most agencies engage with multi-agency strategy meetings, although the
police do not always attend. The risk of significant harm is not always considered
through a child protection section 47 enquiry, and the quality of enquiries is too
variable. The application of child protection thresholds for children at risk of sexual
exploitation is inconsistent, with confusion about the steps needed to analyse and
address risks. A commissioned service provides support, but a coordinated and
agreed approach across the partnership to managing risk is not in place.
Early help assessments are generally of a good quality, but they are not
undertaken for all children who would benefit from one. The family and young
people service provides helpful support. However, not all children receive a
coordinated multi-agency response to their needs. Thresholds for referral to
childrens social care are applied effectively. When the level of need is clear,
children receive a proportionate and timely response. However, delays in
completing welfare checks mean that some children, whose needs are less clear,
wait too long for support.
Single assessments are timely. Support is provided while childrens needs are being
assessed. Childrens voices are evident, but the quality and impact of plans are
variable. Delays in assessing and visiting children who are privately fostered mean
that these childrens circumstances are not properly overseen. Young people who
present as homeless are well assessed, with appropriate provision of help.
Children missing from home are quickly identified and offered return home
interviews. Interviews are detailed and lead to appropriate support. Many return
home interviews do not take place within 72 hours. Effective arrangements are in
place to track children who are missing education.


Inspection findings

At the time of the inspection, 172 children with disabilities were allocated to
the service manager and the team manager responsible for the 025s
disability service. Some of these children have high-level complex and
specialist needs requiring social work assessment, oversight and support.
Others require a lower-level service to oversee and review packages of
support. Sixty children were waiting to be re-allocated following the departure
of a number of social workers from the service. The remaining 122 children
were classed as open for review, and had been appropriately transferred to
the 025s disability service from special educational need coordinators.


Inspectors sampled cases in the children with disabilities service and found
too many children whose needs had not been assessed or reviewed for many
months. Sixty-four children had not been seen by a social worker for over 18
months, and 31 of these children were eligible for a specialist social work
service. Some were at risk of significant harm from domestic abuse or child
sexual exploitation. Others were living in families under acute stress without
appropriate support. Duty systems to respond to parents and professionals
concerns were largely ineffective. (Recommendation)


The 025s disabilities service was transferred from adult services to childrens
services in July 2016. At this point, the head of service established a
turnaround board, chaired by the director of childrens services, to begin to
address the critical weaknesses in the service. Efforts were made immediately
to improve recruitment activity and stabilise the workforce. Steps were taken
incrementally to address the backlog in work and to review some families in
the light of previously unassessed child protection concerns. These actions
have not been timely or effective enough, leaving too many children at risk of
harm and without their needs being met for too long. After inspectors raised
concerns with senior managers, they took swift and decisive action to
understand childrens circumstances and to allocate those identified as the
highest priority.


The early help offer, delivered through the family and young people service
(FYPS) service, provides helpful support for families, including targeted youth
support and parenting programmes. Inspectors saw examples of purposeful
work with families being undertaken by staff from this service, particularly
alongside social workers. However, not all families receive help at the time
they need it, and partners reported that some families wait two to three
months for a service. Although FYPS workers try hard to stay in touch with
fellow professionals, the recording systems in the service are complex,
duplicative and confusing, reducing the ability of staff properly to record and
share their work.



South Gloucestershires single assessments for early help are not sufficiently
embedded in the delivery of early help. Services to families with a range of
needs are often provided without an assessment having been undertaken, and
in most cases that were seen by inspectors, no early help assessment was
evident. Many support plans are single-agency and are of an inconsistent
quality, with professionals working in parallel but with an absence of joined-up
thinking, sharing of information or a coordinated offer of help to meet
childrens needs. The safety mapping tool is often used as a referral, an
assessment and a plan, but it does not contain sufficient information to be
used in this way. It is also frequently the only document that is shared with
families.


Some 87% of children referred to the access and response team (ART) have
not been subject to an early help assessment and, in most cases seen by
inspectors, a large number were passed back to the referrer to undertake this
piece of work. When early help assessments are undertaken, the majority
demonstrate a clear understanding of childrens needs. They lead to helpful
team around the child meetings and appropriate multi-agency packages of
support. A greater number of children and families would benefit from this
coordinated multi-agency response to meet their needs before their problems
become worse. (Recommendation)


Social workers and managers in the ART promptly process all referrals to
childrens social care. Consent from families is routinely and comprehensively
considered, and is recorded on childrens case files. Children who are
immediately identified as requiring early help or social care support are swiftly
referred to the right service. However, the rationale for these decisions is not
always clearly recorded on childrens case files. Delays prevent some children,
for whom further enquiries are needed, from being assessed or receiving help
in a timely way. Inspectors found a large number of children who had waited
in excess of five days for the completion of welfare checks to enable social
workers to decide what help they needed. Senior managers responded quickly
to inspectors concerns and reviewed all cases in this part of the service.
Senior managers also took appropriate action to immediately strengthen the
management oversight and monitoring of this work. (Recommendation)


The emergency duty service has sufficient capacity to respond to requests for
help outside of office hours. A close working relationship between the
emergency duty service and the ART ensures that there is helpful information
sharing and a coordinated response to children in need of help and protection.


When children are considered to be at risk of significant harm, strategy
meetings are held. Multi-agency attendance and sharing of information to


inform decisions about risk are generally good, although inspectors reviewed a
number of cases in which police engagement was considered key yet they did
not attend. The inconsistent engagement with police is of particular concern
for children who are at risk of sexual exploitation. Minutes of strategy
discussions provide a detailed overview of information shared, but the explicit
consideration of the significant harm threshold was absent from the vast
majority of cases seen. There is a lack of clarity about the purpose of these
discussions, with professionals often discussing whether a child protection
conference is needed before a section 47 child protection enquiry has been
undertaken. (Recommendation)

Inspectors identified nine cases when the significant harm threshold had been
met, yet a child protection section 47 enquiry had not been undertaken. This
left children in situations of unassessed risk, for example when multi-agency
checks had not been undertaken to establish the potential risk posed by key
adults in childrens households. Inspectors found a lack of clarity and
understanding about the purpose of section 47 enquiries and, in some cases,
poor attention to responding in a timely way. Section 47 enquiries are variable
in quality and do not always adequately consider needs and risks relating to
brothers and sisters. Adult information, such as that held by health and
probation, is not consistently included. (Recommendation)


In most cases seen by inspectors in which a section 47 child protection
assessment had been undertaken, decisions about whether to convene a child
protection conference were appropriate. However, the rate of these enquiries,
at 121 per 10,000 children, is much lower in South Gloucestershire than
comparators and only 25% of section 47 enquiries result in an initial child
protection conference. In addition, the reduction in the number of children
subject to a child protection plan, from 221 at 31 October 2015 to 153 a year
later, warrants further and closer scrutiny by senior managers. The head of
service has made a promising start to analysing the application of child
protection thresholds and has identified inconsistent decision making by a few
managers who have since left the service. This analysis needs to continue
with greater rigour and focus to ensure that all children who have suffered or
who are likely to suffer significant harm benefit from a comprehensive
assessment of risk and, when appropriate, a multi-agency child protection
plan. (Recommendation)


Childrens views inform conferences and all children are offered an advocate.
Children who spoke to inspectors said that they had found this support to be
helpful. One young person said that these meetings used to scare her, but
that they are now more child friendly. Another said of her advocate, She
tries so hard for us, She does things straight away and She takes time to
understand us.



Child protection conference chairs are suitably experienced and the team is
stable. Inspectors observed well-chaired child protection conferences with a
clear analysis of risks, using the local authoritys chosen approach to
assessment. However, child in need and child protection plans are variable in
quality. They are reviewed within appropriate timescales, but often lack clear
and timely actions. This leads to a lack of targeted support for some children.
Core group meetings are held frequently and records of meetings demonstrate
consideration of progress against plans. Social workers visit children regularly
and work is purposeful. Partner agencies report strong partnership working to
ensure that children are helped and protected. When change is too slow or
the concerns increase for children who are subject to child protection plans,
managers make appropriate decisions to escalate these concerns through the
Public Law Outline.


When children are at risk of sexual exploitation, social workers are alert to
these concerns. However, the local authoritys own case audits have identified
that sexual exploitation risk assessments often lack a clear analysis of risk,
and this is linked to a lack of multi-agency training to enable professionals to
complete these risk assessments well. This was confirmed in cases reviewed
by inspectors.


At the time of the inspection, 19 children were assessed to be at medium or
high risk of child sexual exploitation, including seven children looked after.
Guidance to social workers does not provide sufficient clarity about the
process that they should follow to understand, assess and reduce risk. Cases
seen by inspectors evidenced an inconsistent approach to understanding the
wider needs of children at risk of sexual exploitation. For example, some child
sexual exploitation strategy meetings are overly focused on whether a child
protection conference would be appropriate. Further, child protection section
harm is likely to be met and, when these enquiries are undertaken, they rarely
consider the wider family, including brothers and sisters. While a
commissioned child sexual exploitation service provides targeted help to most
children who need it, overall the impact of work is inconsistent, because it is
not always linked to a comprehensive assessment of risk and need.
(Recommendation)


A child sexual exploitation network meeting is chaired by the police and
appropriately considers perpetrators and disruption activity. Senior managers
and partners recognise that a multi-agency risk management pathway and
panel are needed to consider children at risk of sexual exploitation. This is due
to be launched in March 2017. Consultant social workers provide advice and
support to social workers, and follow up actions about individual children.


However, there is no strategic multi-agency oversight of all children at
moderate or high risk of child sexual exploitation. This is a missed opportunity
to identify links and patterns between children, places and perpetrators.
(Recommendation)

Arrangements for tracking and supporting children who are missing from
home are effective for most children. Children are quickly identified and are
offered meaningful return home interviews by FYPS workers. These
discussions with children and young people frequently lead to targeted
support. Close monitoring of missing children through weekly and monthly
reports enables managers to maintain an overview of numbers of children
who go missing and how many receive a return home interview. Delays in the
police sending notifications about missing children to childrens social care
have adversely affected the timeliness of return home interviews. Through
discussion with police this issue has largely been addressed. However, further
improvement in timeliness is still needed. While 80% of return home
interviews are completed, and 86% of children are contacted within 72 hours
of their return, only 54% of face-to-face interviews occur within 72 hours. In
some cases reviewed by inspectors, children were not seen soon enough after
they had gone missing to allow for a meaningful conversation about what had
happened and why. (Recommendation)


For the majority of children, single assessments are completed in good time.
Managers review timescales for completion to reflect childrens changing
needs. This is a strength. In the vast majority of cases, childrens views inform
assessments, children are seen alone and their wishes are well reflected in
plans. There is good engagement of fathers and wider family members;
inspectors reviewed many cases when fathers had been listened to and helped
to have meaningful and safe relationships with their children. In almost all
cases seen by inspectors, purposeful work takes place while assessments are
being completed. This helps to inform assessments and ensures that families
receive timely support, often during times of crisis.


In some assessments, the focus is predominantly on presenting issues, with
insufficient attention to wider family circumstances and history. Childrens
diverse needs are not well understood or articulated in the majority of
assessments. Almost all assessments are signed by managers, but there is
little evidence that they routinely provide any rationale for their decisions.
(Recommendation)


Domestic abuse referrals are not routinely filtered or screened by the police
and are not all appropriate referrals to childrens social care. This leads to
social workers spending time analysing referrals that do not require a
childrens services response. Social workers do not routinely undertake


domestic abuse risk assessments and few cases are referred to the multiagency risk assessment conference (MARAC) by childrens social care. Social
workers knowledge of domestic abuse is variable and is rarely informed by
research. This limits their ability to assess properly the impact of domestic
abuse on childrens experiences. Children who have experienced domestic
abuse benefit from a support programme, but there is currently a six-month
waiting list. Victims can access the support that they need, but a programme
for perpetrators has yet to be commissioned. When victims and their children
are referred to MARAC, childrens safeguarding needs are carefully considered.
The MARAC process is well established, with a wide range of agencies
engaged, including childrens social care. (Recommendation)

Multi-agency public protection arrangements are effective in managing the low
volume of high-risk offenders. Meetings ensure that risks to children are fully
explored and that there is detailed scrutiny and follow-up.


Awareness raising about private fostering has been undertaken, and the
annual private fostering report covers pertinent areas. However, for a number
of children who are privately fostered, there are delays in completing
assessments. Visiting timescales are not consistently met. (Recommendation)


The needs of the small number of 16 and 17-year-old young people who are
at risk of homelessness are well assessed. Coordinated work with housing
services ensures a timely response to young peoples needs, and decision
making is prompt. Appropriate use is made of emergency accommodation.
Partners have demonstrated their commitment to the new youth housing
panel. Social workers make young people aware of their entitlements,
including, when appropriate, the right to become a child looked after.


At the time of the inspection, 209 children were receiving elective home
education. Of these, 15 have special educational needs. None are children
looked after. Home visits are undertaken at least once a year, and children are
spoken to and their progress is carefully monitored. The local authority holds
an up-to-date register of these children and their families. A safeguarding
officer follows up any safeguarding concerns. However, information about
what the children do once they have completed the statutory phase of their
education is not systematically collected.


Currently, 30 children missing educational provision are tutored by qualified
teachers who receive full safeguarding training. They keep records for each
child on a central register which they review on monthly basis. A new post has
been created to coordinate and oversee progress. None of the children
receiving alternative provision are children looked after. The local authority is
aware of the reasons why the children are not in full-time education. A large


proportion has medical, emotional and special educational needs. An
attendance officer rigorously follows up children missing education in line with
published guidelines and takes appropriate steps to ensure that the
whereabouts of these children are known.

Appropriate processes are in place to ensure that referrals concerning
allegations against staff are responded to promptly, and advice is given to
agencies as needed. Thresholds are consistently applied and a database is in
place to track cases to conclusion. Recording of discussions with concerned
professionals could be further improved.

The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
In order to improve outcomes for children looked after, a specialist looked after
childrens team was established in June 2015. The experiences of children looked
after are getting better, but they require further improvement to be good.
Decisions to look after the majority of children are timely and well considered, but
a small number wait too long to be looked after and, as a result, their
circumstances deteriorate. Most children who leave care to live with a family
member receive effective support. The Public Law Outline is managed well, overall,
although there is delay in achieving permanence for some children. Health
assessments are timely and well considered. Most children live in good-quality local
placements with their brothers and sisters, but not all experience good outcomes.
The fostering service supports carers well, but delegated authority is often
delayed. To improve placement choice, more carers are needed. Children who are
suitable to be adopted are promptly identified, matched and placed with families.
Social workers regularly visit children looked after and know them well, wherever
they live. However, written assessments are not always in place. The independent
reviewing officer (IRO) service reviews most children regularly, but IROs do not
always provide effective challenge to ensure that care plans are progressed
quickly.
The response to children who are at risk of child sexual exploitation is not
sufficiently robust. Return home interviews for children who go missing from care
are helpful, leading to appropriate support, but they are not always timely.
Educational outcomes for children looked after, although improving at key stages 1
and 2, are not yet good enough at key stage 4.


Corporate parenting is well established and senior and political leaders prioritise
the needs of children looked after. The Children in Care Council is increasing in
scope and impact, but senior managers need to do more to ensure that the forum
represents children of all ages and circumstances. The advocacy and independent
visitor service is well established.
The transition to independence team stays in touch with nearly all of its care
leavers, who receive helpful support from personal advisers for their
accommodation, health and medical needs. Pathway plans are not yet good
enough, and care leavers do not value them. Not enough care leavers are in
employment, education and training, and insufficient opportunities have been
made available to young people to work or develop their employment skills within
the council.
Inspection findings

Social workers and the family and young people service (FYPS) workers make
sustained efforts to ensure that children remain within their families when it is
safe to do so. Recent decisions to look after the large majority of children are
timely and appropriate, and risks to children are responded to effectively.
Young people at risk of family breakdown benefit from specially commissioned
mentoring and respite at weekends. Intensive direct work undertaken by FYPS
workers helps families to make positive changes, and schools play an active
role in providing additional support. In those cases reviewed by inspectors,
two older children were not accommodated early enough, and these young
people had experienced continued or increasing risk.


At the time of the inspection, South Gloucestershire looked after 173 children.
The rate of children becoming looked after on 31 March 2016 was 29 per
of comparators. This figure has remained steady since 2013.


When children return home from care or are placed permanently with family
members or other people whom they know, appropriate arrangements and
direct support are in place for most children and their families. Supervision
orders, special guardianship order (SGO) support plans and children in need
plans are used appropriately and are helpful to families. In the 12 months
prior to the inspection, 88 children ceased to be looked after. A very small
number subsequently returned to be looked after. For a very small number of
children, support is not properly targeted to meet their needs, leading to
repeat care episodes or to childrens needs not being fully met.


For the majority of children looked after, written assessments are not in place.
Those that are undertaken are not sufficiently analytical and do not reflect
childrens changing circumstances. Although, for some children, important


information is recorded, this is not always so, such as placement matching
documents or court statements. The effect on children is that plans are not
routinely informed by up-to-date assessments. In addition, it is difficult to see
how emergency care arrangements or packages of support can properly meet
the needs of children looked after when social workers and managers do not
have access to comprehensive and up-to-date information. (Recommendation)

Care plans seen by inspectors are of inconsistent quality. For example, they
are not specific enough, they are not regularly updated and contingency
arrangements are not fully considered. This makes it difficult for children,
families, carers, managers and independent reviewing officers (IROs) to
measure and track actions, or to judge whether childrens lives are improving.
(Recommendation)


For the majority of children, there is appropriate and timely use of preproceedings and care proceedings. Effective oversight and tight scrutiny by
the service manager and the legal team are in place to avoid delay and, while
there are some minor delays in pre-proceedings work, overall this work is
effective. Parenting assessments, connected persons assessments and
viability assessments are of sufficient quality to inform decision making, and
are routinely used in court work. This avoids the need for externally
commissioned independent assessments.


The local judiciary and the children and family court advisory and support
service are positive about working relationships with the local authority and, in
discussions with inspectors, commended the quality and timeliness of preproceedings and care proceedings work. The timeliness of care proceedings
has improved substantially over the past 12 months and consistently meets
the 26-week target.


Overall, cases seen by inspectors evidenced a commitment to parallel planning
or twin tracking with childrens birth families or extended families to support
them in caring for their own children permanently. The local authority has a
higher number of SGO arrangements than the national average. In 201415,
for the six months leading up to the inspection suggest that this trend is
continuing.


In some cases seen by inspectors, the progression of plans for permanence
were delayed. Although plans for children who are suitable for adoption are
progressed well, for a small number of children who require other permanent
care, plans are not progressed in a timely way. Case records do not always
evidence the consideration of alternative permanence options outside of
childrens extended families or that contingency plans are in place. This means


that a small minority of older children have delays in achieving permanence,
for example when there are complexities in finding the right family for them or
when family assessments are undertaken sequentially rather than
concurrently. Senior managers acknowledge that, in order to provide a
consistent and timelier response for all children, permanence tracking needs
to be more rigorous. (Recommendation)

At the time of the inspection, 78 children looked after were cared for under a
voluntary section 20 care agreement. In order to satisfy themselves that
appropriate care plans are in place, senior managers conducted a thorough
review of all section 20 arrangements. This was prior to the start of the
inspection. They concluded that for 52 of these children the legal status was
suitable, mainly because a large proportion were age 16 or 17 and unlikely to
benefit from legal permanence. For the 26 children who were assessed as
requiring permanence, appropriate action has been taken. Twenty children are
matched with long-term carers, and plans are in place to secure permanent
arrangements for the remaining six children.


Of the current cohort of 104 children who are looked after, 59 attend schools
judged by Ofsted as good or outstanding and four attend schools judged as
inadequate. The head of the virtual school and her team know all the schools
and the pupils very well. They work closely with schools to ensure that
children looked after attend the schools that are most suitable for them.


Children looked after made good progress from their starting points at key
stages 1 and 2 in 2016. At key stage 1, all children achieved the expected
standard in mathematics, and most in reading.


Of the 11 pupils at key stage 4 in 2016, two children looked after gained a
minimum of five A* to C GCSEs including English and mathematics. Five have
special educational needs. All children in the cohort made a successful
transition to further education and training. The overall attendance in 201516
by all 115 children looked after in this cohort up to the end of key stage 4 was
of primary-age children looked after was 97.5% and for secondary pupils was
children.


The virtual school team agrees and reviews appropriately challenging targets
for children looked after, and a member of the team provides specialist help
that benefits children, including art therapy. Vulnerable pupils also receive a
boost by attending the TOAST centre, where they improve their self-esteem,
giving them greater confidence when they make the transition between
schools. Those who need extra help or support to increase their emotional


well-being, or those with a disability, enjoy and value taking part in a wellestablished mentoring programme.

The revision and audit of personal education plans (PEPs) have resulted in
plans being more helpful and informative. Children, teachers and foster carers
find them useful in providing a clear focus for planning and reviewing
childrens progress and attainment. PEPs capture the voice of each child well
and include how they view their own performance and achievements. PEPs
are encouraging and challenging, with clear targets to help pupils to improve
specific aspects of work, including attendance, English and mathematics. The
virtual school headteacher and her team ensure that schools use effectively
the additional funds, such as the pupil premium, to improve academic, social
and personal skills. Spending on sports coaching or music tuition and extra
English and mathematics lessons greatly benefits pupils.


In 2016, the local authority commissioned a survey of all children and young
people in schools up to the end of key stage 4 to assess their experiences of
bullying and awareness of keeping themselves safe. Staff in the virtual school
are aware of the issues arising from the survey and, as a result, they are
working with schools to raise awareness and deal with bullying.


Transition arrangements for children looked after to further education or
apprenticeships work well. It is too early to evaluate the impact of the recent
establishment of a virtual college. Its purpose is to improve the monitoring
and support for young people as they become care leavers and reduce the
numbers of those who do not continue in education, training or employment.


The majority of children are seen regularly and alone by their social workers,
and within statutory timescales. This includes children who live outside of
South Gloucestershire. Most children who spoke with inspectors were positive
about these relationships. One child said that his social worker is the best
and another said that her social worker had found her another placement
when she was not happy living with her previous carers. However, a few
children said they had been upset by many changes in social worker, and one
child told inspectors that absolutely no one stays for long. Inspectors found
that, for a minority of children, their views were recorded but not fully taken
into account, or there had been inconsistent efforts to engage with them.


The independent visitor and advocacy service is well established via a
commissioning arrangement. Twenty children have been carefully matched
with an independent visitor, including those who live outside of South
Gloucestershire. Children know how to complain, and the complaints manager
has established helpful links with the advocacy service to facilitate the sharing
of issues and concerns. The complaints team progresses individual complaints,


prompting managers and social workers to respond to childrens worries and
representations. Learning is shared with staff using childrens own words.

When children looked after are at risk of child sexual exploitation, the
response to this risk is not consistent. For example, inspectors saw variable
use of risk assessments to inform planning, and actions to support and
safeguard young people are not always timely enough. Operational oversight
of child sexual exploitation is variable. Senior managers consider risks for
individual children. However, the overarching patterns and trends for all
children looked after who are at risk of child sexual exploitation are not
routinely analysed or identified on a multi-agency basis. This reduces the
effectiveness of work to protect children. (Recommendation)


For children and young people who go missing from care, return home
interviews are not always completed with 72 hours. However, when children
are engaged appropriately, the quality of the work is of sufficient depth to
inform planning and future actions to safeguard them. When young people
offend, or misuse alcohol or drugs, a range of appropriate and specialist
services are in place to offer timely support and advice. (Recommendation)


Appropriate and thorough arrangements are in place to undertake initial and
review health assessments. The designated nurse provides consistency to
young people who live in South Gloucestershire and also those who live out of
the area. The inclusion of PEPs in the health review process during the 12
months preceding the inspection, and recent steps to ensure strengths and
difficulties questionnaires are used well, are further improving the quality and
impact of health assessments. Specific support for emotional health and wellbeing is available from the Thinking Aloud service, enabling children and their
carers to access psychological help and support.


The quality of case recording is too variable. Some recording is poor, with little
evidence of the direct work with children that social workers and carers
describe. Key documents are sometimes missing from case records. Better
files evidence detailed attention to childrens views and feelings. For these
children, records demonstrate how their wishes are informing care plans and
provide a clear account of contact with their birth families. Senior managers
need to address this inconsistency to assure themselves properly of the quality
of casework and to ensure that children can benefit from a comprehensive
account of their care experiences, should they choose to read their records in
the future.


Management oversight and decision making is inconsistent, and case
supervision is not always evident on childrens files. Although social workers
describe helpful oversight and support, inspectors found a correlation between


poorly evidenced management direction and delays in progressing plans for
children. (Recommendation)

For the vast majority of children, placements are of a good quality. They are
mostly local, and children are carefully matched according to their needs. This
includes their cultural needs, family history and any disability. For asylumseeking children, their language and ethnicity are carefully explored as part of
the placement matching process. Children placed out of area benefit from
visitor of support from health, education and other agencies, such as the
youth offending team. Brothers and sisters are routinely placed together.


Short-term and long-term placement stability is achieved effectively through
appropriate matching, placement stability meetings, and helpful training and
support for foster carers. In 201415, only 6% of all children looked after
experienced three or more placements. Long-term stability is also good and
improving, with 67% of children having remained in the same placement for
two years or more as of March 2015, rising to 79% in March 2016 and to 86%
in October 2016. This is much higher than comparators.


Contact arrangements for children with their families are well considered and
facilitated by carers, family members or support workers who are known to
children and their families. This provides familiarity and consistency, ensuring
that the time that children spend with their families and friends is properly
facilitated and assessed.


The local authoritys sufficiency strategy includes key challenges and priorities,
including the need to increase the choice of semi-independent accommodation
for care leavers. The strategy identifies further work that is needed to improve
the recruitment of foster carers and the regional commissioning of residential
placements. Some actions are being progressed well. For instance, a wellplanned and targeted recruitment campaign for foster carers is in place, with
nine assessments in progress.


The fostering service operates within the regulatory framework, but there are
some areas for further improvement. For example, only 80% of foster carer
reviews are completed within timescales. Foster carers told inspectors that
they are supported well, and spoke positively about the availability and
helpfulness of training, including online courses. However, delegated authority
often takes too long, and only one of the six carers who met with inspectors
said that they had a written delegated authority agreement.
(Recommendation)


Children and young people who spoke with inspectors said that they access a
wide range of leisure activities. Free leisure passes are actively promoted by


carers, social workers and virtual school staff, and the pupil premium is used
to provide further access to leisure activities.

Most children, 90%, contribute to their reviews. A clear system is in place for
IROs to escalate concerns. However, they do not consistently articulate or
scrutinise childrens plans for permanence. Inspectors saw examples when
childrens reviews had not challenged delays in progressing these plans.


The Children in Care Council is developing its scope and is beginning to
increase the number of children looked after who are involved in the group.
However, senior managers and leaders need to support the group to enable it
to expand further, so that a greater range of children looked after are
represented. While numbers involved are still small, there is lively and
enthusiastic engagement to improve the lives of children looked after, and
children benefit from enjoyable events and celebrations.


Clear governance arrangements and a positive commitment to corporate
parenting are evident in the council and among key partners. There is a
particularly strong focus on improving educational outcomes and increasing
the availability of work experience and apprenticeships. Young peoples
participation at the corporate parenting steering group is improving and is
better organised. The contribution that they make is valued, and informs
priorities and service development. For example, the Children in Care Council
produces a video in which it asks questions of the corporate parenting group,
which then replies by video. This is the childrens chosen method of
communication and one that they enjoy. This has resulted in the council
approving the use of a Facebook and Twitter account which will start in
January 2017. It will be a shared venture between the Children in Care
Council and the virtual school.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

The local authority identifies children who may be suitable for adoption
through effective parallel planning from the onset of care proceedings,
although these plans are not always easily identifiable within childrens files. A
substantial number of these children do not move to adoptive placements, as
proportionately more children are placed with extended family members under
SGOs or through connected persons arrangements than in any other local
authority. For the 12 months to October 2016, 22 children left care through an
SGO, more than double the number of children who left care through
adoption. Consequently, the numbers of children who are adopted each year
are comparatively fewer than in most other local authorities.



The local authority places children for adoption in good time. Performance has
improved substantially since the last published Department for Education
adoption scorecard (201215). The average period of time from children
receiving court authority to placement with their adoptive families has also
reduced markedly.


Stable, effective frontline management arrangements and a comprehensive
service action plan have resulted in improvements in the adoption service.
Parallel adoption planning is considered early. Potential adopter matches and
preparation work proceed quickly through two adoption social workers
working jointly with locality social workers. Concurrent foster-to-adopt
placements are established early to minimise disruption for children, with
three placements made in the past year and seven adopters being dual
approved since 2015.


Adopters from diverse backgrounds are approved, including single carers and
same sex couples. The local authority has a long-standing history of approving
more adopters than they need in order to place South Gloucestershire children
who are waiting for adopter matches. At the time of the inspection, six
adopters were awaiting a match, two of whom had been approved very
recently. Two children recently approved as suitable for adoption were linked
with a possible adoptive match. Newly approved adopters wait an average of
four months for matches with children. Most children are matched with an
adoptive family promptly.


The local authority has provided adoptive families for children from a wider
spectrum of backgrounds in the year preceding the inspection. Over a third of
over five years, and the oldest child is aged 10 years. Two brother and sister
groups and two children with disabilities were matched with adopters.
Approximately the same proportion of children from Black and minority ethnic
backgrounds (BME), 8.3%, were adopted during 201316 as are represented
in the 9% of BME children living in the local authority. Senior managers have
identified that children from a broader range of ages and backgrounds should
have opportunities to live in adoptive families and are actively raising
awareness through closer links with locality teams, encouraging greater
aspiration and increased understanding among social workers.


Adopter assessments are uniformly strong. Probing explorations of applicants
personal histories, relationships and motivations in seeking to adopt children
are evident. Balanced and proportionate social work reports evaluate
applicants strengths and potential vulnerabilities. Regulatory checks and
references are scrupulously undertaken and documented. Assessments are


completed within six months, with any delays being triggered by applicants
rather than by shortcomings in the adoption service.

Careful consideration is given to brothers and sisters remaining together or
apart, based on assessments carried out by professionals with sufficient
expertise, including clinical psychologists. Adopters told inspectors that
preparation training provided by a pan-regional organisation is thorough and
challenging. Training evaluations capture applicants levels of participation and
engagement, informing their assessment reports.


The availability and quality of adoption support are highly regarded by
adopters whose children were placed with them as long as 10 years ago, and
also by new adoptive families. A wide range of therapeutic programmes,
commissioned from approved providers, provide targeted interventions for
children, adoptive parents and families. Therapeutic support concentrates
predominantly on attachment difficulties, typically arising during the
adolescent years. Fifty-one adopters were receiving support at the time of the
inspection, with over 250,000 secured from the adoption support fund.
Adopters told inspectors that adoption support had prevented breakdowns,
particularly when their teenage children were displaying aggressive behaviour
at home.


Adoption social workers complete the majority of child permanence reports,
and this concentration of expertise results in a consistently high standard of
reporting. Skilful reporting of childrens personalities, births, early childhood
development and family histories provides potential adopters with detailed,
rich and informed portraits of young children awaiting adoption. Reports offer
clear explanations of why adoption is the most appropriate permanent legal
option for children. Life-story books are also prepared within the adoption
team, resulting in colourful, engaging and child-friendly accounts of childrens
journeys towards their adoptive families which can be updated by adopters.
Therapeutic life-story work is provided to older children who are struggling to
understand their birth family histories and identities.


Active family finding occurs through regular meetings and action planning
concerning individual children. Prompt referrals are made to Link Maker, the
adoption register and the South West adoption consortium. Current regional
collaboration is evolving further through the formation of Adoption West,
involving six local authorities, scheduled to become operational in April 2018.
It is anticipated that adopter recruitment, assessment, family finding and
panels will be regionalised, providing a larger pool of adopters to offer
permanent families to children from a broader range of ages and those with
more complex, specialist needs.



A long-standing, highly regarded adoption panel chair with an extensive
professional background in adoption work chairs the adoption panel. Panel
members closely examine reports prior to meetings, devising incisive and
pertinent questions for social workers and potential adopters concerning
matches, approvals and disruptions. The adoption panel chair receives a
thorough annual appraisal from the head of service. The panel comprises an
experienced blend of professional and lay members. All panel members are
appraised annually by the adoption panel chair, and attend training and
development events at least twice a year.


Panel minutes are detailed and well written. The timeliness of decisions
following the agency decision makers (ADMs) review of panel
recommendations improved significantly after a challenge from the panel
chair. Subsequently, the head of service promptly completed all approvals.
The ADM carefully and concisely documents the reasons for decisions,
evidencing close reading of all relevant reports.


The previous backlog in letterbox contact arrangements has been addressed
and all recommended contact agreements are well supported, with advice
offered to birth and adoptive families about appropriate contact. Post-adoption
social workers provide informed advice to adopters concerning the growing
numbers of children who have unplanned contact with birth families through
social media. Stringent efforts to ensure that appropriate contact is
maintained with brothers and sisters are made when this is in childrens best
interests.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement

Social workers and personal advisers in the transitions to independence team,
the care leavers service, are in regular contact with 97% of care leavers, and
know their situations well. They visit young people frequently and meet with
them at convenient locations. However, care leavers say that they would also
like somewhere to meet or to drop into, because the office where the team is
based is not conducive to young people visiting.


Care leavers report that they have strong and positive relationships with their
personal advisers, who provide genuine care and support, and know their
needs. This proactive and caring approach to remaining meaningfully involved
in young peoples lives was evident on case files. The commitment and
practical help from their personal advisers enable care leavers to cope with
personal difficulties. Personal advisors give sound financial advice and


effective assistance with travel and accommodation. They provide sensitive
and helpful advocacy and support, such as helping young people who are in
difficulty because of offending, accommodation problems or debt crisis.

Care leavers feel safe and, overall, personal advisers offer helpful guidance to
young people about keeping themselves safe. For example, inspectors saw
proactive work with a young woman to protect her from the risks of an
abusive relationship, while encouraging her to accept help to make positive
choices about her future. Personal advisers engage well with care leavers in
discussing the nature and types of risky behaviours. However, managers and
staff have not sufficiently considered the risks relating to child sexual
exploitation that care leavers may face. Reviews and plans do not include
proper attention to these risks, although appropriate protocols are in place. A
relatively small proportion of staff in the transitions to independence team
have received child sexual exploitation training. Managers have already put
plans in place to increase staff knowledge and skills within the service.
(Recommendation)


Personal advisers do not always engage care leavers sufficiently in the process
of pathway planning. Pathway plans do not sufficiently prepare care leavers
for their next steps and they are not used effectively to help young people to
develop the skills and qualities that they will need to be independent. Plans
are up to date, but they do not fully assess the needs of care leavers to
enable effective planning. Planned outcomes are often too vague, stating, for
example, the need for a young person to understand the benefits system.
They do not lead to clearly defined actions to be taken that will lead to specific
results and a tangible sense of achievement for the young person.
(Recommendation)


Personal advisers and social workers do not always pay enough attention to
planning for longer-term outcomes, particularly in relation to helping care
leavers to improve their educational and employment prospects. The
recording of care leavers educational attainments is not consistently accurate
or detailed enough for each young person, resulting in incomplete information
about their starting points and fragility in ensuring appropriate goals for care
leavers to work towards.

young people who live in South Gloucestershire, too high a proportion of care
leavers do not engage in education, employment or training for too long a
period of time, although the percentage decreased from 43.5% in March 2015
to 32% in December 2016. A significant proportion of care leavers, numbering
disability or parenting responsibilities. Through the virtual college and two


recently appointed education, employment and training workers, closer links
are being made with the local further education college to provide suitable
courses for care leavers to enable them to acquire the skills and knowledge to
gain employment or progress in education. (Recommendation)
authority is actively supporting one former care leaver who is studying for a
Masters degree. The support that these care leavers receive to make a
success of their studies is regular and helpful.
care leavers and do not receive important information regularly enough. This
was confirmed in discussion between inspectors and young people. Young
people are provided with their health histories, but the quality of the
information received varies between personal advisers and individual young
people. (Recommendation)
medical and health attention. Young people benefit from annual health
assessments with the dedicated paediatrician and from helpful support by the
designated nurse.
or those who are pregnant. A newly appointed transitions worker for young
people with mental health concerns is now providing additional valuable
support.
also the case for those with complex needs. Appropriate checks are carried
out to ensure the accommodation is of good quality and safe, and that young
people feel secure. They have access to a good range of relevant housing,
including tenancies in safe neighbourhoods.
at the time of inspection, three young people were in custody. No care leavers
were placed in temporary emergency or bed and breakfast accommodation.
The staying put strategy is working well for care leavers. Currently, 12 young
people are benefiting from the arrangements and staying with their foster
carers.
achievements of care leavers positively, with certificates awarded to each
young person. It is working with young people to review the event and ensure
greater involvement of care leavers at future events.


such as going to the gym, basketball and cycling. They receive financial help
to participate if they need this, or to develop their skills or interests further.
have identified. They are taking appropriate action to enable care leavers to
become independent and self-reliant and secure employment or training, but
the impact of these actions is not yet evident in all areas.

Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
The leadership, management and governance of services for children who need
help and protection are inadequate. Political leaders and senior managers have not
demonstrated sufficient understanding of the extent of the widespread and serious
failures within the service, in particular in the 025s disability team. Some practice
has improved as a result of recent targeted activity but, over the longer term,
leaders have not made sufficient changes quickly enough to address the deficits,
leaving too many children vulnerable or at risk of harm.
Leaders and managers have not ensured that some elements of core social work
practice are sufficiently robust. For instance, child protection thresholds are not
consistently applied and not all children who need an early help assessment
benefit from one.
More recently, over the past year, the head of service has implemented service-led
self-assessments and plans, resulting in a sharper focus on what needs to change.
However, performance management systems have not been effective enough to
identify some key weaknesses in services for children. There is no overarching
service plan incorporating learning and actions from quality assurance activity.
Case auditing is embedded in practice, but findings are not always used to improve
wider practice. Data is collated and analysed, helping key groups such as the
corporate parenting board to interrogate practice, but weaknesses in the client
record system limit the collection of data and hamper the recording of work with
families. The impact of the provision of early help on children and families is not
fully understood.
Strategic arrangements to respond to child sexual exploitation have improved, but
managers have not ensured that a clear child-level process is in place to respond
to risk. Corporate parenting arrangements work well, although the Children in Care


Council needs to be strengthened. The quality of management oversight and staff
supervision, including appraisal, varies too much across teams.
Social workers are proud to work in South Gloucestershire and feel well supported
by visible managers. Learning and development for practitioners is strong. A
comprehensive programme to develop the skills of operational managers has been
well received. Strategies to stabilise the workforce are becoming increasingly
effective, assisted by strong political support. However, in some teams, such as
the 025s disability service, agency rates remain too high.

widespread weaknesses within childrens services. Determined to address the
decline in service provision, the director of childrens services (DCS)
established a turnaround board. Operating from October 2014 to January
improvements in some areas of childrens services gave the board confidence
to re-establish itself as a childrens services governance board. The board
oversaw the restructure of childrens services and the reorganisation of early
help provision. Senior management oversight has been strengthened through
the appointment of a new head of integrated services. The head of service
has been in post for a year and has filled a vacuum by providing stable,
consistent and visible leadership, with a clear vision of how services for
children need to be improved.
been significant churn at team-manager level and a high level of use of
agency staff that have seriously slowed progress and limited oversight in some
parts of the service, in particular the 025 disability service. Concerns were
identified at a senior level and a decision was made to transfer the 025s
disability service from adult services to childrens services. Senior managers
established a turnaround board specifically for this service, developing plans
to address the significant shortfalls identified in the service. However, senior
and political leaders have not taken sufficient steps to interrogate the
performance data available to establish the true extent of the shortfalls,
including the number of unallocated cases in the service and their impact on
children and families. Actions have not been targeted or urgent enough to
achieve the substantial changes that were necessary. This has resulted in a
large number of vulnerable children not receiving the help, support and
protection that they need. In some cases, risk remained unassessed.
(Recommendation)
appointed principal social worker. Team managers have been engaged in its


design, which is positive. Regular themed case auditing takes place, and this is
used to some extent to inform practice. However, there is no overarching plan
that incorporates the learning and actions from the range of quality assurance
activity that takes place on a regular basis. Senior managers also recognise
that more work needs to be done to support social workers in understanding
what good practice looks like, to ensure that there is a greater degree of
consistency in casework. A new consultant social worker post, commencing
early in 2017, will focus on this work. The planned changes are not yet
evident, and current quality assurance processes have not been robust
enough to ensure that managers and leaders have a clear enough view of
practice or service weaknesses, such as in the 025s disability service.
(Recommendation)
improve managers understanding and ownership of the performance of their
service areas. These have included one-to-one work with managers and
business support by the performance data team. All performance reports use
a consistent dataset that is widely circulated to managers, and the narrative
behind the performance data has improved. The head of service provides bimonthly performance reports to the scrutiny panel. The lead member and
chief executive told inspectors that they are now better informed about
childrens services, and consequently they can better scrutinise performance
across the service and support senior managers when they can see a decline
in performance.
monthly governance board, chaired by the DCS. The development of plans by
each service manager is an important shift in ensuring that service
improvement is owned and managed by all managers. However, not all plans
are SMART (specific, measurable, attainable, realistic and timely), and reports
are lengthy and insufficiently focused on key priorities. (Recommendation)
understand performance in some areas of the service. For example, the
authority does not currently know how many children looked after attend their
reviews. The authority has not analysed the overall impact of early help
services, and service developments are not clearly enough linked to the
evaluation of the difference that support makes to local families. Although the
new client record system, when it is introduced, will include an integrated
evaluation tool, senior managers and partners need to understand the impact
that services are having on outcomes for children now. (Recommendation)
structure and scrutiny panel. Well-established formal and informal contact


between the chief executive, DCS and lead member, and with the LSCB chair
prior to her recent departure, assists communication and challenge.
Committee arrangements have provided helpful scrutiny in some areas, for
example in exploring agency and out-of-area placement spending. However,
while regular performance reports have been provided to the children and
adults committee, including those of the 025s service, challenge to officers
has not been effective enough to identify and address concerns successfully.
adequate funding for childrens services, with substantial additional financial
investment in recent years. The base budget for childrens services has been
increased to reflect demand and the need to address service weaknesses.
Regular reports keep members informed of the pressures on services and the
reasons for any overspend. In the context of financial constraints, this means
that childrens services have continued to receive the required financial
resources.
are available to meet the needs of children. Services are commissioned based
on identified need, informed by the joint strategic needs assessment and by
relevant needs analyses undertaken by partners. Commissioned services are
regularly reviewed against key performance indicators, and measures are
swiftly taken to address shortfalls. Provider and user consultation feeds into
service specifications. Following a needs analysis, services for domestic abuse
are being recommissioned through partnership arrangements.
range of placements to meet the needs of the children looked after. For
example, underneath the overarching commissioning strategy there is a
number of focused plans to address particular needs, based on careful
analysis of domestic abuse, for example. Although targets are overly
optimistic, the authority has plans in place to increase the number of foster
carers and recognises that this is a priority.
almost all told inspectors that they feel well supported by managers. However,
management decisions and formal supervision are variable in frequency and
quality. The supervision policy, which is due to be updated, does not include
expectations about the frequency of case supervision. No system is in place to
monitor the completion of annual appraisals. (Recommendation)
that outlines the authoritys expectations for caseloads, including whether it is
acceptable for cases to be allocated to managers. Senior managers have taken


action to address the high caseloads within the access and response team
(ART), and have put into place plans to increase the team establishment. At
the time of the inspection, caseloads in the ART were at an average of 33.
The majority of social workers in other teams have manageable caseloads,
with a small number of exceptions. Measures to oversee and manage
caseloads have not placed sufficient gravity on unacceptably high caseloads,
such as those found within the 025s disabilities service. At the time of the
inspection, this included six children looked after who had been allocated to
managers. (Recommendation)
decrease in turnover. Turnover was 27% in 201415, decreasing to 24%
during 201516. The proportion of permanent staff is increasing. In March
September 2016. Comprehensive monthly data provides senior managers with
a clear understanding of turnover, agency use and sickness levels within each
team. Despite this focus, agency rates have remained high in some parts of
the services such as the ART and the 025s disability team. While there are
now plans in place to increase the establishment of ART, some children have
experienced too many changes of social worker. Within the 025s team, high
staff turnover and the high number of temporary staff have contributed to the
widespread and serious failings within the service. While senior managers are
able to articulate priority areas, the action plan to support the workforce
development strategy is not robust. This means that there are no clear targets
and timeframes to ensure that plans are effectively progressed.
year in practice (ASYE) social workers and Step Up to Social Work students.
ASYEs are well supported, with protected caseloads and regular learning and
development opportunities. Strategies to aid workforce retention include
progression opportunities for social workers to advance a grade if they meet
expected standards. A pilot programme is in place to support social work
assistants to study for a social work qualification with the Open University.
The authority uses intelligence from exit interviews to inform recruitment
processes, and this includes a telephone interview with agency staff.
appropriately trained and that professional development opportunities are well
resourced. Over the past 18 months, managers have prioritised a wholesystem approach to delivering the local authoritys chosen approach to
assessment. Social workers and partners spoke positively about how this is
improving practice. This is a considerable financial investment and
demonstrates a firm commitment to improving practice. In response to the
identification of inconsistency within management oversight through case


auditing, senior managers have commissioned a comprehensive training and
development programme for all managers, commencing during the inspection.
This is a positive initiative.
the workforce are not fully understood. In some areas, training to support
social workers in their role had not been in place. For example, only 11% of
staff in the leaving care service are trained in understanding child sexual
exploitation. A learning needs analysis is being undertaken which will inform
next years training schedule, but this has not yet taken effect. The impact of
training and development on practice is not fully understood. For example,
although managers monitor the use of research library licences, the effect on
practice has not been assessed. Following the introduction of a new practice
model of assessment, senior managers have clear plans in place to
understand what difference this approach makes. (Recommendation)
seriously, and this is a strong aspect of the service. All council members are
appropriately trained and those who spoke to inspectors expressed a firm
commitment to improving outcomes for children looked after and care leavers.
Newly commissioned council contracts include clauses to ensure that they
provide work experience for children looked after and apprenticeships for care
leavers. Council members provide effective challenge, for example regarding
housing provision for care leavers. A You said, we did video of responses to
questions from the Children in Care Council ensures that there is a method in
place for regular representation of childrens views to the corporate parenting
group.
family justice board and the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support
Service (Cafcass). The judiciary and Cafcass are positive about the quality and
timeliness of work presented by the local authority in court.
response to children at risk of sexual exploitation. However, practice in
relation to individual children is inconsistent, and senior managers and
partners have not yet established a coherent multi-agency process for
understanding patterns and trends in relation to victims. Further work is
needed to tackle these deficits on a number of levels, including the provision
of direct support, ensuring the consistent application of child protection
thresholds and that the multi-agency workforce is appropriately skilled to
undertake this work, and strengthening management oversight.
(Recommendation)


children, adults and health took up his role in 2013. Although the chief
executive regularly discusses capacity issues with the DCS, the absence of this
formal test means that the local authority cannot be fully assured that the
breadth of the role is appropriate, or that the senior leadership team has
sufficient capacity to lead the changes required in childrens services.
complaints team has established helpful links with the advocacy service and
the Children in Care Council. However, a system is not in place to ensure that
wider learning informs future practice. The high number of complaints from
parents and professionals for children with disabilities further evidences the
need to ensure that a robust learning and improvement system is in place to
inform the improvements required across the service. (Recommendation)


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
Executive summary
The South Gloucestershire Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate, because it
has not established effective arrangements to meet its statutory responsibilities as
outlined in Working Together 2015. In particular, it has not sufficiently monitored
and evaluated the effectiveness of frontline services. The board has not been able
properly to challenge or influence key areas of local safeguarding practice.
The board is leading the overall strategic approach to child sexual exploitation and
has updated the child sexual exploitation strategy, guidance and risk assessment
framework. However, it was not aware that child protection procedures for
children at risk of child sexual exploitation are not always being followed. The
board has not sufficiently challenged or influenced practice weaknesses in relation
to the identification of significant harm for children.
The board has received an appropriate range of reports about frontline practice.
However, it has not been sufficiently rigorous in ensuring that required actions are
taken when concerns are identified. For example, the board did not have sufficient
knowledge of the serious and widespread failings that inspectors found in the 0
arrangements have not been sufficiently challenged by the board.
Updates have been provided to the board about the development of early help
services, and the board has appropriately challenged health services about their
lack of contribution to early help assessments. However, the board has not
ensured that the effectiveness of early help has been properly evaluated.
The board has not had any oversight of the safeguarding practices of the mother
and baby unit at the local prison, and therefore cannot assure itself that the
welfare of the babies and children who live there is safeguarded and promoted.
The effectiveness of the boards multi-agency dataset has been reduced, because
it does not include sufficient data about the core business of child protection to
enable the board to scrutinise frontline practice. As a result, the board has not
been able to scrutinise themes or trends over time or use this data to challenge
the local authoritys safeguarding practice.
The boards annual report adequately describes work undertaken during the year,
but it does not provide a sufficiently rigorous analysis of the effectiveness of local
safeguarding practice or evaluate the progress made in completing the previous
years priorities.


Recommendations
when children and young people are at risk of significant harm due to child
sexual exploitation.
disability service.
these babies are safeguarded and that their welfare is promoted.
information to judge the effectiveness of services, particularly in relation to
child protection practice.
privately fostered.
monitored and that priorities are evaluated for their impact on outcomes for
children.
what the board has achieved against its key priorities.
how agencies should respond in cases when it is suspected, and to ensure
that advice and expertise is available.

Inspection findings
inadequate. It has failed to provide sufficient leadership to identify, monitor
and challenge the widespread and serious failings identified during the
inspection.
director of childrens services (DCS) is now holding the position on a
temporary basis until a new chair is appointed. The DCS, lead member and


other board members acknowledge that renewed focus, rigour and scrutiny
are required to enable the board to fulfil its statutory responsibilities and
satisfy itself that all agencies across the partnership are keeping children safe.
key areas of core business, but not all board members have exercised
sufficient curiosity about the information presented. For example, in
September 2015 the board challenged the quality of a report about
safeguarding children with disabilities, and appropriately requested that it be
reviewed and re-presented to the board. The board did not then ensure that
the report was returned in a timely way and hence did not know about the
widespread and serious weakness within the childrens social care 025s
disability service.
understand the level and nature of local child sexual exploitation. However,
the board has not taken sufficient steps to provide clear procedural and
practice guidance for local professionals, particularly in identifying and
responding to significant harm for children at risk of sexual exploitation.
the risk assessment tool by including a section on perpetrators. Through a
multi-agency project, a problem profile has been undertaken and shared in
order to aid identification and disruption. Extensive awareness raising and
training have been provided, funded by the board, to those who work in the
night-time economy and leisure industry, and to local professionals who work
with children.
sexual exploitation and child protection in January 2016, but did not reach a
conclusion. Guidance remains ambiguous and, as a result, partners and
frontline practitioners are unclear about the steps needed to analyse and
address these risks. Further, the board has not ensured that it has sufficient
oversight of the wider inconsistencies in the application of child protection
thresholds for children at risk of significant harm. (Recommendation)
a clear risk assessment pathway is needed. This has been formulated and
agreed but not yet implemented, therefore has not yet affected frontline
practice. This will consider individual children, but will not address the need
for coordinated multi-agency oversight of all children, including those
considered to be at medium or high risk of sexual exploitation. This is a
missed opportunity to identify patterns, trends and links between children who
are at risk and the places where they spend their time. (Recommendation)


health partners about their lack of engagement in early help assessments.
However, the board has not ensured that the effectiveness of early help is
sufficiently evaluated to make sure that services are targeted and meet the
identified needs of children and families. (Recommendation)
authority. The private fostering annual report is comprehensive, but board
members have not sufficiently scrutinised practice in this area to promote
timely assessments and visits to children. (Recommendation)
engagement of the local womens prison in the work of the board. As a result,
there has been no monitoring of safeguarding practice within the prisons
mother and baby unit, and the quality of work to safeguard the 13 babies and
children who are resident within the prison is therefore not known by the
board. (Recommendation)
performance across agencies. To increase its usefulness, board members have
regularly reviewed the content and structure of the report. However, the
dataset still does not provide sufficient information to enable the board to
judge the effectiveness of local child protection practice. For example, it
identifies timescales for initial child protection case conferences, but not the
number of child protection enquiries that do not result in a conference. This
limits its effectiveness. (Recommendation)
undertaken on behalf of the board, providing a sound analysis of practice in
narrative form. However, audits lack overall judgements about the quality of
work and do not have SMART (specific, measurable, attainable, realistic and
timely) action plans to monitor and evidence progress against actions. For
example, a recent multi-agency audit of four missing children did not include
children looked after and, while some findings were helpful, it did not identify
that none of the cases were compliant with procedures. Actions did not
address all areas of weakness. The previous chair requested that singleagency audits are presented to the board, but agencies have been slow to
respond. This has reduced the effectiveness of the board to monitor local
safeguarding practice. (Recommendation)
and are described in the boards annual business plan. Overall, priorities are
sound and are relevant to the local area. The boards priorities have


influenced the joint strategic needs assessment, which now has information
about child sexual exploitation and female genital mutilation in a safeguarding
chapter. However, the intended outcomes are unclear, and this means that
actions arising from the priorities are mainly process steps. They are unlikely
to enable the board to measure its success in scrutinising and influencing local
safeguarding practice.
lay members. Lay members contribute well to the boards work. An executive
group sets the agenda for the board and drives its work programme. It is a
strength that the nine sub-groups are chaired by partners, for example the
clinical commissioning group, the voluntary sector and the local authority.
Most of the sub-groups are well-attended and, when this is not the case, the
board robustly challenges the agency concerned. The board has discussed
financial contributions, resulting in the identification of additional funding for
the appointment of a board manager. However, the budget for 201718, with
the respective contribution of partners such as the police, has yet to be
agreed.
all have SMART action plans that interpret and are aligned to the boards
priorities. The previous independent chair requested that all sub-groups
submit their plans to the board for agreement. However, this has not
happened in all cases. The board therefore does not have robust oversight of
the work of all sub-groups and is unable to agree or influence their priorities.
For example, the policy and procedures sub-group has not identified that the
local authority protocol for assessment, which should set out clear
arrangements for how children will be assessed by childrens social care, has
not been considered by the board. As a result, the protocol is significantly
delayed. (Recommendation)
been consistently effective in highlighting service weaknesses. The previous
chair met regularly with a range of partners, including the chief executive,
DCS, leader of the council and lead member for childrens services. The chief
executive has observed a board meeting. Some board members have
recognised that the board has lacked focus, rigour and analysis and, through
the governance process, have taken appropriate steps to address this.
partnership. Cross membership of the Health and Wellbeing Board and the
Safer and Stronger partnership ensures that information is shared and
exchanged. The board has ensured that these strategic bodies adopt their


priorities. For example, domestic abuse is a shared priority. A multi-agency
domestic abuse conference is due to take place in spring 2017.
board has provided awareness-raising training. Strong links with the local
acute trust, which is a centre of excellence, are in place. While few cases of
female genital mutilation have been identified, inspectors were satisfied that
social care staff are alert to the issues and could deal with them appropriately.
However, one case highlighted partnership issues between the police and
health professionals. Practice requires further analysis by the board to identify
any threshold or training issues. (Recommendation)
children and young people at risk of radicalisation. The head of safeguarding
is a member of the councils steering group for Prevent. A range of agencies
refer to the Channel panel, although none have met the threshold for
discussion in this forum. Screening by the head of safeguarding ensures that
vulnerable children who are referred receive appropriate services. Schools
have access to appropriate resources to support them in their Prevent duty.
arising from child deaths. The annual report is thorough and analytical,
identifying learning for the board. The CDOP has taken action at a local,
regional and national level to drive changes, for example by lobbying ministers
about the importance of personal health and social education to help children
to understand safeguarding risks.
has been instrumental in the police reconsidering their initial position that they
would only be part of a virtual multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH).
Although these discussions have contributed to some delay, they have
ensured that the newly proposed model of a co-located service will be more
appropriate to local practice. The process has also facilitated an agreement to
provide health resources to the MASH.
national guidance for missing children through the scrutiny of the missing
sub-group. Timeliness of return home interviews is now monitored to support
improvement. A spreadsheet detailing missing incidents and return home
interviews supports the monitoring of timeliness. The list is appropriately
cross-referenced with children who are at risk of sexual exploitation. This
analysis prompted an appropriate multi-agency response to a local
independent childrens home at which child sexual exploitation was identified.


seen during the inspection evidenced that, overall, thresholds for referral to
childrens social care are appropriately understood and applied.
For example, the involvement of fathers in assessments, plans and decisions
about their children has improved significantly. The boards protocol on nonmobile babies has been adopted across the region, and audits undertaken by
health partners evidence knowledge and understanding of the protocol. The
board has undertaken a range of in-depth learning reviews involving
practitioners, leading to improvements in safeguarding practice. Findings are
widely shared. Learning from these reviews includes improvements in the
management of allegations against professionals who work with children.
Further capacity has been added to the designated officer role.
child sexual exploitation, on a regional basis. Following robust challenge by
the board, all agencies returned their audits. These have been analysed, with
themes feeding into the child sexual exploitation and training sub-group action
plans. All schools responded to their annual section 175 audit. Further
changes have been made in order to increase rigour in self-assessment and to
ensure greater attention to the boards priority areas, such as female genital
mutilation and child sexual exploitation.
framework. A training strategy is in place, outlining the training required for
each role. All LSCB trainers are quality assured by the board. Lay members
speak to delegates and their managers post-course to assist in the evaluation
of impact. Delegates value the training that they receive. However, a training
needs analysis has been designed yet has not yet been undertaken. This has
reduced the boards ability to target training at specific professionals or
agencies.
Together 2015. It references the required areas and provides a detailed
narrative of the work undertaken by sub-groups. However, the report is not
sufficiently analytical. It does not evaluate the progress made in implementing
the previous years priorities or analyse the effectiveness of local safeguarding
practice sufficiently. This weakens the potential impact of the report in
informing partners about strengths and areas for development. It has not
informed the priorities for the forthcoming year.
children and young people, and has involved the youth board in reviewing the


missing children protocol and responding to the pupil survey about e-safety.
The youth board did not think that many young people would read leaflets
and wanted a more proactive approach to explaining risks. This has had a
positive impact: more schools access safeguarding assemblies, and youth
workers receive helpful support in addressing e-safety concerns.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Stephanie Murray
Deputy lead inspector: Anne Waterman
Team inspectors: Louise Warren, Natalie Trentham, Nick Stacey, Peter Green, Cathy
Blair
Supernumerary inspectors: Nicola Bennett, Brenda McInerney
Senior data analyst: Matthew King
Quality assurance manager: Helen Cawston


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


