Sunderland City Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 11 May 2015  4 June 2015
Report published: 20 July 2015
Childrens services in Sunderland are inadequate
There are widespread and serious failures that leave children unsafe and mean that
the welfare of children looked after is not adequately safeguarded or promoted.
It is Ofsteds expectation that all children and young people receive the level of help,
care and protection that will ensure their safety and help prepare them for adult life.


Inadequate

permanence

Inadequate


Inadequate


Inadequate


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Executive summary


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections



The local authority operates five childrens homes. Four were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.



The previous inspection of Sunderlands safeguarding arrangements was in April



The previous inspection of Sunderlands services for children looked after was in
April 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.

Other information about this area



The Executive Director of People Services in Sunderland took responsibility for
childrens services in September 2013. This is in addition to his responsibility for
health, housing and adult services (since 2007), and also cultural and leisure
services.



The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
September 2014 and is also the chair of the Adult Safeguarding Board.

Children living in this area



Approximately 54,500 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Sunderland. This is 20% of the total population in the area3.



Approximately 25% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty4.



The proportion of children entitled to free school meals5:
in primary schools is 21% (the national average is 17%)
in secondary schools is 21% (the national average is 15%)


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.
Source: ONS Mid-Year 2013
Source: HMRC Snapshot as at 31 August 2010
Source: DfE Schools, pupils and their characteristics




Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 6% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole6.



The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian/Asian British and Mixed7.



The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language8:
 in primary schools is 5% (the national average is 19%).
 in secondary schools is 4% (the national average is 14%).

Child protection in this area





At 31 March 2015, 3,255 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
At 1 June 2015, 394 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 306 at 31 March 201410.
At 31 March 2015, three children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from four at 31 March 201411.

Children looked after in this area



At 1 June 2015, 575 children are being looked after by the local authority (a rate
of 105 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 490 (90 per 10,000 children)
at 31 March 201412.
 Of this number 175 (or 30%) live outside the local authority area
authority area
 No children live in residential special schools
 No children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.



In the last 12 months (1 June 2014 to 31 May 2015) there have been:


Source: ONS 2011 census
Source: ONS 2011 census
Source: DfE Schools, pupils and their characteristics
Source: DfE Characteristics of children in need in England
Source: DfE Characteristics of children in need in England
Source: DfE Notifications of private fostering arrangements in England
Source: DfE Children looked after in England including adoption


subsequently returned to be looked after
 Nine children and young people who have ceased to be looked after and
moved on to independent living
 Four children and young people who have ceased to be looked after and
are now living in houses of multiple occupation.


Executive summary
There are widespread and serious failures in the services provided to children and
their families in Sunderland. This is a corporate failure by senior leaders and
managers that leaves children and young people unsafe. The local authority has
established a voluntary improvement board with partner agencies and has an
improvement plan but these measures have not had a discernible impact on
improving practice or outcomes for children and young people. During the
inspection, 21 childrens cases were referred back to the local authority by inspectors
to request that action be taken to ensure childrens needs were met. This is one out
of every ten childrens cases looked at by inspectors.
Services have significantly deteriorated since the last inspection of childrens services
in April 2012. Poor practice has already been identified by two independent reviews
of childrens services commissioned by the local authority in 2014. A voluntary
improvement board and an improvement plan are in place as a result. Despite this,
inspectors identified widespread, systemic poor practice and services that are neither
adequately ensuring the safety nor promoting the welfare of children and young
people.
Of serious concern is the number of unallocated and unworked cases, particularly
within the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH), where 122 cases have been held
for five months without being progressed. This means that support for families is
compounded by delay. A significant concern is that the local authority cannot know
the extent and seriousness of the issues within these cases. This leaves some
children potentially at risk of harm.
Children are left in circumstances that are actually or potentially unsafe without their
needs or the level of risk being assessed or action taken. This is because there are
fundamental shortfalls in frontline practice across the breadth of childrens services.
Assessments of children are often absent or incomplete and those seen by inspectors
were mostly poor. A Back to Basics training programme, introduced to improve front
line practice, has only just started and is yet to show impact.
Far too often children and families do not have the support of a consistent allocated
worker. There is insufficient oversight of practice by managers and a lack of
communication and focus on key priorities. One of the reasons for this is the lack of
stability within the workforce, caused by heavy reliance on agency staff and interim
appointments at all levels, and compounded by a high turnover of social workers in
some key teams. In addition, very high caseloads mean that workers are unable to
undertake key tasks. While the local authority has introduced a clear strategy for
developing the workforce, it is too new to have had any impact.


There is some effective early help to families, provided, for example by the
Strengthening Families service. However, early help services are not well coordinated
or focused and the new early help strategy is yet to be formally agreed by partner
agencies.
Services for children and young people missing from home or care, missing from
education or at risk of child sexual exploitation are insufficient and poorly
coordinated. Data and intelligence are not adequately collated and analysed to
inform either service development or planning for individual young people.
The local authority is slow to take appropriate legal action to safeguard children. As a
result children at risk wait too long before they become looked after. Once they do
become looked after there are further delays in finding permanent homes for them.
This situation is made worse because of a shortage of appropriate accommodation
and placements.
While there is evidence of some better practice within the adoption service, including
some good life story work, there is a lack of focus on support and preparation. As a
result, there have been four adoption disruptions within 12 months.
Services for care leavers are particularly poor. The support and aspirations for care
leavers are seriously lacking, with poor quality planning and a lack of appropriate
housing.
The local authority and partner agencies do not have a shared, up to date strategic
plan that sets out their current priorities for children, how they will be delivered and
how their impact will be measured. A framework of cooperation outlining how
partner agencies will work together and a new safeguarding Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA) were finalised in May 2015. They are positive developments but
again it is too early for them to have had an impact on improving the range and
quality of services.
Performance management and quality assurance processes are poor, based on
unreliable data and do not always focus on services and areas of practice in the
greatest need of improvement. Learning from audits, the complaints process and
feedback from children, young people and their families is not used to drive
improvement planning. In addition, scrutiny by elected members lacks rigour and has
had little positive impact.
Recent changes within the Local Safeguarding Children Board, introduced by the
experienced new independent chair, together with improved communication between
agencies on the improvement board are positive developments. However, they are
too recent to have had an impact on improving services or outcomes for children.


Recommendations
The following recommendations are those that inspectors considered to be the
priorities for Sunderland. They do not address all of the detailed failings identified in
this inspection and contained in the main body of the report.

Take urgent action to review the cases of all children and young people who
do not have an allocated social worker or who are not being actively worked
with, and provide immediate and appropriate assessment and help as
necessary. (Para 31)


Review as a matter of urgency all cases where children are looked after under
voluntary arrangements to establish whether this legal basis is sufficient to
ensure their safety and emotional security; and take additional action where it
is not. (Paras 58, 62,64, 65)


Increase the capacity, quality and focus of the MASH to meet the demand for
service. (Paras 29, 30, 31, 32, 33)


Review the cases of all children being worked with under the public law outline
or in care proceedings to ensure that robust plans are in place and that cases
are progressing at a pace that matches childrens needs. (Paras 62 ,63)


Ensure robust management oversight of frontline practice so that decision
making, assessment and planning for children are timely, clear and meets their
needs. (Throughout).


Ensure children are seen promptly and regularly and that their views inform
assessments and plans in line with their developing needs. (Throughout)


Take urgent action to recruit qualified and experienced staff and retain and
support professional skills and competence. (Paras 139, 140, 141)


Ensure manageable caseloads for social workers so that they can respond
appropriately and in a timely manner to the needs of children and young
people. (Paras 29, 140)


Work with partners to ensure that there is a single, clear, up-to-date multiagency strategic plan to shape services for children and young people in
Sunderland and against which progress can be measured. (Para 133)


Ensure that strategic planning is focused on the areas of practice most in need
of improvement and is underpinned by clear arrangements for operational
delivery and the measurement of impact. (Paras 129, 133)



Develop performance management and quality assurance processes that focus
on key priorities to help drive improved performance. (Paras 128, 129)


Strengthen the function of scrutiny committee so that it has a clearer impact
on improving outcomes for children. (Para 130)


Ensure that the local authority meets its role and responsibilities as a corporate
parent. (Paras 110, 116, 131)


Ensure there is sufficient breadth and quality of placements to meet the needs
of children looked after and care leavers. (Paras 59, 76, 113, 116, 132)


Provide an out of hours service that meets the emergency needs of children
and young people and is effectively coordinated with day-time services to
ensure consistent and safe work with children and their families. (Paras 34)


Establish clear practice standards, policies and procedures so expectations are
clearly understood by social workers, early help practitioners and their
managers. (Paras 141)


Strengthen the arrangements for disabled childrens transition assessments to
adult services. (Para 42)


Engage with partner agencies to agree the aims, structure and implementation
of the integrated early help offer and its fit with wider services for children and
young people. (Paras 40, 52)


Build on the recent review of services for children and young people at risk of
child sexual exploitation to ensure that these services, and those for children
missing from home, care or education, are comprehensive, joined up and have
sufficient capacity. (Para 134)


Revise the arrangements for supervised contact to ensure these are driven by
childrens needs and that workers are sufficiently experienced and trained to
oversee contact appropriately. (Para 69)


Strengthen the Virtual School so that it is able to track effectively the progress
of all children looked after and care leavers. (Para 86)


Improve the quality, consistency and monitoring of all personal education
plans (PEPs,) particularly target setting and action planning, so that these
become a more useful tool to help young people make educational progress.
(Paras 90)


Establish an effective recruitment strategy for adopters. (Para 103)


Reduce the likelihood of adoption breakdown by developing the adoption
support offer so that children and adopters receive support that matches their
needs. (Para 109)



Improve ways to keep in touch with care leavers, providing a place for them to
drop in and have access to the care leavers team. (Para 112)


Improve pathway plans so that they reflect the needs and aspirations of young
people and involve them in the planning process. (Para 119)


Improve arrangements to provide and monitor education, employment and
training opportunities for care leavers and increase options available to them,
for example through apprenticeships. (Paras 111, 117, 18, 120)


Summary for children and young people


Senior managers in the local authority do not currently make sure children and
their families get the right support when they need it most. They do not listen
well enough to children and young people to help them provide a better
service.



They do not make sure all of the staff at the local authority have the right
support and training to help them meet the needs of children, young people
and their families. Inspectors have told them that it is very important that they
must quickly do much better for Sunderlands children and young people.



When children and their families have problems that are easier to solve, they
get good support from professionals in their community and their school.
When they have more difficult problems, it can take too long to get the help
they need. Social workers and managers change too many times and this
makes it difficult for children and young people to build a relationship with
someone who knows them well. This means they have to tell their story more
than once to different people, which can be hard.



Some children are not seen often enough by their social worker and do not
get the help they need to understand the plans for their future. Not all
children and young people are asked what they want to happen when
decisions are made about their care.



When children need to become looked after by the local authority they go to
live with carers who look after them well. Because lots of children are cared
for by the local authority, they do not have enough homes. This means that
sometimes children and young people have to live outside of Sunderland. This
means children often have to change school, which is not good for their
learning. It can also be difficult for children to keep in touch with their family
and friends.



Some children need to live away from their parents permanently. When this
happens, it sometimes takes too long to find them a permanent home. The
local authority always tries to make sure brothers and sisters live together,
and they do this well.



When young people are old enough and are ready to leave care, they do not
get a good choice of somewhere to live and they are not given enough
support to live by themselves. Some young people want to stay with their
foster carers after they leave care but often their carers do not get enough
help and advice from the local authority to make that happen.



Too many young people leave care without good qualifications, which makes
it difficult for them to get a job. They do not get enough support to go to
college or university. The local authority knows they need to get better at
providing support.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
Serious and widespread systemic weaknesses in childrens social care services mean
that the local authority is failing to ensure that the most vulnerable children in need
of help and protection are effectively safeguarded.
Inspectors saw many examples of referrals by partner agencies concerned about
children where not all necessary action was taken to ensure that they were safe. The
work of childrens social care is characterised by unallocated and unworked childrens
cases, leading to drift and delay in providing services to meet children and young
peoples needs. During the inspection, 21 childrens cases were referred back to the
local authority by inspectors to request that immediate action be taken to ensure
childrens needs were met. This is one out of every ten childrens cases looked at by
inspectors.
Frontline social work managers do not get the support they need from middle
managers to make effective decisions. This is compounded by high staff turnover
and a dependence upon agency staff. Senior managers do not have sufficient
understanding of the issues faced by frontline staff, particularly in the Multi-Agency
Safeguarding Hub (MASH), who have very high caseloads and are therefore unable
to respond swiftly and appropriately to the needs of children and families.
The threshold for access to childrens social care services is not clearly understood
and applied by partner agencies and frontline workers in the MASH. Partnership work
does not provide an effective and safe response to supporting families who
experience parental drug and alcohol or mental health problems, or domestic abuse.
The out of hours service, which is meant to ensure that children can receive urgent
help and protection during evenings and weekends, is not fit for purpose. Private
fostering arrangements do not meet statutory requirements.
Families experience too many changes of social worker. Social work practice is
characterised by delays in response to requests for help, children not being seen,
limited direct work, and poor quality or absent assessments. This leads to poor
quality planning to meet childrens needs. In most cases, children and young people
are not sufficiently engaged in assessments or involved in shaping their plans.
Assessments and plans do not generally take into account distinctive features, such
as their ethnicity or disability.


In most cases reviewed in detail by inspectors, social work intervention has not led
to sufficient measurable improvement in childrens lives. Not all children in need
(CiN) or those who are the subject of child protection concerns have a written plan
as they should do. Even children that do have a written plan are not always seen as
frequently as they should be.
Social workers do not manage core groups of professionals effectively to deliver child
protection plans. Core group meetings are not well attended by partner agencies.
The range of early help services and programmes provided by the partnership is not
well focused or coordinated by a clear strategy. As a result, it is not always clear
what services are available to help, although several individual examples were seen
of effective early help to support individual families.
Services to protect children who go missing from home or are at risk of child sexual
exploitation (CSE) are seriously underdeveloped and lack coordination. Data collected
about children at risk of sexual exploitation is of poor quality. This limits
effectiveness, as the partnership does not have a clear understanding of the extent
of the problem to enable them to address concerns. When children go missing,
return home interviews are not routinely offered as they should be. Arrangements to
support children missing education are more effective, but do not link effectively with
those for children missing from home or care and those at risk of sexual exploitation.
This is a missed opportunity to improve the protection of these children by
developing a greater understanding of risks and how to reduce them. The
recommended actions from a recently commissioned review of children at risk of CSE
are too recent to demonstrate improvement.

Inspection findings

Vulnerable children in Sunderland do not get good enough help and protection
from childrens social care services. Serious and widespread systemic failings
mean that the most vulnerable children in need of protection are not
effectively safeguarded. Many examples were seen by inspectors of situations
where the local authority has not taken all the action necessary to ensure
childrens safety. During the inspection, 21 childrens cases were referred back
to the local authority by inspectors to request that immediate action be taken
to ensure childrens needs were met. This is one out of every ten childrens
cases looked at by inspectors. Social work staff do not consistently follow
safeguarding procedures. Neither they nor their managers get the
management support and oversight they need. Senior managers do not have
sufficient understanding of the issues to take appropriate action to improve
performance and practice at the frontline.



Within the Multi-Agency Service Hub (MASH), which deals with all new
referrals to childrens services, there are not enough social workers to deal
with the high number of reported concerns about childrens welfare, including
incidents of domestic abuse. This lack of capacity is not only because of the
number of referrals that come in but also because these social workers are
additionally responsible for ongoing work with children up to the point of an
initial child protection case conference, the establishment of a child in need
plan or case closure. This lack of social work capacity during the key early
stages of work with children and their families, leads to very high caseloads for
social workers and creates a bottleneck that leads to delay in progressing
work with children. This key challenge for the local authority has not been
managed effectively.


The threshold for referral to childrens services is not sufficiently understood
and applied by partner agencies and social workers in the MASH. The majority
of contacts come from the police, who have no triage process to assess the
appropriateness of the referral before contacting the MASH. This leads to 50%
of these contacts resulting in no further action. The MASH is expected to
provide a swift initial response to concerns about children, but there are
significant delays in decisions to progress referrals and take effective action.


Within the MASH, inspectors saw significant shortcomings including delays in
the allocation of cases to social workers, children not being visited, poor quality
case recording and the drift in the completion of assessments. Additionally,
effectively. In the worst example, a social worker had 45 assessments to
complete that were not entered on the childrens electronic records. When
inspectors identified these shortcomings, they were told that the local authority
had been aware of the concerns and during the first week of the inspection
deployed additional social work resources within the MASH to enable staff to
assess risk and respond to unallocated and unworked cases.


The quality of social work assessments is poor. Social workers are confused
about what type of assessment to complete. This is also the case for early help
professionals, who use different types of assessment to inform their plans. In
almost all cases looked at in detail by inspectors, social work assessments were
of poor quality. They are not timely, comprehensive or analytical and do not
lead to appropriate or focused help. Assessments have weak analysis of risk
and protective factors. They do not consistently include an evaluation of the
childs identity. Chronologies are not used effectively to identify historical
factors and in some cases, assessments are absent or out of date. The voice of
the child is not considered in the majority of assessments seen in the MASH
and it is therefore unclear of the childs view of their situation.


Transfer arrangements for cases to progress from the MASH to locality social
work teams for continuing work are not child-centred, safe or effective.
Transfers are made via e-mail with no prior discussion or agreement between
managers and are therefore sometimes missed. The delay experienced by


families at this stage means that social workers in the locality teams find it
more difficult to develop effective relationships with children and their families
as they have been waiting too long for help.

The outof-hours service that provides emergency social work services at
evenings and weekends is not fit for purpose. There are no staff members
specifically dedicated to it. Arrangements rely on social workers who have been
working through the day continuing to work out of hours. Tired out-of-hours
social workers often focus only on responding to the immediate presenting
safety issues for children. They frequently fail to complete essential records
such as full referral details or records of child protection strategy discussions.
As a result, this essential information is not available on the electronic records
to ensure continuity between the day and out-of-hours services in keeping
children safe.


The number of children subject to child protection plans in Sunderland is rising.
In May 2015, 394 children were subject to a plan. This is a 29% increase from
to a child protection plan for the category of neglect. This is much higher than
both statistical neighbours (55%) and England (43%). The reasons for this
have not been analysed and are not well understood by the local authority.


Not all those assessed as children in need (CiN) under Section 17 of the
Children Act 1989, or who are the subject of child protection concerns, have a
plan aimed at reducing risk and improving their welfare. In no cases looked at
in detail by inspectors was there a good child in need or child protection plan;
many were poor. Examples were seen where there was no written plan. Where
they did exist, many were out of date, delayed in completion or had key
omissions. Plans are not consistently reviewed or updated and so do not
adequately reflect childrens changing needs or level of risk. In the large
majority of cases, childrens needs arising from diversity factors are not
sufficiently considered. This means that the help being offered to the family
lacks focus and is not defined by clear expected outcomes.


The allocation of a case to a social worker does not consistently or reliably
improve childrens safety. Children experience too many changes of social
worker. Nearly a quarter of all children subject to a child protection plan are
not seen by their social worker in the timescale set by their plan. In the large
majority of cases where action is required to remove a child permanently from
their family, arrangements are not progressed in a timely manner. There are
delays and missed opportunities in obtaining legal advice to help shape
assessments and plans and poor contingency planning.


Child protection core groups do not always take place regularly and when they
do, they are not well managed. They do not use the child protection plans to
measure progress and ensure actions are focused on the issues and actions
that will make the most difference. There is no designated minute-taker and so
no formal record of the core group meeting to share with group members,


including children, young people and parents. Consequently, it is not always
clear what action is required from whom and by when. Professionals from the
different agencies who attend core groups report that they make their own
notes and often have to contact social workers after the meeting to ask them
what they need to do.

Partnership working to meet childrens assessed needs is of inconsistent
quality. In most of the cases looked at in detail by inspectors, multi-agency
work is not effectively coordinated. There is some poor joint work between
childrens social care and the police. This includes poor information sharing to
determine risk and weak decision-making on whether to undertake single or
joint child protection investigations.


The consistently poor performance of childrens social work services has
resulted in a loss of confidence by their partner agencies. This has led to
delayed referrals and refusals by agencies at early help panels to accept cases
judged by childrens social care to be ready to step down from child in need
and child protection plans. As a result, many examples were seen of children
remaining in the statutory system when this is not necessary and may not be
in their best interests. Attendance of some agencies, in particular the police, at
core groups and child protection conferences is poor.


Identified risks to children are not always clearly documented in case records.
This compromises the councils ability to make the right decisions at the right
time when children may be at risk of immediate harm. Significant gaps in case
records include poor or absent records of strategy discussions and meetings
and delays in placing child protection conference minutes on file. The outcome
of child protection enquiries is not recorded consistently and the timeliness of
progressing to an initial child protection conference (ICPC) is consistently poor.
Performance in April 2015 was only 51% within timescale. In addition, social
workers use offline documents for the majority of their recording including
initial assessments, strategy discussions, child protection enquiries, reports to
ICPCs and care plans. Consequently, childrens electronic case records do not
contain accurate details of social work activity and the dates of completion of
work, which hampers frontline managers ability to monitor and improve
practice.


Transition arrangements between childrens and adult services for disabled
children do not consistently ensure effective planning for young people at this
important point in their lives. This is because, unless disabled children are
assessed as having complex needs, they have a review chaired by a non-social
work qualified support officer when a detailed social work assessment to fully
identify their needs would be more appropriate.


Children at risk of child sexual exploitation and those who go missing from
home and care are not adequately safeguarded. Understanding of the numbers
of children involved, the effect this has on them and the impact of services in
tackling the problem is seriously underdeveloped. Staff from different agencies


have received training and a risk assessment toolkit has been introduced to
inform their responses to risk. This is not yet embedded in frontline practice,
with some social workers unclear about how to use the tool. The Missing,
Sexually Exploited and Trafficked (MSET) group meets monthly and has had
some success in working with individual young people who are vulnerable to
sexual exploitation or who have repeatedly gone missing but does not routinely
compare data and intelligence from different sources to understand the wider
picture or who are the most vulnerable young people. In particular, gaps in
intelligence and data and a failure to make connections between cases of
actual or risk of sexual exploitation, children missing from home or care and
those missing education limits the effectiveness of this group. This means that
professionals do not have the detailed understanding that would enable them
to identify children at greatest risk, identify hotspots or develop services.
Although some examples were seen of disruption activity, this work is not yet
effectively coordinated.

A national charitys Cut them Free campaign and Chelseas Choice, a themed
drama production about a true story of exploitation, have been rolled out
across all schools, reaching many children.


When children do go missing, return home interviews are not always offered.
Social workers and managers are not clear on statutory guidance about when
a return home interview should be offered. Return home interviews for
children not known to childrens services who go missing from home are
undertaken by a commissioned service. However, there is no equivalent
service in place for children and young people who are active cases to
childrens services, when they go missing from home or care. Copies of return
home interview records for children not known to the local authority are sent
to the police. However, those that are carried out by social workers for young
people who open cases to childrens services are not sent to the police. As a
result, there is no opportunity to collate information from the full range of
interviews to help shape and target services. When this was raised as a
concern by inspectors, the local authority put in place revised guidance to staff
to ensure copies of all return home interviews are collated centrally.


Arrangements to support children missing education are effective but school
attendance remains a challenge. Thorough procedures are in place to ensure
that any children missing from education (CME) are identified quickly and
appropriate action taken to establish their whereabouts. Weekly school returns
are followed up swiftly and investigations are referred to the five locality
attendance officers. Information about the names and number of children
missing education is not however cross-referenced with information about
children vulnerable to sexual exploitation or missing from home or care. This
limits the local authoritys ability to assess who are the most vulnerable
children. The authority provides appropriate support to parents of children
receiving elective home education including advice and guidance, home visits
and examination arrangements. However, procedures are insufficient to assure


the quality of alternative educational provision and they are particularly poor
for those children educated outside of the local authority area.

The local authority cannot be assured that children who live within families
where there are concerns about parental drug or alcohol misuse or mental
health problems are supported and safe. Delayed responses by the local
authority and the poor quality or absence of assessments, combined with
confusion about the availability of services, leads to a lack of appropriate focus
on these families needs. The Safeguarding Joint Services Needs Analysis (May
early intervention services, Strengthening Families and social care. This
includes duplication of service provision in some areas and scarcity of provision
in others, with identified problems around the lack of consistent application of
child protection thresholds. This mirrors the concerns identified by inspectors.


Poor partnership work provides an ineffective response to supporting families
experiencing domestic abuse. Insufficient training and support means that
social workers do not always have the knowledge they need to spot the signs
and symptoms of domestic abuse, or to make effective interventions. The local
authority does have a standard assessment tool for assessing risk in cases of
domestic abuse but this is not routinely employed. The data on domestic abuse
is insufficiently developed to help shape service and management decisions.
The rate of domestic abuse referrals has risen sharply by 40% in the last year
and the local authority and its partners do not know why. Domestic abuse
contacts and referrals from the police are of poor quality. They are not
informed by an assessment of the risks posed to children and do not provide a
sound basis for social work decision making. The Police triage team uses an
evidence-based assessment tool but does not routinely share this information
as part of the notification to childrens social care. Following referrals,
childrens services send standard letters to parents who may be either a victim
or a perpetrator of domestic abuse, despite the possible risk of further violence
inherent in this practice.


Private fostering arrangements do not meet statutory requirements. It is
acknowledged by the local authority that insufficient work is being done to
promote awareness of private fostering across the area. A small number of
young people are appropriately identified as privately fostered when referred
to the MASH. There were then considerable delays in the completion of
assessments of private fostering arrangements and, where these do exist, they
are of poor quality. Visits to support privately fostered children and young
people are neither sufficiently frequent nor regular, and it is unclear from social
work records what help is being offered.


There are delays in the progression of some cases being considered by the
local authority designated officer (LADO), where child abuse is suspected by an
adult who is in a position of trust. This means that childrens safety cannot be
assured. Despite prioritisation of cases by the LADO to ensure that the
immediate safety of children is not compromised, there is insufficient capacity


to provide a timely response to all cases. As in the broader work of the local
authority, there is a reliance on the use of offline systems that are not
connected with other child protection processes. This leads to poor
coordination.

The Strengthening Families approach is Sunderlands response to the Troubled
Families national initiative. The model became operational in March 2013. By
December 2014, Sunderland reported that all of the 805 families they were
working with had been turned around. The Strengthening Families panel
provides a multi-agency forum for access to services, but the police no longer
attend. This delivers less effective joint work to support families.


A range of services are provided by the local authority and partner agencies for
families requiring early help. These services have greater stability in middle
management, make some effective use of co-location of professionals to
enable teams around the family (TAFs), and share a robust panel system that
monitors thresholds for intervention. However, whilst there are examples of
good early help making a difference to families, overall there is a lack of
strategic coordination and data is not used to identify the different levels of
need across the city and target services to address that need. As a result, help
is not always available at the right time and in the right place.


Gaps in the provision of early help mean that families experience inequality of
access to the services they need. For example, the early help offer for children
under five years has much clearer pathways, but this is not the case for
children over five. Victims of domestic abuse and others who need to attend
parenting programmes experience waiting times of up to five months. There is
some targeting of service where there are three or more agencies involved
with families through TAFs but the number of families engaging with this
service is low, only five in the East locality at the time of the inspection.


Local authority family support workers provide some effective services for
children just below the threshold for safeguarding. However, there are not
enough of them to meet the demand and so some families wait too long to get
the help they need. Examples were seen by inspectors of families caring for
disabled children with complex needs experiencing delays in getting services
and of others experiencing gaps in services.


For those receiving services, many families are engaging successfully with the
early help provided and they have their cases reviewed to ensure their
changing needs are met. Almost all of the 536 children who have been subject
to an assessment under the common assessment framework (CAF) last year
have been to the Strengthening Families panel and their circumstances have
been reviewed. Good preventive work provided in childrens centres was also
seen by inspectors. This includes targeted work with parents from ethnic
minority groups who are accessing parenting programmes, and a language,
literacy and mathematics course that is making a discernible difference to their
lives. Where outcomes have improved, this work is underpinned by effective


support that meets identified need through a child-focused plan. Some
examples were also seen by inspectors of effective use of TAFs involving
mental health support services, Wear kids and the Sunderland Youth
Offending Service.

The youth drug and alcohol project (YDAP) works well with young people up to
the age of 18. Effective targeting of young people who present at Accident and
Emergency is a good way to engage with young people when they may be at
their most receptive. As a result, the number of young people engaged in
programmes has gone up by 20% to 126 young people in the 12 months to 31
March 2015. The YDAP is performing above national average in key areas such
as early access, with 100% of young people waiting less than three weeks to
access the service and planned exits from the service at 87%. This
demonstrates good outcomes for this vulnerable group. The rate of first time
entrants to the youth justice system is on track to achieve the challenging
a period year on year improvements.


A Charter mark for schools in anti-bullying ensures quality standards that
subscribing schools must adhere to, which the large majority do. This includes
the completion of a Cyber Safety Agreement. The childrens anti-bullying team
and individual school leads use creative means of getting the messages across
within settings including, drama, poster competitions and poetry.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Inadequate

Summary
There are serious and widespread failures in services for children looked after. Some
children have remained at home in harmful or potentially harmful situations for too
long before becoming looked after. When children do become looked after, they are
often unable to develop trusting relationships with their social worker because of
frequent staff changes. Children wait too long to be placed with permanent carers
and to achieve legal security. The local authority has lost the confidence of the family
courts. When children return home from care, the local authority does not always
ensure these decisions are underpinned by assessments that demonstrate risks have
been addressed, or provide sufficient on-going support and monitoring.
There are significant failings in quality assurance arrangements to ensure that
children looked after and care leavers receive prompt and effective services that
reflect their identified need. There is limited evidence that challenge by independent
reviewing officers (IROs) leads to sustainable improved outcomes for children looked
after. There is insufficient placement availability and choice. Increasingly children are
being placed outside the city and placement stability is deteriorating.
Corporate parents are not sufficiently ambitious for children looked after. The
educational attainment gap between children looked after and all children is
widening. Not all children who go missing from care or who are at risk of sexual
exploitation are identified or receive a return home interview.
Adoption is not considered soon enough for children who are unable to return home
to their birth families. Children do not achieve permanence quickly enough.
Permanency planning is not taking place by the time of the second looked after child
review. Foster to adopt arrangements are under-developed. Children wait too long to
be matched to an adoptive family and adopter recruitment is on hold. There are too
many adoption disruptions because of poor support at critical times.
Outcomes for young people preparing to leave care are very poor and the local
authority is failing to support young people in the most basic ways. Health, housing,
education, employment and training needs are not met and young people spoken to
are dissatisfied with the service they receive. Some young people spoken to said they
felt unsafe and lonely where they live.


Inspection findings

There are currently 586 children and young people looked after by Sunderland
City Council. This is an increase of 96 children (20%) since March 2014. This
represents a rate of 107 per 10,000 children in the population, which is almost
double the England average of 60 and above the average of 84 in similar
councils. The local authority has not undertaken any analysis of the reasons for
this increase or why a high number of these children are looked after under
voluntary arrangements.


The local authority acknowledges that only a small number of connected
persons placements were previously approved as foster care arrangements.
This means children were placed with family members and other connected
persons without their capacity to provide safe care being formally assessed or
monitored. The local authority took action to address this after a serious
incident notification in August 2014 that highlighted the issue. The action taken
has not however been sufficient, because inspectors found continued poor
practice, including a failure to take action when assessments of carers are not
approved. This means that some children remain in placements that may not
be appropriate for their needs or may not even be safe. Inspectors found a
small number of cases where children have remained in family placements
after a temporary approval has been ended due to the unsuitability of carers.
The local authority were already in the process of reviewing these childrens
cases and have been asked to expedite this by inspectors to ensure that
children are safe and having their needs met.


Insufficient attention has been given to understanding the needs of children
and their families and childrens pathways into care. There is also a lack of
concerted effort to improve early identification and provide support to families
at risk of breakdown. There is no family group conference service to work with
extended families and help them to make plans in family meetings to support
children where concerns have been raised about their care. This also means
children are not given early opportunities to live within members of their
extended family when remaining with their parents is no longer possible.
Consequently, some children have become looked after who otherwise could
have remained within their wider family.


When children return home from care the authority is failing to comply with
recent amendments to the Care Planning Regulations, as this is taking place
without the approval of a nominated senior officer. A failure to undertake
assessments before returning children home means the local authority cannot
be satisfied that the concerns that led to them being removed from home have
been adequately addressed. There is also limited evidence that once children
return home they have a specific return plan or are visited regularly to ensure
they are settled and safe.


When children do become looked after either by compulsory removal from
home, or under a voluntary agreement to come into care, this is rarely


underpinned by effective pre-proceedings work under the Public Law Outline
(PLO). Letters before proceedings are not consistently agreed with legal
advisors and so the local authority cannot be confident that they are all of the
required standard. Cases in the pre-proceedings stage are not regularly
reviewed. Authoritative action is not taken soon enough to issue care
proceedings where parents are unable to demonstrate and sustain change
within the childs timescale.

Applications for care orders do not proceed quickly through the family courts.
Consequently, the Judiciary and Children and Family Court Advisory and
Support Service (Cafcass) have lost confidence in the local authoritys ability to
effectively support and progress children and their families through family
proceedings. Delays in completing assessments at the pre-proceedings stage
and poor quality assessments are two of the reasons performance is outside
the requirements of the Public Law Outline where cases are expected to
conclude within 26 weeks. Childrens cases are currently taking an average of
achieving legal permanence and security. There is no strategic oversight of
cases in the pre-proceedings process or when care applications have been
issued and therefore senior managers are unaware of the delays.


Over half (52%) of looked after children are accommodated under Section 20
of the Children Act 1989. This is almost double the national average of 28%.
The local authority has no current management information about the length
of time children remain looked after under voluntary arrangements or the
reasons for it. The local authority began auditing these cases from February
Section 20 being reviewed by a senior manager. There is limited evidence
these reviews have led to any remedial action being taken.


Inspectors considered all 66 audits of the cases of children subject to Section
orders. The findings show significant delay in securing permanence for children
either through care outside their birth family, return to parents or kinship or
connected persons care. Inspectors found 11 children subject to the preproceedings process, some for more than 12 months with no decision to issue
care proceedings despite a lack of improvement in their circumstances.
Inspectors also found two children experiencing delay in assessments for
Special Guardianship Orders (SGO), one for more than two years; and four
children whose plans for possible return to their families have not progressed.
In relation to children on full Care and Placement Orders, inspectors found five
awaiting assessment for SGO and seven children awaiting revocation of their
Placement Order. Evidence in one case had been filed with legal advisors for
over 18 months. Given that only 178 of 586 cases have been audited so far,
the true extent of delay in progressing childrens plans is likely to be far higher.


Challenge by IROs does not lead to sustainable improved outcomes for
children looked after. IROs are not given sufficient profile and status as


additional guardians of the childs plan. Where IROs identify drift and delay,
they escalate this to senior managers but this has little or no impact. Only a
minority of children achieve a plan of permanence by their second looked after
review. Consequently, children experience unnecessary delay in the
implementation of their care plans. Excessive caseloads of more than 100
mean IROs cannot fulfil all of their statutory duties and are not able to track
progress on childrens plans between reviews. The timeliness of reviews has
deteriorated from 94% in timescale in 2013-14 to 76% in 2014-15.

Childrens needs are not formally reassessed once they become looked after
and so care plans are often not informed by childrens current developmental
needs. Care plans are not always clear about desired outcomes for children
and what is expected of the various professionals involved in their lives.


Inspectors have seen no evidence that placement and information records are
routinely provided to carers when children are placed, or updated when
children move placement. This means key information required by carers in
order to provide appropriate care for an individual child is not always available.
This includes delegated authority for carers. This is a statutory requirement.


Arrangements for childrens contact with their birth families are not informed
by childrens needs and are not reviewed by social workers. The contact
service is under-resourced and consequently childrens contact is being
supervised on an ad hoc basis by a variety of staff from across the local
authority. Not all dedicated contact supervisors have relevant qualifications and
none of the 25 staff had received any relevant training prior to the service
starting in April 2014. Children see too many different workers during family
contact; this is not helpful for their emotional development and wellbeing. This
failure to consider childrens needs and routines, to review contact
arrangements or to supervise contact with suitably trained staff is compounded
by the use of unsuitable venues. This exposes children and young people to
risk of harm.


There is insufficient local placement capacity to meet the needs of children
looked after. Consequently, 166 children (31%) are placed outside the local
authority boundary and this has a negative impact on their ability to keep in
contact with family members and other significant people in their lives.
Childrens education is also disrupted at critical periods in their learning, with
their education.


The local authority currently has five childrens homes, four of which are
judged good. One childrens home requires improvement. The local authority
has taken immediate steps to implement an action plan to improve the
effectiveness of this home and no further enforcement action has been
required. Where young people are placed in private residential homes outside
the city, robust commissioning and effective regional consortium arrangements
ensure the provision is only used where it is judged good or better by Ofsted.



The local authoritys fostering service does not have a clear strategy to
respond to some significant challenges that it is facing. Despite rising numbers
of children looked after and declining placement stability, recruitment of foster
carers is not currently being prioritised and there is growing pressure to find
enough carers for sibling groups and teenagers with challenging behaviour.
The service is overwhelmed with the number of connected person carer
assessments that are being requested. Currently the team are assessing 17
such carers, five of which are overdue. Connected person carer assessments
are of a poor quality. More positively only two children are currently waiting
for long-term carers to be identified and no brothers and sisters are currently
placed apart unless this has been in accordance with their care plan.


The chair of the fostering panel has recently resigned and a new chair has
taken over. The panel is properly constituted and works well together. The
panel does not however receive performance information or reports. First
reviews of foster carers are presented to panel, though currently there is a
backlog.


The panel has turned applications down, but the majority have then been
overruled by the agency decision maker (ADM). The panel does not currently
have confidence that the recommendations they are making will be supported
by the ADM. This role has been filled with a series of interim post holders.
Consequently senior managers cannot be assured that decisions are being
made in the best interests of children.


Foster carers feel supported by their supervising social workers and, in cases
seen by inspectors, social workers were visiting foster carers every six weeks.
Training and development programmes have been maintained. In the case
files seen by inspectors, appropriate agreements, checks and references were
in place. However, foster carers do not receive formal written confirmation of
delegated authority. This means that they do not have the authority to make
safe and unchallenged decisions for children and care planning regulations are
not being complied with.


The stability of short- and long-term placements for children is deteriorating.
There has been an increase in the number of placement moves children
experience with 76 (13%) out of 586 having three or more moves in the past
twelve months. This is a rise from 12% in 2013-14 and compares to a 10%
average for 2013-14 in similar local authorities. Five children have experienced
six moves. One of these is just five years old. Placement disruption affects
childrens ability to develop stable and supportive relationships with trusted
adults. This is critical to the emotional development of children unable to
return to their birth families.


This instability is compounded by the significant turnover in social workers that
children experience. In the past 12 months almost one third of children looked
after have had a change of social worker. One young person told inspectors
they had had 12 social workers. This has had a negative impact not only in the


childs ability to develop a meaningful relationship with their social worker but
also in relation to: delays in the completion of assessments of childrens needs;
delays in progressing cases within the Public Law Outline (PLO); delays in
children achieving permanent care outside their family; and delays in
progressing childrens plans either for reunification to their families.

Not all children looked after are seen regularly by a social worker. At the time
of the inspection, there is no record of 72 children and young people having
been seen by a social worker in 2015. One young person spoken to by
inspectors commented my social worker is unreliable; they sometimes dont
come when they are supposed to and they are often late. Not all statutory
visits by social workers are well recorded which makes it difficult to see the
purpose of the visit or how the visit monitors and drives forward the childs
plan.


There is a lack of evidence of management oversight on the vast majority of
childrens files. Rationale for decisions is unclear. The local authority does not
have accurate performance data about statutory visits to children, which
means senior managers are not aware whether they have been visited or not.


Children and young people who are living in permanent long-term foster
homes are not always given access to the services they need to help make
these placements successful. For example, when these children and young
people receive life story work this is due to the commitment of individual social
workers and foster carers rather than an organisational understanding of their
needs or a policy and commitment to support this.


Procedures to identify and support children who go missing from care or are at
risk of child sexual exploitation are underdeveloped. Currently return interviews
are not offered in all cases and not all interviews are conducted by a
professional with sufficient independence from the carers. Information
obtained from interviews is not used or analysed to inform safety plans for
individual children or understand push and pull factors. Information is not
aggregated to identify patterns, themes and trends.


Not all children at risk of child sexual exploitation receive a risk assessment.
Where these are undertaken, their poor quality and failure to analyse the full
range of findings including the childs history of going missing means children
at risk of sexual exploitation are not identified and protected. The local
authoritys data in relation to missing children and children at risk of sexual
exploitation are unreliable. The local authority was unable to provide inspectors
with a clear statement of the numbers of children involved. Inspectors sampled
sexual exploitation. In the vast majority of missing cases, children had gone
missing on more occasions than is recorded in the authoritys performance
data. This means senior managers are unclear about the numbers of children
at risk of child sexual exploitation and going missing from their care. This is a
serious failing.



The Councils Pledge to all children looked after and care leavers does not
reach the vast majority of children and young people. There is no website to
communicate information to children and young people. The Change Council,
which is the local authoritys Children in Care Council, does not fully represent
the views of all children looked after, with just five members attending the last
two meetings. There are no mechanisms in place to allow Council members to
canvass the views of their peers. Despite their small numbers the Change
Council has had a significant impact in improving some services, for example,
successfully lobbying to keep two childrens homes open and to increase the
payment made to care leavers.


No children in Sunderland are allocated an independent visitor. Only eight
children looked after receive the support of an advocate, despite the
contracted service having capacity to allocate an advocate within 24 hours and
the contract having no limit to the number of advocates who can be
commissioned. This number is very low given there are 370 children and
young people looked after over the age of seven.


The authority has made an improvement of 2.8% in reducing the numbers of
children and young people at risk of offending, but this is from a very high
starting point. The 2014-15 figure of 13.3% (29 out of 218 children aged 1017) continues to fall from a high of 16.1% in 2011-12. However, the rate of
children and young people offending in Sunderland remains high at 10.4 per
ten thousand children compared both with North East local authorities at 6.5
and England at 3.75 per ten thousand. The lack of a restorative justice
approach within the local authoritys own residential provision is having a
negative impact on the numbers of cautions and reprimands young people
receive. As a result of this children looked after in Sunderland are around three
times more likely to be cautioned or convicted for an offence when compared
with children looked after nationally and twice as likely when compared with
statistical neighbours.


The vast majority of children looked after attend good or outstanding schools.
The virtual school does not however have enough staff to support adequately
the 446 school-age children who are looked after. Attendance in Sunderland
schools is in line with schools in the rest of England but the number of pupils
who are persistently absent is slightly higher than nationally. The proportion of
children looked after who have had at least one fixed term exclusion has, for
the last three years, been higher than for similar groups nationally. No looked
after child has been permanently excluded for the last two years.


Most children looked after enter school from a low starting point. Too many
school moves for very young children mean they are frequently set back in
their attainment. For example, out of 15 looked after children at Key Stage 1,
three have moved schools four times since starting school, one has moved
three times and nine have moved twice.



For those looked after for an average of two years or more, the rate of
progress at the end of Key Stage 2 and Key Stage 4 is a mixed picture. The
number of children achieving a Level 5 in reading at Key Stage 2 was higher
than previous years, but at Level 4 children looked after performed below the
general population of children locally and nationally. Children identified as
having special educational needs perform less well than similar groups
nationally at both Key Stage 2 and Key Stage 4.


Performance in GCSE examinations at five A*to C in all subjects shows an
improving trend and has doubled in the last year from 40% to 80%. Standards
in the proportion gaining five or more GCSE grades A*-C including English and
mathematics has remained low at 20%, and are well below that which is
expected nationally and that of their peers locally. The rate of progress is not
rapid enough to close the attainment gap, and the better progress made at
Key Stage 2 for some children is not sustained throughout Key Stages 3 and 4.


The quality of personal education plans (PEPs) is poor; target setting is
insufficiently clear to drive progress effectively, with few targets being specific
or measureable enough to monitor progress. Timescales are often unclear,
with many actions simply being reported as on-going. Young peoples views
are not well or consistently recorded.


The Anti-Bullying strategy, which includes cyber-bullying, ensures foster carers
and residential workers have training to enable them to support children and
young people when they encounter discrimination or bullying.


Thorough procedures are in place to ensure that any looked after children
missing from education are identified quickly and appropriate action is taken to
establish their whereabouts. Procedures to assure the quality of alternative
educational provision are insufficient, particularly for those children placed
outside of the local authority area. Virtual school staff do not visit providers
prior to a child being placed and quality assurance procedures are not well
defined. Arrangements for the transition of young people into post-16
education and training are not good enough. Young people are not helped to
explore sufficiently the whole range of post-16 options.


Children and young people have not had their health needs identified and met
because initial health assessments of children becoming looked after have
often not been completed in a timely way. This has improved during 2015,
from 21% in January to 80% in May. However, this improvement needs to be
built on and maintained. The high turnover of social workers has been a
particular factor behind initial health assessment requests not being sent to the
designated doctor within 28 days, and consent not always being sought from
parents.


Children and young peoples emotional and mental health needs are not
sufficiently recognised or addressed. Where strengths and difficulties
questionnaires are completed for children they are not scored and are not used


to identify young peoples emotional needs or gaps in services. Child and Adult
Mental Health Services (CAMHs) are delivered by a number of providers and
referral pathways are unclear. This means it is confusing for young people,
staff, parents and carers to access services. Thresholds and the criteria for
transition to an adult specialist service are particularly high. As a result, young
people who may need this service are referred back to their general
practitioner. Consequently young people experience stop and start
assessments and delays in receiving support when they need it. However,
children who self-harm are responded to very quickly and appropriately and
are seen and assessed by a psychiatrist in hospital.

Children looked after are able to get advice and support from a specialist nurse
who provides contraception services. The Youth Drug and Alcohol Project
(YDAP) is a team of qualified drugs workers providing a service for all young
people aged 10-18 who require specialist advice and support to help overcome
problems or difficulties relating to drugs or alcohol. YDAP have a link worker
specifically identified to work with local authority childrens homes. Training on
sexual health matters and drug and alcohol issues is regularly provided to
foster carers.


Tier 3 CAMHS for children and young people with serious mental health
difficulties is overwhelmed by the number of referrals it receives. Children wait
for up to up to three months to receive a service. Staff in universal services
and targeted services lack skill and confidence in dealing with emotional and
mental health problems and so refer almost all cases into specialist services.
This means that some children receive a mental health service unnecessarily
and the service cannot focus on those children most in need. Children looked
after receive a degree of prioritisation and have a separate referral pathway
but this still lacks sufficient responsiveness. Care leavers are not given priority
by the service and do not have a separate referral pathway.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is inadequate


Children do not achieve permanence quickly enough. The adoption scorecard
(2011-14) reports that it takes 654 days from the point at which a child
becomes looked after to them moving to an adoptive family. This is 107 days
away from meeting the national threshold target, 77 days longer than
statistical neighbours and 26 days longer than the England average. Local
authority data show a significant improvement in performance for 2014-2015,
which has seen the number of days drop from 599 in 2013-14 to 484.


The time taken to find an adoptive family is also too long. The adoption
scorecard (2011-14) reports it taking on average 240 days, which is 88 days


away from meeting the national target, 52 days longer than statistical
neighbours and 23 days longer than the England average. The local authority
again report improved performance for 2014-15, down from 215 in 2013-14 to
scorecard is showing improvement, Sunderland is still not achieving the
national thresholds targets for either indicator.

Opportunities to put in place concurrent arrangements are being missed. There
is no foster to adopt policy and carers are not being actively recruited. The
local authority recently identified a worker within the Permanence Team to be
a Foster to Adopt Champion but it is too early to assess any impact of this
development.

time of the second children looked after review. In the cases seen by
inspectors, formal discussions had not taken place by this point. Importantly,
this means that valuable time is wasted during which contingencies could be
explored and profiling work started. Added to this, the progress of children
who require a permanence plan is not being tracked. The Permanence
Monitoring Group, which used to meet regularly to perform this function, has
not met for 18 months.
standard. Care Plans are clear and focused, Child Permanence Reports are well
written and regularly updated and children benefit from good quality life story
work. Social workers and social work assistants in the Permanence and
Adoption teams are knowledgeable, experienced members of staff who have
manageable caseloads. However, the current team manager of the
Permanence Team does not have the required three years experience within
adoption work to be able to sign off key documents, such as the child
permanence report. There is also a lack of appropriate management oversight
in case records where management decisions and the rationale behind
decisions are not routinely recorded.
match cannot be found, profiles are shared with members of the North East
Consortium, the Adoption Register is accessed and paper and online
publications are used. The local authority has also held a number of events
where information about children has been shared with prospective adopters.
Sunderland is currently assessing 14 adoptive households. The local authority
has a well-established two-stage assessment process and the vast majority of
assessments take place within timescales. Adopters spoke positively about the
training they had received.
been taken. The local authority does not have in place robust management
arrangements to ensure that there are sufficient adoptive carers in the future.


successful at securing adoption for a significant number and range of its
children looked after. The Adoption Scorecard reports that from 2011-14, 21%
of the children who left care were adopted; this is good performance against
the England average of 14%. Further, of the children aged five and over
leaving care, 9% are adopted, performance which is higher than statistical
neighbours by three percentage points and higher than the England average
by four percentage points. For 201314, eight sibling groups were placed
together and there were no sibling groups placed apart where the assessment
was for them to be placed together. Good performance was sustained in 201415 with the number of older children and sibling groups adopted increasing
over the previous year. The number of children adopted from ethnic minority
backgrounds is extremely small with only one child being adopted in the last
year.
children. Later life letters are written and life appreciation days are taking
place for the majority of children.
place when required in order not to hinder the progress of cases. However, the
agency decision maker is not making decisions within timescales, leading to
delay at a critical point in the childs journey.
unnecessary delay as a result of medical information not being provided in a
timely way. These issues should have been picked up by the family finding
tracker meetings, which monitor the progress of children waiting to be
matched.
months. This has seriously impacted on their ability to secure a permanent
family. Four placements have broken down, two during introductions and two
shortly after the children had joined their prospective adoptive families.
Inspectors noted in all of these cases, poor matching, inadequate preparation
and insufficient management oversight. In three of the matches that broke
down, activity events (meetings that both children and adopters attend) were
used. The local authority needs to reassure itself that this tool is effective. The
learning from these placement disruptions has not been used to inform
improvements in practice.
packages of support ongoing. Post-adoption support offered lacks depth,
providing no CAMHs support for adopters and professionals dealing with
challenging and complex family issues. Currently there are three full-time
adoption support workers providing practical assistance and some low level
emotional support. These workers have completed only 18 assessments since
March 2014. Managers accept that there is a significant gap in both the range


of post-adoption support on offer and its take up despite the capacity available
within the service. A scoping exercise is due to take place to consider the best
way to meet the needs of adoptive families in Sunderland, while also ensuring
value for money.
the work being undertaken within the service or by the Adoption Panel. This
means that the Corporate Parenting Board is limited in the extent to which it is
able to understand what has taken place and hold staff to account. For
example, the 2014-15 report contains only data on the number and range of
children who have been adopted and adopters approved. This information is
not placed within the context of a service struggling to get children adopted
quickly enough, support and maintain children in their adoptive placements
and recruit sufficient adopters.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that is inadequate
service. The local authority fails to support these young people in some of the
most basic ways. The outcomes for young people leaving care are extremely
poor as a result of this failure.
the building where the leaving care team is based to visit their support
workers, meet up with each other or drop in for advice. When this was pointed
out by inspectors, the local authority took immediate action to change this so
that young people can enter the building. This situation has contributed to the
poor performance of the service in keeping in touch with care leavers,
especially those who do not consistently have access to a mobile phone.
Sunderland is currently in contact with only 30% of care leavers. This is 75 of
decline from 52% in the previous year. This is an exceptionally low number
and represents a very serious failing.
Only 60 out of 136 care leavers (44%) aged 19 to 21 years are in suitable
accommodation. This is down from 96 out of 147 (65%) in 2013-2014.
because of anti-social behaviour, threats of violence or because of the poor
quality of accommodation. One 17-year-old met by inspectors lives in a shared
home whose bedroom has graffiti and damage from the previous tenant. Two
young people living in supported lodgings did say they feel safe and happy
where they live, however six that are living in or have recently moved on from
trainer flats and hostels say that they felt worried and unsafe. They say that
the lack of support and the loneliness they felt living on their own made them
feel anxious and isolated.
up home, equipment for work and training and they have not been given any
information about advocacy or complaints. Young people are expected to fund
expensive deposits and bonds on properties of up to 800 from their leaving
care grant, which leaves them with little money for the essential items required
to set up their own home. The local authority does not have robust
commissioning arrangements in place to ensure sufficient high quality,
affordable and safe housing for care leavers.
recently found accommodation but one young person spent three months


street homeless, while another sofa-surfed for six months. A third young
person is living with just basic resources in bed and breakfast accommodation.
Senior managers were unaware of these issues. Cases of homeless children
looked after and care leavers are not formally reported on a regular basis to
the leadership team or the Corporate Parenting Panel.
outcomes for them are poorly recorded. As such the service is unable to
determine whether care leavers are being supported into employment or
training. The number of care leavers not in education, employment or training
is 101 out of 136 (74%). This is very high and a deterioration in performance
from 57% the previous year. Five young people are recorded as being not in
education, employment, or training (NEET) due to pregnancy or parenting and
a further four due to illness or disability. Activity information for 193 care
leavers (77%) is recorded as not known. The local authoritys inability to
identify and record care leavers employment status is a serious failing that
prevents action being taken to improve young peoples economic well-being.
the local college are poor. Care leavers attending Sunderland College have no
transition arrangements in place, the college is not involved in pathway
planning and when problems arise for students such as eviction, it is the
college that offers pastoral care and support. Liaison between the virtual head
teacher and the college is poor. The college does not receive information from
the local authority about things that might impact on young peoples future
success.
information missing; some had not been started. Those that had did not
contain clear goals, expectations or timescales and young people had not been
actively involved in developing them. Case recording on care leavers files is
incomplete and does not demonstrate that comprehensive risk assessments
have been undertaken. This means that the local authority does not know how
many care leavers are at risk from such factors as drug or alcohol misuse and
therefore do not know what support they will need to address these needs.
and delay in progressing plans are unchallenged. Assessments and plans are
not dated, signed or reviewed by managers and the promotion of young
peoples education, employment and training is not discussed with any sense
of urgency. Supervision takes place regularly but is not well recorded,
reflective or focused on problem solving.


The Change Council provides a forum for children looked after but there is no
council for care leavers and this means that their thoughts and ideas are not
sufficiently heard and responded to. Care leavers said they would welcome a
chance to speak to senior managers and to have a say in how services for
them are designed and delivered. There is no forum to celebrate care leavers

achievements, they do not receive birthday presents and there are no
arrangements in place to ensure that they are not alone at Christmas and
other holidays.
opportunity to develop longstanding trusting relationships with their leaving
care workers, who they value highly. Some of the team are experienced in
working with young people and are able to offer help with practical matters
and work to support young people through emotional issues. However, other
workers on the team are offering low-level practical support to young people,
which is more like a befriending service than a professional leaving care
service. Staff do not receive adequate training and development to ensure that
they have the skills to respond to young peoples needs around mental health
and wellbeing, domestic abuse, drug and alcohol use and sexual health.
receive a health passport when they leave care. Some young people who
spoke to inspectors have recently become mothers but had received little or no
information about medical issues that may have been important to know
during their pregnancy or post natal period.
exploitation are under developed and uncoordinated. Some examples of good
work were seen in individual cases, such as later life letters, one-to-one work
to develop self-esteem, breaking patterns of behaviour and giving young
people alternatives, but there is a lack of strategy or consistency in approach.
These individual cases are not used to build a picture of the risks to young
people.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Senior managers and elected members, including at the very highest levels in the
council, have not ensured that children and young people receive services that keep
them safe. They do not ask the right questions or undertake the right activities to
have a good enough understanding of frontline practice and have not put in place
the necessary improvements. There has been a serious failure in governance and
this has led to broad and deep inadequacies in services for the most vulnerable
children.
In the year before the inspection, two independent reviews commissioned by the
local authority reported significant failings in services for children and young people
similar to those identified during this inspection. Despite these reports, there remain
serious and widespread failings in local authority services that potentially leave
children unsafe. The local authority has not been able to ensure that all children and
young people who need one have a social worker who sees them regularly, an
assessment of their needs and a plan aimed at improving their welfare. Decision
making for children is often unclear and many children and young people experience
delays in receiving help.
Performance management and quality assurance processes are poor, based on often
unreliable data, and do not always focus on services and areas of practice in greatest
need of improvement. Learning from audits, the complaints process and feedback
from children, young people and their families are not used to understand the quality
and impact of services and to drive improvement planning. Scrutiny by elected
members lacks rigour and has had little positive impact.
The local authority is not meeting its responsibilities as a corporate parent. The
needs of children looked after and care leavers have not been adequately analysed
or met. A sufficient range and quality of placements has not been provided; both
placement stability and the percentage of care leavers in suitable accommodation
have declined over the last year. Outcomes for care leavers are particularly poor,
with less than half in suitable accommodation.
The local authority and partner agencies do not have a shared, upto-date strategic
plan that sets out their priorities for children, how they will be delivered and how
impact will be measured. The Childrens Trust has not met since May 2014 and no
successor forum is in place to act as a focus for the multi-agency planning and
delivery of services for children and young people. A framework of cooperation


outlining how partner agencies will work together and a new safeguarding joint
strategic needs assessment (JSNA) were both finalised in May 2015. These are
positive developments but too new to have had an impact on improving the range
and quality of services.
Services for children and young people missing from home or care, missing from
education or at risk of child sexual exploitation are insufficient and poorly
coordinated. Data and intelligence about young people are not adequately collated
and analysed to inform service development and planning for individual young
people. A March 2015 review of services for children and young people at risk of
child sexual exploitation commissioned by the local authority identified significant
weaknesses in the existing strategy and action plan.
The local authority is aware of the need to recruit and retain staff, to provide better
support and to develop their skills. Despite some success in recruiting permanent
staff, an on-going reliance on interim and agency staff, including at senior
management level, has led to continuing instability. Plans to support and develop the
skills of staff through the appointment of a chief social worker, the roll out of a Back
to Basics training programme and other measures are too recent to have had a
measureable impact on improving practice.
Staff morale in Sunderland is low. During the course of the inspection, staff reported
feeling frustrated and unsupported because they were not able to provide adequate
services to children and families.

Inspection findings
children in Sunderland are supported, protected and cared for appropriately.
There are widespread and serious failings in services to the most vulnerable
children and young people. Despite a commitment from both political and
strategic leaders to making improvements, many of the shortcomings found by
inspectors were the same as those identified in the two independent reviews
commissioned by the local authority in 2014. The local authority has not shown
sufficient leadership, management, impact or pace in understanding, tackling
and improving these failings so that outcomes for children and young people
improve.
who need one have a social worker. Nor have they been able to make sure
that vulnerable childrens needs and the risks they face are assessed and
reduced through prompt and good quality support. Inspectors saw many
examples of children and young people who either did not have a social worker


at all or who did but were not being seen regularly and where work was not
being done to improve their lives. This is not safe for children and young
people. There are not enough frontline managers and this combined with a
lack of stability arising from the high number of interim-managers means that
there is insufficient management oversight to provide consistent, guidance and
scrutiny of practice. As a result, decision-making for children and young people
is not always clear, consistent or timely.
and support to enable social workers to do an effective job. This has a direct
impact on the quality of services received by children and their families. In
talking to inspectors, social workers in Sunderland variously described the
service as firefighting, overwhelming, dangerous, unsafe and chaotic.
role of performance management in understanding and improving practice is
under-developed and the data that support performance management are not
reliable. Performance reporting does not focus sharply enough on key
weaknesses in services. Senior managers have not established a performance
culture in which the analysis of performance is informed by managers and
social workers. As a result, performance information is not used as a practical
tool to improve services and develop practice. During the course of the
inspection, and in response to feedback from inspectors, the local authority
took some immediate steps to improve both the quality of data and how it is
used to monitor and improve practice. Although positive, these are only the
first steps in ensuring a robust and effective performance management system
are developed to help improve outcomes for children and young people.
and impact of work with children and young people, because the use of audits
is weak. Although the local authority is beginning to undertake both case and
thematic audits, this is a new development. Case audits began in January 2015
and have not had an influence on improving practice and outcomes for
children and young people. The local authority has not made best use of those
audits it has undertaken. Learning has not led to subsequent actions plans or
training to improve practice or any assessment of their impact. Qualitative
information from audits, complaints and feedback from children, young people
and their families has not been adequately gathered, analysed and linked to
performance data to give the rounded picture of the quality and impact of
practice necessary to drive successful service improvement.
outcomes. Although they express a strong commitment to the welfare of
children and young people, and have backed this with increased funding at a
time of significant financial pressure, they have not been successful in
improving services. Elected members scrutiny of childrens services has not
been rigorous or tenacious enough to have a positive impact on outcomes for
children and young people. A new safeguarding committee, created to


scrutinise the implementation of the local authority improvement plan, met in
February and March of this year but is too new to have had an impact.
planned sufficiently to improve outcomes for children looked after and care
leavers. Corporate parenting board members cannot give clear evidence of
how or where they have made a positive difference for children. The Change
Council (children in care council) is underdeveloped. The local authority has
not done enough to involve children and young people, leading to low
attendance by children and no representation from care leavers. There are no
mechanisms in place for the corporate parenting board to seek the views of the
wider children looked after population.
increase in the number of children looked after over the last year. The strategy
has a much stronger emphasis on describing existing services rather than on
analysing need or planning for the future. Consequently, in-house and
commissioned placements do not provide a sufficient range and quality of
placements to meet the needs of children and young people. This lack of focus
on key priorities is also reflected in the paucity of edge-of-care provision, such
as a family group conference service, and in the lack of enough good quality
housing or an apprenticeship scheme for care leavers. Better placement
provision, where it does exist, is driven by strong needs assessment and
contract and compliance arrangements, for example through consortia
arrangements with other local authorities and for some young people
permanently placed in out of city placements. Notably the voice of children and
young people is also much more evident in placement planning in these cases.
Bringing together commissioners and social care staff at children in care panels
is a positive new development but too new to have had a significant impact.
for children is a significant gap and multi-agency governance arrangements
lack clarity and accountability. Without such a plan, and an effective forum or
board, underpinned by operational delivery plans and focused reliable
performance data, agencies are not collectively achieving the best for children
and are not able to hold each other to account effectively or to measure
outcomes achieved for children. A refresh of the Children And Young Peoples
Plan 20102025 carried out in 2014 does not update the plan but rather
provides a brief explanation of some key national and local legislative, policy
and practice developments in the intervening four years. Delivery plans for key
priorities have not been developed in the interim and the performance
framework developed to measure impact has not been used. The childrens
trust has not met since May 2014 and no successor body is in place. A
Framework of Cooperation between the Health and Wellbeing Board (H&WB),
Sunderland Safeguarding Children Board and Sunderland Safeguarding Adults
Board (SSAB), which also envisages the Childrens Trust (subject to review)
becoming an advisory group to the H&WB, was drafted in May 2015 but is yet
to be agreed.


a much stronger focus on children and young people and identifies 11
appropriate areas of unmet need and service gaps, including CAMHS and
developing CSE services. It is however too new to have had impact, lacks
analysis and does not focus on some services areas in need of significant
development, including services for children missing from home or care and
care leavers.
important in starting to build the improved relationships between the local
authority and partner agencies that are a necessary starting point for good
inter-agency working. However, the lack of engagement in this process of
some key agencies such as the police and general practitioners limits joined-up
improvement planning. As with wider partnership working, scrutiny within the
improvement board is under-developed and improvement planning is not
sharply focused on clear priorities or underpinned by robust plans for
operational delivery and impact assessment. Consequently the local authoritys
own assessment of progress presented to the June 2015 meeting of the
improvement board is that less progress has been made than was expected.
sexual exploitation are insufficient. They lack the joined up approach and
impetus that a clear strategy, action plan and robust performance data and
intelligence should provide. This is highlighted in a local authoritycommissioned review of March 2015 that led to an immediate action plan to
remedy deficits in the previous plan and strategy but this is very new and
significant gaps remain in the quality, sufficiency and impact of services.
from education and those at risk of child sexual exploitation have not been
brought together and analysed to understand prevalence, levels of risk and
trends. This means that service planning, training, awareness raising and
disruption activity as well as planning for individual children and young people
have not been informed by the information available. In particular, intelligence
from return interviews carried out with the most vulnerable children, those
whose level of need means that they are an open case to childrens services,
has not been collated centrally to help understand need and plan service
developments.
undertake specialist work with young people who go missing or who are
vulnerable to sexual exploitation and to provide training and awareness raising
to professionals. Consequently, there is a waiting list and young people
experience delays in receiving a service. Information in relation to child sexual
exploitation and missing episodes is not always shared between different
meetings about children. This means that planning for children is often neither
well coordinated nor informed by all relevant information, and is consequently
less successful than it could be in reducing risk for children and young people.


development are major challenges and are therefore key priorities. Some
success has been achieved in reducing the percentage of the workforce who
are agency workers from 30% in September 2014 to 21% in April 2015, and in
achieving the target of recruiting three experienced social workers each month
since January 2015. However the high percentage of managers who are
interim, and the higher concentration and turnover of temporary agency staff
in some key teams, remain a very serious issue. The MASH is staffed currently
with 37% agency social workers. This means that the stability necessary to
build sustained improvement has not been achieved.
thrive. Staff are often not clear about what they need to do, how they need to
do it and by when. This is further hampered by a complex and unintuitive
electronic case recording system, insufficient and inconsistent management
oversight and supervision and very high caseloads, often in the 30s or 40s and
even up to 69 in the case of one social worker.
developing and retaining staff but has yet to show significant impact. The
efforts of the newly appointed chief social worker to improve communication
between frontline managers and staff and senior managers, and to drive up
practice standards are well focused but too new to have had an impact. The
safeguarding managers and practice champions groups have only started
meeting over the last three months. Only one of six modules of the Back to
Basics training programme has been delivered to staff so far and risk
assessment and signs of safety training is yet to be rolled out.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
inadequate.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective arrangements
in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It does not
understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to identify
where improvements can be made.

Executive summary
The Sunderland Safeguarding Children Board is failing to exercise sufficient scrutiny
of services for safeguarding children and young people in Sunderland. It has not
done enough to evaluate how effectively agencies are keeping children safe or hold
partners to account for their practice. It has not provided sufficient leadership and
coordination with regard to key priorities including children who may be at risk of
sexual exploitation, those who go missing and those who live in homes where
domestic abuse is a problem. The board has not undertaken a multi-agency practice
audit for over a year. It has not therefore monitored the effectiveness of local
arrangements to safeguard children as required under statutory guidance.
The experienced independent chair, appointed in September 2014, has led a
comprehensive review of board membership, structure and priorities and there is
now a clear commitment at senior leadership level to improving the effectiveness of
the board. This has resulted in changes coming into effect in April 2015. These
include all board members now being sufficiently senior to be able to commit
resources or agree changes to practice in their agencies. However, while
considerable development work has been undertaken and a number of initiatives are
well underway, these improvements have yet to show a significant impact in
ensuring that the LSCB is fulfilling its statutory functions.
Relationships with other statutory boards have until recently remained unclear. This
means that the board has had limited impact in ensuring that childrens safeguarding
issues are prioritised within the work of other boards, such as the Sunderland
Safeguarding Adults Board and the Health and Wellbeing Board.
There is a lack of clear links between various planning documents. This means that
the board does not have clearly defined priorities or expectations about the quality of


services for children in Sunderland against which it can hold agencies to account. For
example, with regard to the provision of early help services, a single, streamlined
plan is in preparation but it is not yet complete.
The boards limited resources are overwhelmed by the scale of undertaking 10
serious case reviews (SCRs) in two years, and this has seriously limited their capacity
to undertake other activity. Current performance information available to the board is
insufficient to allow partners to scrutinise and challenge performance.
Representation by Childrens Services at sub-committees of the board has been
inconsistent because of both poor attendance and staff turnover. Partners express
exasperation at what they see as a lack of commitment and capability at middle
management level within Childrens Services.

Recommendations
services for children across the partnership.
consistent with the multi-agency threshold guidance document and then
monitor its effectiveness.
practice and is able to respond to demand following the imminent publication
of a high number of Serious Case Reviews (SCRs); then ensure lessons are
learnt and improvements embedded.
coordinated response to the high number of SCRs awaiting publication.
and at risk of sexual exploitation or trafficking are driven by effective
information sharing, performance monitoring, action planning and are
strategically coordinated and monitored by the board.
Looked After Partnership (MALAP) to ensure a sufficient focus


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
to meet its statutory duties and does not provide effective oversight of all
areas concerned with childrens safeguarding as required by statutory
guidance. The board has not had a clear or agreed structure through which to
exercise its critical friend role or assure itself that childrens safeguarding
matters are being given sufficient priority at a strategic level by partners. The
board has recently (May 2015) signed off a framework of cooperation with the
Sunderland Safeguarding Adults Board and the Health and Wellbeing Board,
but this is too new to have had an impact.
in Sunderland and this limits the boards ability to monitor effectiveness and
hold agencies to account. The board leadership recognises that the delay in its
implementation is having a significant impact on planned improvements in
frontline services. A draft strategy document seen by inspectors, is not
consistent with the existing multi-agency threshold guidance document and
this will need to be resolved prior to publication to avoid compounding an
existing lack of clarity among professionals about early help pathways and the
threshold for referrals to childrens services.
safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children, nor has it provided
sufficient leadership and coordination with regard to key concerns such as child
sexual exploitation and domestic abuse. The board has not received reports
from the Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO) for two years and has not
received a report on Private Fostering Arrangements (PFA). It has not
conducted a multi-agency practice audit for over a year or carried out an audit
of agencies safeguarding arrangements under Section 11 of the Children Act
quality of services. To address this, the board has recently developed and
agreed a performance and quality assurance framework and is undertaking a
Section 11 audit. It has also formed and trained multi-agency auditing teams,
and produced an auditing pack. However, none of this is yet in use.
alongside the unreliable nature of much of the data and the lack of multiagency audits, this lack of oversight means that often poor and uncoordinated
safeguarding services are not receiving sufficient scrutiny and challenge of
their quality and impact. Board members remain largely unaware of the impact
of any development activity and cannot easily evidence progress or challenge
delay. The most recent performance report to the board shows a sharp decline
in domestic violence referrals. Board members knew this was inaccurate and
attributable to human error, but the error passed the boards Quality
Assurance sub-committee and was included in the board performance report


twice. The commentary within the boards performance reports is too focused
on highlighting trends within the data and lacks sufficient analysis of the
impact on children.
responded to by senior leaders including the local authoritys Chief Executive.
This led to the appointment of the current independent chair in September
governance arrangements to improve its performance. The independent chair
now has the confidence and trust of board members in what is a very testing
environment for effective partnership working; they describe him as, inclusive,
engaging and committed to change. His position as independent chair of the
SSAB has led to better integration with adult safeguarding matters and the
promotion of a think family approach.
provider and they are kept up to date with current statutory guidance.
Examples were seen by inspectors of effective local policy formation.
Coordination between the safeguarding children and adults boards to
coordinate partners approach to Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) has led to a
multi-agency group working together effectively to raise awareness of the
issue, particularly amongst medical professionals working with parents. A
detailed policy has been developed, including a flowchart, to undertake
preventive action under child protection procedures where there is a risk of
FGM.
joined up. Following changes to its governance structure, the board has
completed and agreed a single, streamlined plan but this is not yet in
operation. The streamlined plans outcome measurements are too centred on
the completion of processes, and not sufficiently focused on the quality of
practice and how this improves outcomes for children.
does not provide the strength of leadership or scrutiny necessary to support a
robust and effective multi-agency response to missing children and those at
risk of child sexual exploitation. MSET enables known cases of child sexual
exploitation to be tracked but does not focus on the children most at risk.
Information about sexual exploitation and missing children are not evaluated
together to provide an understanding of trends, themes and hotspots. This is a
missed opportunity to use intelligence to inform disruption activity, which is
underdeveloped, and service planning. Although there has been some ad hoc
evaluation of return home interviews, overall evaluation is weak. A recent
review by Childrens Services of strategy and services available identified an
approach to child sexual exploitation that is seriously underdeveloped and not
currently capable of safeguarding young people.


following death or serious injury to a child, the boards Learning and
Improvement sub-committee streamlined and refined its processes to cope
with demand. As a result, it demonstrates improved, decision making, agenda
planning, and tracking to ensure that SCRs are completed to their terms of
reference. A high number of SCRs has placed additional pressure on board
staff, sub-group members, and on resources, limiting the boards capacity to
undertake other work.
been attended by four different Childrens Services middle managers. This lack
of continuity has led to significant delay in taking steps to ensure that learning
from SCRs and other serious cases is effectively disseminated and used to
inform practice development.
members are aware that due to inconsistency, the lessons from SCRs and any
consequent changes to frontline social work practice have not had the
necessary impact within Childrens Services. Service outcomes for children in
Sunderland have not therefore improved in line with the lessons identified by
SCRs. Repeated challenge from partner agencies using the boards formal
escalation process have not led to improved performance by Childrens
Services in this area.
(CDOP), which is a tri-partite arrangement with two other local authorities.
Cases are initially considered by a local child death review panel (CDRP),
effectively chaired by the Clinical Commissioning Groups Head of
Safeguarding. Scrutiny of LSCB minutes indicates that CDRP provides regular
feedback to the board. Current themes highlighted within the CDOP annual
report include standard items, such as co-sleeping, road traffic accidents,
sudden unexplained deaths, and other local themes such as drowning. Many of
the current high number of SCRs are yet to be published and so have not fully
impacted on this forum. The current CDRP chair acknowledged that because a
number of SCRs are due to be published in the near future, there will need to
be effective liaison with partner agencies to ensure that the aggregated
findings from these child deaths are used effectively to inform strategic
planning.
functions. A joint committee with the adult safeguarding board oversees the
training programme, although this arrangement is recent and proposals for the
identification, planning and delivery of joint training are new. Training is
administered and delivered by a dedicated board training officer supported by
a training pool drawn from the boards partner agencies. A recent, rudimentary
training needs analysis (TNA) has provided the committee with a baseline from
which to adjust and enhance their training programme. The committee
produces a business plan and completes an annual report of its activities.


However, documentation reviewed by inspectors indicates that the TNA was
not completed in line with the boards existing business priorities, or its
emerging improvement plan. As a result, it identifies a further set of priorities
at a time when the board is already overwhelmed by multiple priorities.
arising from the high number of SCRs. This will be a significant pressure going
forward.
Services is by far the worst attender, and that childrens social workers have
the poorest attendance record at board training. This means that partners
cannot be assured that the messages from board processes such as SCRs are
being heard by frontline workers from the lead agency. The boards Annual
Report for 2013-14, published in December 2014, echoing the independent
chairs structural review, is a frank analysis of the boards shortcomings and
appropriately reads across to the boards improvement plan. However, proper
consideration has not yet been given to the resource implications of the
boards recent decision to take on governance of the Multi-Agency Looked
After Partnership (MALAP). While this shows commendable commitment to the
welfare of children looked after, the board needs to be assured that it has the
capacity and resources available to ensure that this substantial additional task
can be carried out effectively.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 11 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Fiona J Millns
Deputy lead inspector: Dominic Stevens
Team inspectors: Gary Lamb, Paula Thomson-Jones, Peter McEntee, Tracey
Metcalfe, Susan Myers, Chris Luke, Ian Young, June Cramman, Pamela Blackman
Senior Data Analyst: Peter McLaughlin
Quality assurance manager: Bob Morton


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


