Tameside Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and protection, children
looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board1
Inspection date: 26 September 2016 to 20 October 2016
Report published: 9 December 2016

Childrens services in Tameside are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Failure by the local authority to ensure sufficient capacity to meet increased levels of
demand in almost all areas of the service is a primary contributory factor to the poor
practice seen in this inspection. This failure has led to a workforce that is not suitably
experienced, high staff turnover, and some practice that does not intervene to
protect and support children when needed. As a result, there are serious and
widespread failings in the help and protection that children in Tameside receive.
These failings, along with services for children looked after that require
improvement, represent a deterioration in the quality of service provided to children
and young people since the local authority was last inspected in March 2012.
Senior leaders actions to address high staff turnover and increased demand for
services have been ineffective due to poor analysis of need to inform planning. A
failure to maintain appropriate arrangements for the oversight of domestic abuse
notifications from July 2016 onwards meant that an even larger number of children
were experiencing unacceptable delay before their circumstances were considered by
a suitably qualified and experienced social worker. While senior leaders took swift
action when inspectors raised concerns, they had not detected the extent of the
issues through their own quality assurance activity, which was insufficiently rigorous.
This had left the local authority not knowing whether these children were safe.
For some children, poor application of thresholds resulted in: multiple repeat
contacts to childrens social care, children receiving services at the wrong level of
need, allegations of abuse that were not investigated in accordance with statutory
guidance and children at risk of child sexual exploitation receiving services that were
not informed by appropriate assessments of need. As a result, the risk to these
children was not adequately identified, responded to or reduced, and some remained
at risk of significant harm for too long before effective action was taken. Senior
leaders initial responses to concerns raised by inspectors in individual cases did not
demonstrate an understanding of the detrimental impact on children of poor practice
and thresholds for intervention that are too high.
Social workers caseloads are high, in most teams, and the work is frequently
complex. This means that social workers often do not have sufficient time to
understand fully and respond to childrens circumstances. Turnover of staff results in
some children having to tell their story repeatedly and others not having their voice
heard, hindering progress in their care planning. Deficits in social work practice are
not always addressed, due to ineffective management oversight in many parts of the
service. For children needing help and protection, most assessments do not
sufficiently address risk, resulting in poor decision making and care plans that lack
focus on ensuring progress for children. When children go missing from home or
care, information from return interviews is not used well to reduce risk.
Overall, performance management information is not used effectively. Inaccurate
data in some parts of the service limits managers and senior leaders understanding
of what is happening for children. Insufficient benchmarking and shortfalls in quality


assurance activity have meant that senior leaders and elected members were not
fully aware of the deficits identified in this inspection, leading them to have an overly
optimistic view of the services for children.
Some children receive effective early help from specialist teams within the local
authority. The quality is inconsistent and, across the wider partnership, the use of
the common assessment framework to prevent escalation of need is too limited. The
local authority plans to introduce changes to monitor and improve standards.
Some children looked after experience good-quality assessment and effective care
planning, resulting in improved outcomes, but this is not consistent for all children.
Assessments are not routinely updated to take account of a childs current situation
and ongoing risks. Not all children have effective permanence plans and many do not
receive the support they need to improve their emotional health and well-being. The
corporate parenting strategy and pledge to children who are looked after require
urgently updating. The children in care council, despite good work, needs support to
increase its membership and influence.
Good-quality, stable placements and strong support from the virtual school mean
that many children looked after make progress in their educational attainment and
attendance. Independent reviewing officers ensure that most children participate in
their reviews and challenge other professionals when practice needs to improve,
although this is not always effective. When children remain in their birth families,
they do so informed by good-quality assessments of family members.
A specialist service for care leavers established in February 2016 is beginning to
ensure some care leavers move into appropriate accommodation. However, too
many care leavers do not have a pathway plan that addresses their current housing
needs, and those spoken to by inspectors were unsure of their entitlements. A few
care leavers aged 18 and over are placed in bed and breakfast accommodation for
short periods. This is unacceptable, even in an emergency.
Services to children in need of adoption are good. This is because timely, effective
work in the adoption team compensates for the previous poor experiences of
children through the provision of well-planned adoptive placements and extensive
ongoing adoption support. Children in private fostering arrangements have their
needs responded to well. Children with disabilities receive a good-quality service
from a specialist multi-agency integrated team. Senior leaders have appropriately
identified some other areas of improvement. These include arrangements for the
external support of newly qualified staff and reintroduction of services for children on
the edge of care. However, these changes are new or are planned, and have not yet
resulted in practice improvements or better outcomes for children.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates four childrens homes. Two were judged good or
outstanding at their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
March 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked
after was in March 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since May 2013.
 The DCS is also the executive director for people, which includes responsibility
for adult services, stronger communities and education.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post
since January 2015. The LSCB is not shared with any other local authority.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 48,985 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Tameside. This is 22.1% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 23.1% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
- in primary schools is 19.5% (the national average is 15.2%)
- in secondary schools is 18.9% (the national average is 14.1%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 14.7% of
all children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are Asian/Asian British and mixed backgrounds.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
- in primary schools is 14.2% (the national average is 20.1%)
- in secondary schools is 12% (the national average is 15.7%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data, when this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 30 June 2016, 1,379 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction
from 1,485 at 31 March 2015.
 At 30 June 2016, 261 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 212 at 31 March 2015.
 At 30 June 2016, three children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement.
 Since the last inspection, five serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted and four serious case reviews have been completed or
were ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 30 June 2016, 437 are being looked after by the local authority (a rate of
- Of this number, 142 (or 32.49%) live outside the local authority area
- 50 live in residential childrens homes. Of these 50, 26 live outside the
authority area
- One lives in a residential special school,3 and is outside the authority area
- 306 live with foster families, of whom 84 (27.4%) live outside the authority
area
- 36 live with parents. Seven of these 36 live outside the authority areaOne
child is an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.
 In the period April 2015 to March 2016:
- There have been 16 adoptions
- Ten children became subject of special guardianship orders
- 122 children ceased to be looked after, of whom 6.55% subsequently
returned to be looked after
- 12 children and young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to
independent living
- 19 children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now living
in houses in multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or fewer per year.


Recommendations

Ensure that all areas of service have sufficient staff of a suitable level of
qualification and experience for the role that they are required to undertake
and that their workloads are manageable.


Ensure that action taken by social workers is compliant with statutory guidance
and that the application of thresholds in casework with children and families is
appropriate.


Ensure that social work assessments include an effective consideration of
history and parenting capacity that informs thorough analysis of risk and
ensures that assessments are updated regularly to reflect childrens changing
needs and circumstances.


Ensure that the quality assurance of work by senior and middle managers
routinely considers the quality of managerial decision making and the
application of thresholds at all stages of a childs involvement with the local
authority, including contacts within the public service hub.


Improve the quality of performance management reporting to senior leaders
and elected members, so that they have sufficient information to benchmark
improvement against clear, good practice standards.


Ensure that all staff receive high-quality supervision and managerial oversight
at a frequency that reflects their skills and levels of experience and agree
levels of external support for newly qualified staff on the assessed and
supported year in employment programme.


Ensure that childrens views and wishes are consistently gathered, recorded on
files and used to inform planning.


Work with partners to ensure coordinated early help for a wider group of
children through increased use of early help assessment and plans via the
common assessment framework, and implement an effective quality assurance
framework to monitor and improve the quality of work done in early help.


Ensure that children looked after are provided with timely services to make
certain that their emotional health and well-being are promoted.


Ensure that when children go missing from home or care, the information
gathered at return home interviews is used to inform planning effectively and
reduce future risk.


Ensure that all care leavers have an up-to-date and good-quality pathway plan
that reflects their current needs and circumstances, and that they have full
information about their entitlements to support them into adult life.



Ensure that support to the children in care council enables effective
representation of the views of children of all ages and those placed at a
distance from the local authority. This should include work to ensure that the
pledge to children looked after and care leavers is refreshed and
communicated effectively to all children and young people.


Ensure that the use of bed and breakfast accommodation for care leavers aged


Review and update the corporate parenting strategy to give clarity to the work
of the board and ensure that this is shared across the partnership, so that
external scrutiny can support improvement in services for children looked after.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children in Tameside have become worse since Ofsted last
inspected it. Social workers try very hard to help children, but they are given
too many children to support to do the job well. This means that children do
not always receive the right help as quickly as they should, and sometimes
their problems grow more serious before they receive the services that they
need.
 Although there are some good services to help families that are experiencing
domestic abuse, the police do not always tell social workers about children
living with domestic abuse soon enough and workers take too long before
they offer children a service.
 Social workers, who have lots of children to support, do not always have
enough time to get to know children and their families well. Children often
have too many changes of worker. These changes make it difficult for children
to tell social workers about the important things that have happened to them.
This makes it difficult for social workers to make good plans to help them.
 Managers do not always make sure that social workers have the advice and
support that they need to do a good job. Sometimes, they do not realise
quickly enough when they need to do more to help the children.
 Children often wait too long to get help to improve their emotional health.
Sometimes they do not receive help at all. Leaders in the council know this
and they are working hard with health services to make things better.
 Children looked after do not receive enough help to understand their life
story. Most children who are looked after live close to their family and friends.
They live with good carers who know and take care of them well, and are
helped to do well in school.
 Most care leavers live in good housing where they feel safe, but sometimes
older care leavers, when they do not have a place to go, are placed in
temporary bed and breakfast accommodation. This is not suitable, even in an
emergency.
 The children in care council does a good job, but it needs more members. The
council needs to do more to make sure that all children know their rights and
get a chance to have their say.
 Children who are adopted and their families get good help to sort out any
problems quickly.


The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
Serious and widespread failings in services to children in need of help and
protection in Tameside mean that they are inadequate. Children do not receive
timely help, due to the inappropriate application of thresholds, leaving some
children at risk of significant harm for too long before effective action is taken to
help them. Too many children who need a social work assessment are referred
multiple times by partner agencies before they receive a service. A lack of capacity
in the multi-agency public service hub and in some social work teams means that
most children experience drift and delay because requests for services are not
screened, responded to or allocated for assessment in a timely way, including
children assessed by police as at medium risk of domestic abuse.
A failure to investigate allegations of abuse consistently in accordance with
statutory guidance results in some children not being seen or spoken to, or
assessments not completed to evaluate risk. Risk not being adequately assessed or
responded to at the right threshold level limits the positive impact of the support
services that are provided to children at risk of sexual exploitation. Assessments
that do not effectively consider history, parental capacity or analyse risk lead to
care plans that are insufficiently focused on the key issues and that do not robustly
monitor progress or evaluate change. When children go missing from home, the
information from return home interviews is not used well to inform plans to reduce
risk.
High caseloads and turnover of staff prevent regular direct work with children and
hinder the development of a meaningful relationship between social workers and
families, leading to further drift and delay.
A specialist, integrated service for children with disabilities, with stable staffing and
management, delivers better quality assessments and care planning for this group
of children. Effective assessment and support from a named worker for a small
number of children living in private fostering arrangements ensure that their needs
are met. Young people who present as homeless receive appropriate services,
including consideration of becoming children looked after.
A wide range of early help services and specialist early help teams provide
effective support to some families and prevent further escalation of need.
However, positive impact is limited by insufficient use of the common assessment
framework (CAF) across the wider partnership and by the inconsistent quality of
assessments and reviews of many plans. The local authority has responded to this
gap by establishing two CAF adviser posts to advise and promote CAF with
partners, in addition to developing a quality assurance function.


Inspection findings

In Tameside, the application of thresholds and management of risk for children
in need of help and protection are inadequate. Children do not receive the
appropriate level of support to meet their needs, and experience drift and
delay at all stages of their journey, with some children being left for too long
at continued risk of significant harm. (Recommendation)


The lack of sufficient capacity and effective management oversight within the
public service hub lead to drift and delay for children, many of whom are
referred to childrens social care multiple times before they receive a service.
When risk to children is identified at the point of referral or they make
allegations of abuse, this does not always result in effective assessment of risk.


During the inspection, HMI referred 15 children to the local authority because
of concerns about thresholds being applied correctly. As a result, the local
authority took action for 12 children that included reopening cases,
undertaking visits, undertaking assessments, holding child protection
conferences, arranging multi-agency meetings and, in one case, planning to
hold a multi-agency learning review.


Children referred for services experience serious and widespread delay in
decision making about service provision. The multi-agency public service hub
lacks sufficient suitably experienced social work and management capacity to
deal with the volume of work. At the point of inspection, there were over 350
children recorded as contacts to the hub who were waiting for a decision. In
addition, over 150 children who were the subject of medium risk domestic
abuse notifications from the police were also waiting for screening and risk
assessment. Delays for children ranged from weeks up to two months, with
many having no assessment of risk or need. This is in addition to the delay in
the police sending notifications to the hub, and examples were seen of
incidents taking place several weeks prior to notifications being processed.
(Recommendation)


When brought to the attention of the local authority, an immediate review was
conducted which found that, while no children waiting for a decision were at
risk of immediate harm, a number required referral for social work assessment.
Action taken by the local authority during the inspection, with the provision of
additional resources, reduced the volume of children waiting for a service but
did not resolve it.


Children who meet the threshold for social work intervention are not
responded to early enough and, as a result, experience delay and some
children experience further harm. While local authority data suggests that the
number and rate of re-referrals in Tameside has decreased over the past year


(at 15%, it is lower than comparators at 21% and England 24%), an analysis
of Annexe A data provided for inspection shows that the number of repeat
contacts is high. In the three months prior to the inspection, 2,527 children
were the subject of a contact to the public service hub. Of these, 365 children
had two contacts within three months, 88 children had three contacts within
three months and 28 children had four contacts within three months. The local
authority had not analysed this data or identified the issues that led to repeat
contacts to the service, instead assuming that this was the result of
inappropriate requests for information rather than a service. In all cases
sampled by inspectors, repeat contacts were requests for services to help
children, not requests for information.

The local authority does not consistently adhere to child protection procedures
or meet statutory requirements when responding to children making
allegations of abuse. Examples seen included no direct contact at all made with
children or young people, visits to children but no assessment completed and
an assessment completed but no strategy meeting or section 47 investigation.
This results in inconsistent and poor-quality assessment of risk, and leaves
some children at risk of further harm. (Recommendation)


When section 47 enquiries are undertaken, the majority are informed by multiagency strategy meetings. Decisions made at this stage are proportionate,
leading to appropriate action to protect children, although the records of the
discussion remain variable in quality.


There is no formal arrangement to ensure that the out-of-hours service has
timely access to legal advice or support from senior managers, when required.
Despite this, when children need social work support outside normal office
hours, competent and experienced workers work closely in partnership with
the police and ensure that children are safeguarded. Because of a recent
review, the local authority plans changes which, it anticipates, will strengthen
arrangements.


The majority of assessments of need are not effective, with many lacking
sufficient detail, not addressing previous issues of neglect or domestic abuse
and with insufficient consideration of history or evaluation of risk. There is also
evidence of unchallenged self-reporting of parents being a determining factor
in the outcome of an assessment, rather than the independent analytical
inquiry of social workers. This means that, for many children, there is not a full
understanding of their circumstances and risks remain inadequately assessed.
(Recommendation)


The support to children with multiple and complex disabilities is stronger.
Children are well supported and their needs recognised through the work of
the integrated service for children with additional needs. Children in this team
receive a high-quality service that is sensitive to individual needs. Assessments
are multi-agency and plans include efforts to gather childrens views and


wishes and meet them. There is evidence of planned multi-agency responses
and positive joint work with safeguarding teams.

Consideration of childrens diversity needs is inconsistent. While, for some
children, there is evidence of sensitive consideration of their sexuality or
impact of their disability, for other children issues of diversity in relation to the
impact of parental mental health are absent, and for many White British
children there is no acknowledgement or exploration of their diversity needs.


Childrens views and wishes are not consistently gathered or recorded on files.
For most children, there is evidence of social workers making efforts to engage
with them through regular visits, although the frequency is often limited due to
high caseloads. The use of direct work tools to aid communication with
children or inform planning is not consistent. For some children, even when
their views are known and documented, these are not used to influence plans.
(Recommendation)


At the point of inspection, 263 children were subject to child protection plans,
which represents a substantial increase of 51 children since March 2015.
Children at risk of neglect remain the largest group (52%), with increasing
numbers of children at risk because of emotional abuse (37%). The majority of
childrens plans are not of good quality, and they are narrowly focused on the
presenting issues rather than fully addressing all the needs of children.
Progress is often limited, with actions not achieved, and work continues
without re-assessment or analysis of change. This results in delay for children,
particularly for those at risk from neglect, with some children remaining on a
child protection plan for too long before progressing into pre-proceedings or
becoming looked after.


Regular core groups attended by a range of appropriate professionals monitor
the progress of children subject to child protection plans. The poor quality of
assessments and subsequent plans for children result in core groups offering
support to families but not being sufficiently focused on evaluating progress or
reducing risk. Child protection reviews are timely, and are attended by relevant
agencies and family. Chairs of child protection conferences identify and
challenge delay for some children that result in plans being progressed for
consideration of legal action.


Child protection conference and reviews do not include adequate participation
or attendance of children and young people. The current system in place to
gather childrens views is not well used, and not enough children have access
to advocates to support participation. Local authority data since April 2016
shows that, of 167 children aged over 11 years, only 31 provided their views
and only 13 attended their child protection conference supported by an
advocate. The local authority has recognised this and recommissioned its
advocacy service. The new provider started in August 2016, so the impact was
limited at the time of the inspection.



Early help services in Tameside offer different levels of support and a good
range of services for children and families that are delivered via seven
childrens centres and four family intervention teams located in the areas of
most need in the borough. A range of evidence-based interventions designed
to offer time-limited support for families is an attempt to manage demand.
Despite this, there remains a waiting list for some services, resulting in many
children not getting the benefit of this support early enough.


The common assessment framework (CAF) is not well embedded outside of
these early help teams. CAFs completed by other lead professionals are not
recorded or monitored in terms of numbers, quality or outcomes, therefore
local authority managers and the wider partnership do not know how effective
CAF is in supporting families and preventing escalation of their needs. There
were 238 CAFs completed in the six months prior to inspection, with the vast
majority of these completed by local authority early help staff who are based in
childrens centre or family intervention teams. (Recommendation)


The quality of early help assessments is not consistently good, because of
insufficient consideration of the impact of parenting capacity on children, in
addition to strengths and needs not being identified for every child or family.
The vast majority of assessments reflected views of children, but contained no
information or analysis regarding their diversity needs, including children from
minority ethnic backgrounds. Progress of intervention is not adequately
analysed or understood, because effective reviews do not take place for the
majority of plans.


When children have returned after being missing from home, they are visited
by the police. The police undertake safe and well checks, and ensure
notification of the episode to the local authority and directly to the
commissioned provider to undertake return home interviews. The local
authority does not have accurate data about the completion of return home
interviews. Inspectors found that most return home interviews are available
on childrens files, but the information gathered does not inform plans to
reduce risk or address the underlying factors that led to the missing episode.
A regular meeting to monitor closely the response to children who go missing
in each two-week period, which also includes those missing from education,
ensures that the short-term response is monitored.


The local authority has not had an overview of all those who go missing that is
informed by reliable or effective data and, as a result, the wider picture and
longer-term response is not clear. A recently recommissioned service to
undertake return interviews is reported to be improving timeliness and the
numbers of interviews completed, and the local authority anticipates that this
will in future provide more effective performance information to inform its
understanding of those children who go missing.


Tamesides established specialist team (Phoenix) responds to cases of child
sexual exploitation, providing a range of education and awareness-raising and


direct work with young people, in addition to pursuing criminal investigations.
As a result, professionals recognise child sexual exploitation, respond and
make referrals to Phoenix to ensure that young people receive support.
However, confusion about the role of the specialist team, combined with a lack
of understanding and application of thresholds, results in many children not
having an assessment of their needs and risks by the safeguarding social work
team. The response is often not at the right level of need and the risk is not
effectively reduced, despite provision of support services. All cases when
young people were referred back to the local authority, due to concerns that
the risks they were experiencing due to sexual exploitation were not being
reduced, resulted in an escalation of service.

A named officer for children missing from education ensures that the local
authority holds up-to-date and accurate information on these children. At the
time of the inspection, there were 97 open cases of children missing from
education. Clear guidance and procedures are in place that support staff well
in carrying out their duties. Staff are persistent and determined in their efforts
to identify the whereabouts of children missing education and evidence their
efforts to identify, track and work with these children and those families that
choose to provide elective home education. Evidence of effective multi-agency
working and liaison results in the increasing identification of those missing
education.


Staff work effectively to engage families that choose to educate their children
at home, visiting the majority of children to assess the suitability of the
education that they are receiving. In one case, sampled staff had successfully
brokered work experience and support from CAMHS to improve the childs selfesteem and had successfully developed the childs career aspirations.


A multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC) ensures that the response
to families affected by high-risk domestic abuse is coordinated. The social care
representative updates the panel and childrens case records, ensuring that
information is appropriately shared. A good range of services to support
children and families affected by domestic abuse is available, provided by a
commissioned specialist service. However, social work with children at risk
from domestic abuse demonstrates the same weaknesses in social work
practice as in other areas of service. Poor quality assessments, inadequate
analysis of risk and poor application of thresholds limit the impact of the
support services with children experiencing drift and delay before their
situation improves. This reduces the effectiveness of otherwise good
information sharing within MARAC.


Effective assessments conducted by a dedicated housing social worker in
conjunction with a housing officer ensure appropriate services to young people
aged 16 and 17 presenting as homelessness, in most cases. Outcomes and
offers of accommodation consider young peoples needs and vulnerabilities
with many young people placed as children looked after when appropriate.



Numbers of children privately fostered remain low despite a wide range of
awareness raising activity, extensive training and the production of an updated
leaflet during 2016. A dedicated worker for private fostering and improved
referral pathways ensures that the response to children when identified is
timely, with statutory checks undertaken, appropriate assessments completed
and subsequent visits undertaken in line with requirements.


The competent and experienced designated officer is effective in ensuring that
the authority fulfils its duties in relation to allegations of abuse, mistreatment
or poor practice by adults who work with children. In addition to managing
allegations and ensuring investigations are undertaken, good support and
consultation, training, advice and guidance are given to professionals where
required.


While not a priority Prevent area, the local authoritys and partner agencies
responses to the prevention of radicalisation in all its forms are thorough,
proportionate and well informed by local intelligence, national guidance and
local best practice. A well-established Channel panel considers support for
young people who may be at risk of radicalisation. Agencies such as schools
report greater confidence in identifying young people vulnerable to extremism
because of a wide range of good-quality training and awareness-raising events
coordinated by the Local Safeguarding Children Board.


The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
When children in Tameside are looked after, most of them live close to their
communities in stable, good-quality placements with foster carers who know them
well. Most attend good schools, where support from the virtual school helps to
improve their attendance and attainment. The difference in attainment between
some children looked after and their peers is diminishing.
The quality of assessment and planning to support children is not consistently
good. While the work done for applications in court is stronger and in most cases
timely, for other children looked after the fact that the assessments and
chronologies are not routinely updated means that their changing circumstances
and risks are not re-evaluated. Childrens care plans are not always specific enough
about the things that need to happen, including arrangements for contact. Children
do not have timely access to a sufficient amount and range of services to support
their emotional well-being.
Childrens reviews mostly take place on time, and good support ensures that the
majority of children participate in their review. While most children have stability in
their lives, not all children have a plan for permanence recorded by their second
review, resulting in delay in finalising decisions about their future. Efforts to
complete return home interviews for children looked after result in some
information gathering, but do not always sufficiently inform further care planning.
When children looked after are at risk of sexual exploitation, they receive
appropriate services to help to reduce risk.
Social workers caseloads are too high. This means that although they visit children
in line with statutory guidelines, they do not have time to visit more frequently if
needed or spend time with children to undertake direct work sessions, including
life-story work.
Adoption is considered in an appropriate and timely manner for all children who
may benefit. Parallel planning and fostering to adopt are effective, and
comprehensive assessments of children and adopters enable suitable matching.
Social workers and personal advisers have more regular contact with most care
leavers than they did previously, and support for those with complex disabilities is
a strength. The range of housing options is improving, but some young people
over 18 years live in bed and breakfast accommodation for short periods. This is
unacceptable. Too many young people do not have a written, up-to-date pathway
plan that details the support that they will receive, and those care leavers spoken
to by inspectors were unsure of their entitlements.


Inspection findings

Some children live in situations of neglect for too long before becoming looked
after, as a result of drift and delay in securing services for children in need of
help and protection. When children are not at immediate risk, there is an
insufficient range of effective services to support them to stay with their
families. The rise in the number of children looked after mirrors the general
increase in the region, with 445 children looked after at the point of inspection,
an increase of 30 children since March 2015. A number of projects designed to
support children remaining with their families, such as family group meetings,
are being re-established. However, this work has been progressed too slowly
and children are not yet benefiting from these services.


While childrens safeguarding needs that result in them becoming looked after
are responded to well, ongoing and emerging factors detrimental to childrens
well-being, such as the risk of placement breakdown, are not as well
considered. Some children at risk of self-harm and other behavioural problems
experience delay in accessing bespoke therapeutic work, which is limited in
range and availability. (Recommendation)


Improved tracking and monitoring of cases within the Public Law Outline (PLO)
are helping to identify potential delay and take action more quickly. Some
cases in PLO do not have a clear plan about what needs to happen and,
although inspectors saw some examples of good multi-agency packages of
work making a difference for children, this is not happening in every case.
Letters issued to parents prior to proceedings clearly explain the local
authoritys expectations of them. Additional meetings held with parents and
their solicitor further clarify concerns and agree timescales for change. Parents
spoken to by inspectors said that they understood the processes. Viability
assessments of different family members, undertaken concurrently in the
majority of cases, avoid further delay for children.


A proactive legal department ensures that consistently good-quality
assessments and evidence are produced for court proceedings. The Children
and Family Court Advisory Service (Cafcass) and the court are confident in the
quality of work produced by Tameside and report that timeliness of
proceedings has improved significantly, now taking an average of 27 weeks to
complete, which is in line with performance in the region.


When children looked after need access to more specialist services, the
assessments are updated, thorough and well written. For some children looked
after who are not the subject of care proceedings or in need of specialist
services, the assessments are significantly out of date, some by several years,
and as a result the impact of current situations and important changes for
children are not evaluated to inform their care planning. Chronologies are of
poor quality and do not inform plans or capture the most important events in
childrens lives. (Recommendation)



Care plans require improvement. Most care planning documents reflect
childrens current circumstances but do not consistently provide sufficient
analysis of childrens needs, and some lack clear, measurable goals and
timescales. Plans do not always specify clear arrangements for contact
between children and their families, and rely on carers to promote contact
without support from the local authority. For some children, this has resulted in
them not being able to see their brothers and sisters as often as they would
like. (Recommendation)


Diversity and identity needs arising from disability and ethnicity are responded
to in a sensitive way. Assessments of need for children with disabilities
thoroughly explore the relevant issues, and there are good arrangements in
place for children making the transition to adult social care. Consideration of
wider diversity needs such as faith, gender and sexual orientation is not as
effective, especially for White British children.


Good efforts made to complete return interviews for children in care who go
missing do not always result in effective use of this information to inform care
planning. The response to children who go missing from care in each twoweek period is monitored as part of the regular missing meeting, but local
authority data does not yet provide an accurate overview of patterns or trends.
When children are at risk of sexual exploitation, the response is more robust
and, for the majority of children looked after, risk from sexual exploitation is
recognised and addressed. A screening tool used to identify the specific issues
and level of risk for individual children informs access to an effective range of
help and support from a specialist team.


Visits to children are in line with statutory requirements and social workers are
seeing children alone, when appropriate. However, the views of children are
not always explicit in decision-making processes and advocacy is not routinely
available to help children to express their wishes. (Recommendation)


The timeliness and quality of children looked after reviews is inconsistent, with
only 88% of childrens reviews currently taking place on time. The independent
reviewing officer footprint is evident on many childrens files, with individual
challenges recorded, including the use of the escalation policy, but it is not
clear what learning or changes to practice occur as a result of the issues
raised. The majority of children participate in their review in some way, using
an impressive range of creative activities including artwork and games.


Social workers routinely consider ways to support children to remain in their
birth families through placement with extended family members and connected
persons. Viability assessments are thorough and clearly focused on the needs
of children. When there is consideration given to placing children back with
their parents, the work is not as strong. Assessments of parental capacity are
not always robust and, for a very small number of children, situations
deteriorate following their placement.



Most children looked after (70%) live with foster carers and have the
opportunity to enjoy family life. Brothers and sisters are placed together in the
vast majority of cases, when a plan is made for them to do so. The majority of
children (67%) continue to live in Tameside, which makes it easier to maintain
contact with family and friends in the community. The percentage of children
looked after that is placed at more than 20 miles from home is low, at 6%,
better than comparators, at 12%, and the England level, at 14%.


Most children live in stable placements. The number of children who had
experienced three placements or more was 10% in 201415. This performance
is in line with national and comparator levels, and means that children do not
experience too many unnecessary moves. Tamesides directorate report shows
that, for 201516, the percentage of children experiencing three or more
placements was 8.7%, which is an improvement in performance on the
previous year. The 201415 published data for the percentage of children
looked after in the same placement for at least two years is 72% in Tameside,
which is higher than comparators at 68%, and provides many children with the
opportunity to build long-lasting relationships with their carers. Completion of
life-story work is not routine for children in long-term foster placements, which
means that children have gaps in information about their histories.


Permanence plans for children who are not going to be adopted are not always
recorded at the second care planning review meeting, creating delay for some
children, who wait too long before decisions are made about routes to
permanence. At the point of inspection, only 8% of children ceased to be
looked after because they became the subject of a special guardianship order.
This is a small increase from 7% in 201415, but still lower than both
comparators (15%) and England average (11%). (Recommendation)


The local authority has taken action to improve the suitability and sufficiency of
placements by introducing during 2016 a payment for skills scheme for foster
carers. Despite consultation and meetings that have taken place, some foster
carers told inspectors that they do not fully understand the changes
implemented in July and are concerned about future arrangements. The wide
range of training available for carers is difficult for some carers to access, due
to oversubscription. Foster carers feel supported by their supervising social
workers, but felt that staff turnover impacted on the relationships with
childrens social workers, who were also sometimes hard to contact and did not
always have the time to come to know children well.


The virtual school maintains an oversight of the educational progress of
children looked after. Most of these children attend schools that are judged
good or better by Ofsted. Regular meetings with partners and good
information exchange ensure the identification of deteriorating performance
and the plans that are put in place to address concerns. The monitoring of
childrens attendance has also improved and, in most cases, attendance at
school is good, with the virtual school working effectively to keep children in
school. In a context of rising permanent exclusions in Tameside, there have


been no permanent exclusions of children looked after in the past 12 months.
The use of fixed-term exclusions is also decreasing.

Social workers have detailed knowledge of the small number (14) of children
who attend alternative provision, and work hard with partners such as the
pupil referral service and schools to put in place individual packages of support
and education to engage them.


At key stage 1, those children looked after who took tests in 2015 achieved
less well in reading and mathematics than in writing. At key stage 2,
attainment is often in line with or better than children looked after nationally.
At key stage 4, nearly a third of children looked after obtained five GCSEs or
more including English and mathematics in 2015. The difference in attainment
between children looked after and their peers is diminishing in Tameside, and
some children looked after make good progress from their starting points.
Inspectors saw good examples of the pupil premium being used well to
support the attendance and progress of children looked after. This includes
providing additional staff to support behaviour improvement and to provide
counselling for children.


Not all children looked after have an up-to-date personal education plan (PEP),
with both quality and timeliness requiring improvement. The completion rate of
PEPs has improved since 2014, but remains too low, with over a quarter of
children without a current PEP at the point of the inspection (28%). Plans have
sufficient detail to help to review childrens progress and plan their next steps,
but for some children it is hard to determine the progress that they are
making.


The promotion of the health of children looked after varies, and it is not
consistently good. The local authority has recognised this and worked with
health partners to improve performance. However, the proportion of children
having dental checks, at 74.8%, is comparable to previous years and requires
improvement. The local authority reports that the performance in respect of
the number of children having timely health assessments in the past 12
months has improved, but is not yet good. Some 77.5% of children under five,
their health assessments completed within the timescales.


A community paediatrician completes all initial health assessments, while other
health professionals carry out reviews, with the quality overseen by the named
nurse for children looked after children. There are reciprocal arrangements for
Tameside children placed in other areas in Greater Manchester to ensure that
their health assessments and reviews take place on time. Despite this,
according to information provided by the local authority, the timeliness of initial
health assessments is poor. In quarter one of 201617, 75% of children did
not have an initial health assessment within the expected timescales.



Many children looked after with additional needs associated with their
emotional health and well-being do not receive effective or timely support.
Strengths and difficulties assessments are routinely completed and scored
before review by a community paediatric nurse who will consider making a
referral to child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS). Children often
wait too long for a service, and the support for children with lower-level
emotional health needs is not well developed or coordinated.
(Recommendation)


The recent appointment of a dedicated psychologist for children looked after
has had a positive impact on the timeliness of triage referrals to CAMHS and a
stronger offer of consultation to social workers. The commissioning of
individually tailored packages of therapeutic services happens for a very small
number of children with specific needs, and there is effective use of the
adoption support fund to provide therapeutic work for adopted children.


Despite the efforts of a longstanding and dedicated chair, the children in care
council has not been provided with sufficient support by the local authority to
develop and expand its membership to ensure wide representation from all
children looked after. The limited membership prevents the council from
informing and influencing effectively the work done with children looked after.
Children are not clear of policies that affect them and do not know about the
local authority pledge to the children in their care. (Recommendation)
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good


The involvement of the adoption team, from the first legal planning meeting,
and the early allocation of an adoption worker enable parallel planning and
speed up the overall adoption process. Children and their social workers
benefit from a skilled, knowledgeable, stable and experienced adoption team
with a passion for permanence.


The number of children successfully adopted in the 12 months prior to the
inspection (17% of all children leaving care) is in line with the national
average. Targeting the traditionally more difficult to place children is achieving
success. Older children aged five- to nine-years-old make up 28% of this
group, and brother and sister groups represent 42% of all children placed for
adoption in 201516. Although fluctuating, the number of children leaving care
via adoption from minority ethnic groups or with complex disabilities remains
low. Recent success in recruiting more adopters for children from these groups
should increase the number of children who can be offered adoption as an
alternative to long-term care.


Timescales for achieving adoption continue to improve. The 201215 adoption
scorecard shows that it took on average 529 days between a child in Tameside
becoming looked after and being placed with their adoptive family. Although


not yet meeting the national threshold of 487 days, this is better than the
England average (593 days). The latest published data for 201415 shows a
further drop in the days taken, to 499, and the most recent data seen at the
inspection shows this trend continuing. The increase in the number of children
who wait less than 16 months between entering care and moving to their
adoptive family demonstrates the extent of the improvement in the past 12
months. Of the 37 children placed for adoption within the past 12 months,

Good use is made of parallel planning and the increasing availability of foster
to adopt placements. The inspection looked at the data for 54 children at
various stages of their adoption journey. On average, the decision that a child
should be adopted took longer than usual, but with good timescales being
achieved once the decision had been made and the adoption team involved.


The adoption team undertakes all assessments of children and prospective
adopters. All those seen as part of the inspection were of good quality,
including reflection on the identity, faith and ethnic background of those
assessed. Prospective adopters assessments all give a clear understanding of
an individuals or couples readiness to adopt. Child permanence reports seen
gave a real sense of the child. They reflect the social workers knowledge of
the child, painting a picture for any prospective adopter of their needs, history
and personality. The vast majority of child permanence reports are regularly
updated. This is important, especially for very young children, who change
quickly over a short period.


The vast majority of case records and files seen by the adoption team were of
good quality. However, the current electronic recording system does not fully
support the work of the adoption team, for example with the storage of
prospective adopters records and the production of the management data
required to meet the adoption standards and regulations. To compensate for
this, the team keeps additional manual paper files and records data on
spreadsheets. This creates additional work and introduces a greater risk of
human error.


The current well-focused adoption recruitment strategy meets the needs of
children awaiting placement. Adopters spoke highly of the timely, well-planned
induction that they had received, which leads to adopters who are well
prepared and understand the challenges that they may face when adopting.
There have been 27 prospective adopters approved in the past 12 months,
with almost all assessments completed within the required timescales. Once
approved, the wait for a child to be placed is short, with most adopters (63%)
having a child placed with them within six months.


Adoption disruptions are rare, with just one disruption in the past 12 months,
which involved Tameside adopters being matched with a child from another
local authority some considerable distance away. While not identifying


significant gaps in Tameside practice, the learning from a disruption review is
being used positively to support learning and improvement.

The adoption panel meets regularly and considers with care the cases
presented, appropriately checking and challenging to ensure that the
recommendations to the agency decision maker are well thought through. The
minutes of the panel reflect the richness of the debate. However, a number of
panel minutes signed off by the panel chair and the agency decision maker
contain inaccuracies regarding the roles of the panel members. The authority is
reviewing all the panel minutes produced over this period and reissuing any
that are inaccurate. (Recommendation)


Children age two and over who could benefit are offered direct work in
preparation for adoption. Child appreciation days ensure that prospective
adopters really understand the childs journey so far. The effort made to
include all those with knowledge of the child enhances this work. Preparation
and support are offered to birth brothers and sisters and parents of children
being placed for adoption.


At the start of this inspection, some children had experienced a delay of three
to four months in the production of their final life-story book, due to staff
absence in the adoption team. Action has been taken to resolve this issue, with
an agreement in place to have an additional resource to tackle the delay
quickly. Later-life letters prepared for the childrens file by the adoption social
worker are well-balanced, giving a detailed account of the childs life and
family history up to the time of adoption.


Well-planned packages of adoption support, informed by comprehensive
assessments of need, provide a service to a wide range of individuals who
have experienced adoption. Assessments and therapeutic inputs are
commissioned, following successful applications to the adoption support fund.
There have been applications for 31 children since December 2015. In
addition, individual support sessions and direct work have been delivered to 65
families by staff employed by Tameside.


Experienced support staff actively help adopted adults to understand their
histories as part of adult birth record counselling. A voluntary group, run with
the support of the adoption team by Tameside adopters, supports 104 families
with advice and the opportunity to share. The group also provides feedback
about services and ensures that adopters are engaged in the development of
policy and the regional adoption agency plans. The adoption team remains in
contact with as many families as possible, and 161 families are annually invited
to two events, both of which have good attendance. Adopted children aged
four to 18 have their own club, Club Awesome, which meets monthly.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care
leavers is that it requires improvement

Since February 2016, a re-established leaving care service has made
improvements to the previously poor-quality service provided for care leavers.
Staff are working hard to form positive relationships with the young people
who are on their caseloads. Some young people have well-established
involvement with workers, and the support provided now means that basic
housing and health provision are available for care leavers, in addition to good
support to enable them to further their career aspirations. For other young
people, support has recently become more consistent now that the service is
fully staffed. Young people who receive regular help from staff are positive
about the help and support that they receive. The caseloads of personal
advisers are too high, and this means that it is hard for them to develop
meaningful relationships with all young people.


The local authority is in touch with most young people leaving care. At the
time of the inspection, the proportion of 19- to 20- and 21-year-olds with
whom the local authority was not in touch was 9%, equating to 12 young
people. Inspectors saw that personal advisers are making all reasonable efforts
to contact these young people to good effect. These include unannounced
visits to known addresses, contact by text and telephone, and via family
members and known friends. Young people who had recent contact after a
period of not being in touch were positive about and welcomed the support
that they are now receiving.


Not enough (35%) care leavers have an up-to-date pathway plan that reflects
their current needs. When young people do not have an up-to-date plan, the
impact is mitigated to an extent, because the support offered reflects current
needs and circumstances. However, not all young people spoken to by
inspectors were sufficiently clear about the level of support that they could
expect, including financial support. In a minority of cases, poorer pathway
plans rely too much on young people to complete tasks themselves, without
identified support from staff. The team is working to address this deficiency.


The children with disabilities team works successfully with care leavers with
disabilities. Effective arrangements are in place that offer good support for
young peoples transition to adult services. Pathway planning for this group is
timely and covers young peoples wide-ranging needs, including their health,
education and accommodation. The independence of young people is
promoted and a strong partnership with the local leisure services provider
supports the education and employment aspirations of young people
effectively. Of the last 15 young people to take part in the supported internship
programme, 13 have secured paid employment.


The local authority has been successful in extending the range of
accommodation options open to young people leaving care, and the range of


housing options available to young people is improving. The proportion of
young people staying put with their foster carers when they turn 18 years old
has increased and, in 201516, 85% stayed. The number of supported
lodgings available has increased from four to 13 over the past year, and most
young people who use these placements achieve successful outcomes as a
result.

A bedsit scheme, developed to support care leavers who are moving on from
residential or foster care, offers a further period of support to help them
through their transition to adulthood. The accommodation seen by inspectors
is of good quality and young people show pride in their first home. They
receive a high level of effective support to help them to budget for their
household expenses, find employment or training and take part in social
activities. Timely work ensures that young people who are ready to live
independently are in a position to bid for their own tenancy when they turn 18.


Most young people receive the support that they need to develop their skills to
live independently through their foster carers, personal advisers and social
workers. A training programme developed for foster carers can further equip
young people with the skills to live independently. A small number of young
people have successfully completed a series of six-week workshops to help
them to budget and manage their own tenancy effectively.


Bed and breakfast accommodation is used in an emergency for short periods,
for those aged over 18, without sufficient due consideration or action taken to
mitigate the potential risk. This leaves young people highly vulnerable. The use
of bed and breakfast accommodation is unacceptable under any
circumstances. In cases sampled by inspectors where bed and breakfast
accommodation had been used, young people were quickly found long-term
housing options that were appropriate to their needs. Young people told
inspectors that they felt safe where they lived.


Young people receive a range of support to help them to achieve their
education, training and employment aspirations. Referrals to the specialist
careers organisation are increasing, resulting in a greater availability of
specialist support and guidance for young people. Published performance data
shows that around four out of 10 care leavers do not have an education,
training or employment placement, which is in line with national averages and
better than comparators, yet requires improvement. Inspectors saw examples
where good support, such as volunteering opportunities, increased young
peoples work-readiness for full-time employment.


The virtual school has recently begun to promote university as an option for
young people by holding a promotional evening at Manchester Metropolitan
University. A small number of care leavers are in higher education and a
reasonable package of financial support is available to them, such as a 2,000
bursary which matches minimum recommended standards, a laptop and book
allowance, and accommodation costs. Young people receive a reasonable


range of other financial support to help them to take practical steps forward,
such as the leaving care grant of 2,000 to help them to equip their first home.
Discretionary support is available to help young people, for example to present
well at interviews, pay for travel costs and provide bridging payments in lieu of
receiving benefits. Another example seen showed a discretionary payment
helpfully topping up a young persons apprenticeship wage to enable them to
maintain their accommodation. Despite this, not all young people are fully
aware of their entitlements to financial support. (Recommendation)

Young people have their basic health needs met, with personal advisers and
social workers offering good practical support to young people to help them to
access the adult community mental health team, such as accompanying young
people to their doctor and mental health appointments. Having free passes to
the councils leisure centres and facilities also promotes the physical health of
care leavers, and a team of care leavers was recently a runner up in the North
West five-a-side care leavers football competition.


The co-location of the leaving care team with the sexual health team and
drugs and substance misuse workers enables easier access to specialist health
advice and support for young people. The health passport, updated in April
widely understood, with many young people spoken to by inspectors stating
that they had no knowledge of it.


There are very few incidents when care leavers have complained about aspects
of the service or support that they receive. Inspectors saw some examples
when staff go the extra mile to resolve young peoples concerns. However,
young people spoken to by inspectors said that they did not know how to
complain formally, should they be dissatisfied with aspects of the support.


Leadership, management and governance

Inadequate

Summary
A corporate failure to ensure a sufficient, stable, workforce that is suitably
experienced to meet demand for services, including in some cases where the
thresholds for intervention has been unacceptably high, has led to serious and
widespread failings. These failings compromise many aspects of work with
children, including the timely delivery of some otherwise good-quality services,
such as in relation to domestic abuse. As a result, services for children have
significantly deteriorated since the local authority was last inspected.
High caseloads and staff turnover mean that an often inexperienced workforce
does not give children the level of service or continuity that they require, and
frontline managers do not always give staff the level of managerial oversight and
supervision that they need to ensure a safe service. While most starkly evident
within the local authority public service hub and safeguarding duty team, these
issues are widespread across the service. They result in thresholds for intervention
that are too high and children waiting too long to receive an acceptable response
to their needs. Senior leaders were not aware of the extent of the delays until
informed by inspectors.
While the local authority has demonstrated an appropriate commitment to
improving practice through workforce development opportunities and increased
staffing, the action to date has been insufficient and, in some instances, has
exacerbated problems. This has been due to poor risk assessment and forward
planning. Delays in the arrangements to support newly qualified social workers to
complete their assessed and supported year in employment mean that the support
given does not yet meet acceptable standards.
Insufficient quality assurance of work by senior managers in key areas of the
service means that they have an over-optimistic view of the quality and timeliness
of the help that children receive. Their initial responses to concerns raised by
inspectors in individual cases did not sufficiently recognise and respond to risk.
Reporting of performance to senior leaders and elected members has significant
gaps. It lacks helpful analysis, sufficient benchmarking and measures against a
standard of what good should look like for children in Tameside. This does not
assist them to understand fully the practice on the frontline or to communicate
clear expectations to staff. The rigour of scrutiny arrangements is limited yet more
by the wide remits held by the lead member and the scrutiny panel.
While the local authority has comprehensive strategic plans to address some of the
deficits seen in this inspection, these are not successfully implemented and, at the
time of the inspection, had not been translated into good and safe services for all
children in Tameside.


Inspection findings

Since the safeguarding and looked after children inspection in 2012, the
services for children requiring help and protection have declined. During this
period, demand for services has increased steadily and significantly. The local
authority has responded to this challenge through relocation of staff and
recruitment of additional agency workers. In areas of the service most under
pressure, the action taken has been insufficient to ensure good, safe services
for children.


This corporate failure to ensure sufficient capacity within almost all areas of
the service is a significant underlying contributory factor to the deterioration in
the quality of help that children receive. While most evident within the local
authority public service hub and safeguarding duty team, these issues were
seen to some extent at almost every point in the childs journey.
(Recommendation)


Poor application of thresholds, including a failure to investigate appropriately
allegations of abuse for some children, was a recurring theme throughout this
inspection. Initial responses by senior managers to inspectors concerns raised
in individual cases were insufficient in their recognition and response to risk.
(Recommendation)


The public service hub model demonstrates a clear commitment to innovative
partnership working. However, at the start of the inspection, longstanding
issues in the local authoritys capacity to assess the large volume of contacts
that it receives had not been resolved, meaning that senior managers and
leaders could not be sure that all children had timely assessment of risk or
need.


A corporate decision to increase capacity for the triage of contacts by
transferring recently qualified early help social workers into the hub in autumn
have the level of skill and experience required to undertake this role.
Managerial oversight and formal supervision of this largely inexperienced team
were weak, contributing to unacceptable delay and sometimes poor decision
making in respect of some contacts seen by inspectors. (Recommendation)


From July 2016, due to a change in operating procedures, the existing delays
in decision making increased substantially for children living with domestic
abuse that was assessed as medium risk by police. At the start of the
inspection, children were waiting for up to two months before a qualified social
worker considered their circumstances. The local authority reports that this
change, resulting from a vacancy within the social work management team,
was not reported to the assistant executive director or executive director of
childrens services (DCS), although the reduced managerial capacity was
known.


by the police about this group of children. This long-standing issue had not
previously been the subject of challenge by senior leaders as a single agency
or through the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB), until highlighted by
inspectors.
capacity and the impact on practice, senior leaders did not maintain sufficient
oversight of the work and had not identified these issues prior to them being
highlighted by inspectors. When these were raised, the local authority took
swift action to review all of the childrens circumstances. No children were
found to be at immediate risk, although a number were identified as in need of
a social work service. The local authority took immediate steps to ensure that
this level of backlog of work could not arise again. By the final week of the
inspection, although the time that children waited for a decision was still too
long, the action taken had significantly improved the level of managerial
oversight and the timeliness of decision making within the hub.
improved efficiency on other areas of the service in a system that was already
struggling to meet the volume of work. While a resulting increase was
predictable, for example, in the numbers of children requiring a social work
assessment, it had not been planned for as part of the senior leadership teams
risk assessment of the response to inspectors concerns, and the DCS had not
known about it until informed by inspectors.
staff of the appropriate level of experience in most areas of the service.
According to the most recent reported figures for 201415, at 25%, staff
turnover was high. This is considerably higher than statistical neighbours
(15%) and the England average (16%).
authority has not demonstrated clear risk assessment or forward planning.
Although the local authoritys response has been swift in light of concerns
raised by inspectors, this backlog of work would have been preventable if
effective action had been taken when capacity issues were first identified in
November 2015.
or more children. The local authority has taken action in the short term in
those areas of the service under the most pressure, such as the safeguarding
duty team, through the recruitment of additional agency staff. However, this
has not increased stability or significantly reduced the workloads.
avoidable drift and delay, including examples seen by inspectors of a reliance


on other agencies to undertake work that should be done by childrens social
care. In other instances, while some children are seen within minimum
timescales, this is not always at a frequency that meets their needs.
key element in its improvement journey. Although it does not have an
overarching workforce recruitment and retention strategy, it was clearly able to
articulate comprehensive coherent plans which are well informed by rigorous
analysis of the profile of its workers, its position in the market and sufficiency
considerations. This has informed a service redesign that is ready for
implementation, which the local authority expects will reduce workloads
through an increased establishment of staff and providing incentives for
experienced staff to progress and share their expertise. However, this remains
untested and, at the point of the inspection, the volume of work means that
workers are not always able to give children the level of service that they
need.
managers capacity to provide workers with timely effective oversight of
casework. While workers report that they feel well supported, this is not
always evidenced in consistent, timely, reflective supervision or management
oversight that challenges poor practice effectively.
assessed and supported year in employment do not meet the local authoritys
own practice standards. This, combined with significant delay in their external
support, means that the current cohort has not received the level of oversight
required or the protected caseloads that they are entitled to. Arrangements
have now been made for this group to commence external training with a local
university in December 2016. (Recommendation)
neighbouring authorities to provide high-quality training opportunities for staff,
based on the professional capabilities framework, and includes managers and
independent reviewing officers. This is complemented by the good range of
training provided through the LSCB, including dedicated single-agency
lunchtime sessions on specific topics and a council-wide leadership programme
for managers, launched in summer 2016, which 37 managers in childrens
services have already completed. However, this positive investment in learning
has yet to be reflected in improved standards in frontline practice.
areas of the service, such as the hub and safeguarding duty team, means that
senior leaders have an over-optimistic view of the quality and timeliness of the
service that children receive. For example, the local authority does not report
on or quality assure decision making in the large number of repeat requests for
service that it receives that are recorded as contacts, because it assumes that


numbers are high because they include routine information requests.
(Recommendation)
within their service areas. At a team manager level, this is largely focused on
compliance and on ensuring that performance management information is
correctly input on the local authoritys management system. This is
appropriate, given the challenges that the local authority faces in ensuring that
some basic practice standards are met.
audits. Learning from some of these audits has resulted in effective action
planning to drive up standards in some areas, for example to reduce the
numbers of children subject to child protection plans. However, in others,
proposed actions have not been taken, resulting in repeat recommendations.
The numbers of cases audited are not always sufficient for the local authority
to form firm conclusions. At the time of the inspection, the local authority had
suspended the audit cycle since August 2016, due to a staff vacancy.
casework at the point of transfer and case closure, findings from this work are
not collated or disseminated. This is a missed opportunity to inform and
improve practice.
assure itself of the quality of practice in relation to children missing from home
or care or those at risk of child sexual exploitation. This is due to gaps in
performance management information, and it is taking action to address this.
analysis, sufficient benchmarking and measures against a standard of what
good should look like for children in Tameside. This does not assist senior
leaders or elected members to have a thorough understanding of practice on
the frontline or to communicate to staff clear expectations of performance
based on good practice standards.
practice by the chief executive and lead member through formalising
arrangements for them to meet quarterly with the DCS, the assistant executive
director and the chair of the LSCB. The chief executive has given a clear steer
to streamlining and improving the quality of information brought to this
meeting. However, this is too recent to measure the impact of the changes on
either senior leaders understanding of practice or improving outcomes for
children.
remits held by the lead member of childrens services and the scrutiny panel.
Scrutiny by the panel of key areas of the councils core business in relation to


childrens social care, such as the public service hub, while planned, have not
yet taken place. Despite these capacity challenges, the scrutiny panel has
undertaken a useful audit of the councils response to children at risk of sexual
exploitation that was well informed by relevant research. This has resulted in
action planning to improve services, including to young people placed from out
of area by other local authorities.
while the work of the corporate parenting strategic group is progressing, the
lack of a current strategic plan means that opportunities for improvement
through external challenge are limited. The pledge to children looked after and
care leavers requires urgent refreshing and relaunching to ensure that it is
effectively communicated and speaks directly to children and young people in
language that is accessible to them. (Recommendation)
LSCB and the Adult Safeguarding Board, supported by key senior leaders such
as the DCS sitting on all three boards. A recent review of joint working
protocols identified that some strategic priorities would benefit from further
alignment. Learning from this review will be combined with a joint board
development session planned for April 2017 to inform changes to the joint
Health and Well-being strategy, which is due to be refreshed.
joint strategic needs assessment. While, overall, in common with many areas,
single commissioning is largely health focused, the service has staff dedicated
to childrens services, ensuring that the needs of adults do not take
precedence.
decisions that have led to gaps in services, for example for children at the
edge of care and family group conferencing. Commissioning, informed by good
strategic planning in relation to domestic abuse, supports victims well.
However, delays in responding to requests for service and assessing childrens
needs mean that children wait longer than necessary for a service.
young peoples participation, and peer reviews to inform its strategic planning.
However, at the time of the inspection, service improvements because of this
learning were still at the planning stage and had not resulted in demonstrably
improved outcomes for children.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
Tameside Safeguarding Children Board (TSCB) is not fully effective in its scrutiny
and monitoring of the quality of frontline practice across the partnership, because
of a lack of good-quality performance information, for instance useful data. The
child sexual exploitation strategy is not informed by an integrated multi-agency
data set, which if available would provide assurance of the sufficiency of the
strategy.
While the board can demonstrate effective challenge in some areas, the challenge
to agencies in relation to the poor application of thresholds and delays within the
public service hub has not been systematic or rigorous enough to ensure that
agencies provide evidence of improvement.
Governance arrangements between the board and other strategic partnerships,
such as the Adult Safeguarding Partnership Board and the Health and Well-being
Board, are satisfactory. There are no formal reporting arrangements to either the
corporate parenting strategic group or the family justice board, which limits the
boards ability to monitor the safeguarding of children who are looked after and
those going through a court process.
The board has a range of appropriate sub-groups and task and finish groups that
effectively discharge statutory requirements and lead work on board priorities. The
domestic abuse steering group has been successful in raising awareness of the
nature and impact of this type of abuse and improving support services. The
recently agreed neglect strategy has led to improvements to specific training on
the graded care profile. The child sexual exploitation sub-group has overseen a
number of positive developments relating to raising awareness: training, victim
support, enforcement and prosecution. The learning from serious case reviews
and audits is responded to and disseminated across the partnership.
The TSCB annual report 201516 provides a comprehensive account of board
activity, but lacks analysis of the quality of services for children and evidences only
piecemeal involvement in their planning. Similarly, the business plan is updated
regularly, but the absence of some key issues means that the effectiveness of the
business plan to support improvements is diminished.
A clear commitment to involving children and young people in influencing board
activity resulted in the safeguarding youth forum, established during 2015 which
influenced work undertaken on online safety. At the point of inspection, the group
was not active due to lack of membership, and as a result young people are not
currently engaged in improving safeguarding in Tameside.


Recommendations
priorities and update its business plan to include concerns about frontline
practice and service delivery at all levels of need, and ensure that an
evaluation of the impact of safeguarding practice upon childrens well-being
and safety is undertaken and included in the boards annual report.
enable effective scrutiny and evaluation of the quality of frontline practice and
service provided to children.
across the partnership is effective and is resulting in timely and appropriate
intervention for children.
Tameside by regular critical analysis of accurate and up-to-date performance
information from all partners. This is to include the development of an
integrated multi-agency data set concerning children at risk of child sexual
exploitation, ensuring that the prevalence is accurately captured and enabling
an evaluation of the effectiveness of the current strategy.
young people influence the service planning needed to deliver TSCB priorities
and plans.
justice board to ensure that the TSCB has appropriate oversight of outcomes
for children looked after and those who are the subject of care proceedings.
Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
ensure that it works more efficiently and effectively. All board members and
sub-group members are clear about their responsibilities and accountabilities.
The business manager sits on the strategic group and the business group, as
well as all sub-groups. This is with the exception of the learning and
improvement group, which is attended by the boards training coordinator, and
the quality assurance and performance management sub-group, which is
attended by the quality assurance officer. This structure helps to avoid
duplication and identify any gaps.
Partnership Board and the Health and Well-being Board are appropriate, and
work is planned to strengthen the existing governance arrangements. A joint
development event held in April 2016 agreed to establish a shared


safeguarding strategy and revise joint protocols, but this has yet to be
progressed, due to capacity issues.
sufficiency, quality and analysis of data reported to the board. This includes an
overdependence upon police data with regard to children who are at risk of
child sexual exploitation, or involved in missing episodes or domestic abuse
incidents. The board has compensated for this by asking agencies to undertake
manual trawls of data, where possible, and has rearranged their meeting cycle
to align with the reporting cycle. However, until the quality of performance
reports and supporting analysis improves significantly, the effectiveness of the
board in monitoring the quality of frontline practice is reduced.
(Recommendation)
audits, but findings are limited due to the small number of cases that are
considered. The audits undertaken in 201516 relating to child sexual
exploitation and domestic abuse reviewed only two cases each. This limits the
usefulness of the findings. (Recommendation)
to evaluate the impact of the partner agencies application of thresholds,
through either the multi-agency auditing process or the scrutiny of singleagency audits. There is no plan to evaluate the impact of the childrens needs
framework launched in June 2016. (Recommendation)
challenge to the local authority regarding the insufficiency of data relating to
common assessments and the lack of an effective early help quality assurance
framework. This has led to agreement to appoint two common assessment
advisers who will both collect data about completed assessments and evaluate
impact. The board also successfully challenged the local authority about its
need for an effective joint protocol between housing and social care, to ensure
appropriate assessment of homeless 16- and 17-year-olds. This led to a
revised joint protocol and an improved joint assessment process. Challenge
concerning lack of therapeutic support for child sexual exploitation victims has
met with partial success, with an agreement of how the support will be
delivered beyond March 2017 still to be resolved.
in some key areas. For example, the board was aware of the concerns relating
to the way that the public service hub was operating and the resulting delays
in progressing contacts and referrals for some children, having received the
report of the review of the hub in December 2015. The board has not
subsequently analysed whether the action taken in light of the review led to
improvement. The board has not called the police to account for delays in
referring to the hub children whom officers had assessed as at medium risk of


domestic abuse. The chair has strengthened the challenge process from the
board, but this is too recent to show impact.
current weak link with the family justice board, limits the boards ability to
monitor the experiences of children involved in court processes. Similarly,
better links with the corporate parenting strategy group are required to ensure
that the board takes an active role in monitoring and promoting the
safeguarding of children looked after. (Recommendation)
activity, achievements and priorities, but lacks analysis of the quality of
services for children. This will need to be addressed to ensure that the annual
report is useful in providing helpful and analytical commentary on safeguarding
activity in Tameside. (Recommendation)
routinely updated by the executive business group meeting, a number of key
issues and developments of concern to the board do not feature in the 2016
proposed resolution, longer-term therapeutic support for victims of child sexual
exploitation, an evaluation of the impact of the new early help adviser posts
and the work to align the three strategic boards. The plan continues to
propose only to monitor the public service hub, and these omissions risk
reducing the effectiveness of the board. (Recommendation)
contribution to the planned transformation of mental health services for
children and young people, securing therapeutic support for child sexual
exploitation victims until March 2017, ensuring appropriate support services for
families experiencing domestic abuse and improving pathways to services for
young people involved in self-harm. However, the boards approach to driving
service planning and monitoring improvement in Tameside lacks coherence, is
insufficiently proactive and not clearly reflected in the TSCB annual report and
business plan. (Recommendation)
useful work during 201516 with regard to updating the boards website and
involvement in a pilot in a secondary school concerning safe social networking.
Unfortunately, some young people have left the group and consequently it has
not met since February 2016. A fresh recruitment process has not yet secured
new membership, so young people are not currently involved in influencing
improvements in safeguarding in Tameside.
of the strategy to counter child sexual exploitation. Evidence of services
delivered include: awareness raising across communities through a recent
week of action against child sexual exploitation and, in schools, through the


roll out of Real love rocks and Love or lies resources; training for partners,
taxi drivers and managers of licensed establishments; and enforcement,
disruption activity and prosecution. The lack of accurate performance
information in relation to child sexual exploitation hampers the boards ability
to analyse its prevalence and prevents full understanding of the impact of the
work completed. The serious and significant case review sub-group has
commissioned a review of the child sexual exploitation system, but this will not
take place until later in 2016. This means that the recommendations of the
peer review undertaken in March 2016 have not yet been agreed or
implemented.
boards. The group has worked effectively to ensure that a range of appropriate
support is available to victims, perpetrators, young people and children living
with domestic abuse. This includes the pilot of domestic abuse awareness tools
in 13 schools and the implementation of operation Encompass. The multiagency training programme delivers awareness-raising training and training on
the whole-family approach to domestic abuse.
case reviews. The strategy is located within the Greater Manchester neglect
strategy and identifies the key indicators to measure impact. The multi-agency
training programme has been adjusted to reflect the requirements of the
strategy and training on the graded care profile, and delivery commenced in
the summer of 2016. This is too recent to evidence impact.
young person, the board has contributed to the establishment of the Children
and Young Peoples Emotional Well-being and Mental Health five-year (2015
Glossop that aims to strengthen referral pathways and deliver a clear offer to
meet the emotional well-being and mental health needs of children and young
people. As part of the programmes workforce development work stream, the
boards task and finish group concerned with self-harm and suicide has
progressed an appropriate mental health training ladder delivered through the
multi-agency training programme.
chaired independently with effective communication supported by a shared
CDOP manager based in Tameside. The annual report 201516 provides clear
information concerning notifications received and closed down, and the themes
and issues that have emerged. The predominant findings relate to the deaths
of children under the age of one year due to prematurity, low birth weight and
mothers smoking during pregnancy. These issues are addressed by public
health actions and, in Tameside, this has led to improved planning by
maternity services with pregnant women and in a midwife post dedicated to
support pregnant women to cease smoking.


managed effectively a considerable number of serious case reviews and multiagency case reviews, relative to the size of the local authority. The national
panel has endorsed all of its decisions regarding the initiation of serious case
reviews. The panel has effectively ensured implementation of action plans by
the relevant agencies and has progressed dissemination of the findings
through the learning and improvement sub-group.
procedure group. Revisions of threshold guidance in 2015 and the childrens
needs framework in June 2016, combined with revision of referral pathways for
self- harm, female genital mutilation, forced marriage and children at risk of
radicalisation, have ensured that procedures are up to date.
ensures that partner agencies produce evidence of their compliance. Scrutiny
by members of the quality assurance and performance management sub-group
assures the validity of evidence before signing off the agencys section 11
response. Multi-agency audits concerned with strategy meetings and pre-birth
assessment are planned for 201617. The establishment of a schedule of
single-agency audits provides a more systematic approach to evaluating the
quality of both frontline practice learning and service delivery.
strategy and a well-regarded multi-agency training programme. Training
reflects policies and procedures, and their updates and learning from serious
case reviews, multi-agency case reviews and audits, and has a focus on skill
development as well as knowledge. Additionally, learning is communicated
through widely circulated seven-minute briefings that are discussed in team
meetings, six-weekly safeguarding update events and e-learning opportunities.
The training coordinator has recently recruited 13 more professionals to the
training pool, and the learning and improvement sub-group has developed a
new process to secure a better return on the impact on practice
questionnaires.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after, and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted and one additional inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Paula Thomson-Jones HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Shirley Bailey HMI
Team inspectors: Margaret Burke HMI, Susan Myers HMI, Jon Bowman HMI, Simone
White SHMI, Carolyn Spray HMI, Judith Nelson
Shadow inspectors: Jan Edwards
Senior data analyst: Clare Atkinson
Quality assurance manager: Chris Williams SHMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance, Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


