Torbay
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 12 October 2015  5 November 2015
Report published: 5 January 2016

Childrens services in Torbay are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Torbay are inadequate. Leaders and managers in the local
authority have been ineffective in prioritising, challenging and improving the quality
of practice, in particular for children in need of help and protection. The local
authority was judged inadequate in the inspection of safeguarding in 2010. The
improvements that followed resulted in a judgement of adequate at a child
protection inspection in 2013. This trajectory of improvement has not been sustained
over the last year. Senior leaders have introduced initiatives and progressed a range
of projects, but in doing so they have lost focus on the core task of ensuring goodquality frontline services to children and families.
High turnover within the senior leadership team over several years, combined with
inconsistency in management style, sickness absence and ineffective challenge
throughout the organisation, have adversely affected the speed and effectiveness of
improvement. The previous Director of Childrens Services (DCS) has returned on an
interim basis and, together with a stabilised management team, is beginning to
provide more consistent and effective strategic direction to support improvement.
The DCS and senior managers are visible to staff and are well respected. The
leadership team is beginning to introduce a culture of challenge and improvement
and of continuous learning. There is sustained financial investment and a clear
political commitment to provide high-quality childrens services. Torbay childrens
services benefit from a well-resourced workforce with manageable caseloads.
Performance information is not reliable and therefore cannot be used to enable
effective scrutiny of activity. Quality assurance processes are not yet embedded and
do not routinely lead to identifiable improvements across the service. Audit activity
has been limited until recently and findings from audits have not been used
effectively to inform staff training and improve practice.
Important weaknesses remain in social work practice across the service. While no
children were found to be at immediate risk, children in Torbay do not receive timely
responses to their needs and thresholds for access to services are not well
understood or applied. Children and families experience delay in gaining access to
help and protection at referral, assessment and planning stages. Practice across the
service is not sufficiently proactive and a culture of incident-led social work is
evident. Delays experienced by children and families in receiving services are not
sufficiently challenged by managers or child protection conference chairs.
Management oversight and supervision remain variable in timeliness and quality.
Assessments do not routinely include a thorough analysis of risk or clearly reflect the
voice of the child. Weaknesses in practice include the poor quality and impact of
child in need and child protection plans, the inconsistent application and
understanding of thresholds, the high number of repeat referrals, and slowness in
initiating care proceedings.
However, improvements to the quality of practice are taking place in a number of


areas. These include the introduction of the multi-agency safeguarding hub and a
strengths-based model of casework. Arrangements to identify and support children
at risk of sexual exploitation are improving and partnership working is becoming
better integrated into services. However, the quality of individual case work is too
variable in terms of improving outcomes for children. Young people are not routinely
offered a return interview after they have been missing.
Arrangements to support and assess 16- and 17-year-olds who are homeless are not
robust. Assessments of need and consideration of becoming a child looked after for
each young person are not routinely undertaken. This means that young people may
remain at risk.
Arrangements to investigate allegations of abuse or poor practice by people who
work with children are not consistently timely or robust. Thresholds for referring to
the designated officer are not well embedded or understood across the partnership
and learning from cases is not used effectively.
The quality of early help work is significantly underdeveloped. There is no
coordinated overview of early help provision across Torbay and no evaluation of its
impact. Partners do not sufficiently understand the early help offer, which means
that some children and families may not have access to the right help at an early
stage.
Services to families experiencing domestic abuse are underdeveloped. Torbay does
not provide a perpetrators programme or direct work with children. Some children
have to wait for many weeks for Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services.
Decisions to look after children in Torbay are not sufficiently timely or effective.
Children experience delays in becoming looked after, particularly in cases where they
have been exposed to ongoing chronic neglect. While the duration of care
proceedings has reduced and the quality of court work is now much stronger,
arrangements to secure permanence at the earliest opportunity for children are not
prioritised or timely. Strong commissioning arrangements and increasing numbers of
foster carers have contributed to good placement stability. Educational outcomes for
children looked after are improving, but at Key Stage 4 they are still too low.
The local authority is in touch with the vast majority of its care leavers, who receive
good support from personal advisers. However, the quality of pathway plans is poor.
Careful planning helps to ensure that most children are prepared well for adoption.
However, adoption as an option for permanence is not routinely considered for all
children who are unable to return home. While the average time between a child
entering care and moving in with her or his adoptive family is improving, children
continue to experience unnecessary delay in securing adoptive placements.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements/
arrangements for the protection of children was in March 2013. The local
authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in September 2010. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The interim director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since
September 2015
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since September 2013.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 25,100 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Torbay. This is 18.9% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 21.6% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 18.6% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 12% (the national average is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 8.1% of all
children living in the area, compared with 28.6% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic group of children and young people in the area is Any
Other White Background.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 5.1% (the national average is19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 4.1% (the national average is 15%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 13 October 2015, 1,376 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 13 October 2015, 209 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 132 at 13 October 2014.
 At 31 March 2015, 58 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from 74 at 31 March 2014.
 Since the previous inspection, five serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted and two serious case reviews have been completed or were
ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 13 October 2015, 290 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 116.9 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 297 (119.7 per
authority area
 one lives in a residential special school,3 out of the authority area
 eight live with parents, of whom 50% live out of the authority area
 there are no unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 24 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
 three children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or fewer per year.


Recommendations

The Chief Executive should ensure that leadership in Torbay is strong,
consistent and sharply focused on improving and sustaining outcomes for
children throughout childrens social care services (paragraphs 111131).


Improve the quality of performance management and monitoring through an
improved and robust suite of data, effective and challenging management
oversight and rigorous action planning (paragraphs 112119, 123124, 129


With partners, ensure that multi-agency thresholds are understood and
consistently applied across the partnership (paragraphs 19, 20, 26, 30).


Ensure that timely decisions are made on contacts and referrals and that initial
visits to children are prompt (paragraphs 21, 22).


Work effectively with partners to ensure that children receive timely and
effective early help and that assessments and plans are in place for each child
(paragraph 18).


Ensure that assessments are timely, proportionate and effectively identify the
risks, needs and protective factors, leading to appropriate and measurable
plans (paragraphs 22, 27).


Ensure that 16- and 17-year-olds who are homeless are given the opportunity
to have a comprehensive assessment and help and support according to their
needs (paragraph 32).


Ensure that the threshold for a referral to the designated officer is well
understood across the partnership (paragraph 131).


Ensure that all children who go missing from home or care are offered a timely
and comprehensive return interview and that information from these interviews
is collated to inform effective targeting of preventative and protective services
(paragraphs 37, 60).

pay greater attention to ensuring that they achieve five GCSE grades A* to C,
including English and mathematics (paragraph 63).
in relation to domestic abuse, adult mental health, Child and Adolescent Mental
Health Services (CAMHS) and the emergency duty service (paragraphs 28, 31,
for all children in a timely manner and that consideration is routinely given to


Fostering to Adopt arrangements and concurrent planning, where appropriate
(paragraphs 78, 83).
child protection conference chairs and ensure that reviews and conferences
result in effective information sharing and purposeful, timely plans for children
(paragraphs 2627, 5355).
guidance on their next steps, which include more formal communication to
them of their entitlements (paragraph 95).
leavers are actively encouraged to contribute to the development and content
of these plans (paragraphs 103104).
and contributes to a learning culture within the organisation (paragraph 116).


Summary for children and young people
 Children sometimes have to wait too long to be seen by a social worker or
another professional who can help them.
 Some social workers dont spend enough time talking to children and young
people to understand what their life is like. This means that the plans they make
for children and their families are not always good enough.
 Homeless young people who are 16- or 17-years old dont always get the help
that they need from childrens services; this means that they might live in
accommodation thats unsafe.
 When children and young people go missing, either from their own homes or
from care, they dont always meet with an adult when they come back to talk
about why they went missing. This means that people who care about them dont
know where they have been or how to help them to keep safe.
 Some services help children a lot, such as the Intensive Family Support Service,
and the assessment resource centre, where parents are assessed as to how well
they can look after their children.
 Most children who are looked after by the local authority live in the same
placement for a long time and get help to ensure that they are healthy and that
they go to school.
 Some children who are looked after are waiting too long to move in with a family
who wants to adopt them. However, when a child does move in with a family,
they and the family get a lot of help to make sure that everyone gets on well
together.
 Staff are good at keeping in touch with young people when they leave care, but
the quality of the written plans to help them prepare for adult life is not good
enough.
 The electronic recording system doesnt help managers to find out easily about
what the quality of services is like. It doesnt help social workers to find
information easily either.
 Senior managers, staff and local councillors really want to help children and
young people in Torbay. They have made some improvements and they are
determined to make sure that services keep getting better.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
Serious weaknesses in performance monitoring, management oversight and the
quality of social work practice lead to delays in visiting children in a significant
proportion of cases. This leaves children at potential risk of harm before assessments
begin and before plans are put in place to protect them and meet their needs.
Thresholds are not well understood and applied by all agencies, which means that
children do not always get the right service at the right time. Assessments are not
sufficiently comprehensive at identifying risk for children. Planning for children in
need or with a child protection plan does not effectively address all identified risks
and therefore does not offer sufficient protection for some children.
The electronic recording system does not support good social work practice and
performance monitoring. The quality of chronologies is poor and they do not enable
historical information to be considered in assessments of childrens needs. Multiagency working is not sufficiently robust for children in need.
Young people aged 16 and 17 who present as homeless are not consistently offered
an assessment by childrens social care and the local authority cannot be assured
that these young people have been appropriately safeguarded.
Systems and processes are improving slowly for children at risk of sexual
exploitation. However, the quality of practice is still variable. Return interviews are
not always undertaken when young people go missing and when they are
undertaken they are not always undertaken within timescales. This leads to missed
opportunities to engage with young people and to gather information to reduce risk.
Although well-coordinated work is being undertaken to develop robust systems to
identify and offer early help services, children have not consistently received help at
an early stage. Timely and effective support services have not been in place for
children in relation to domestic abuse, adult mental health and CAMHS.
Some good quality practice was seen during the inspection, for example in the family
intervention team. Some services support effective practice such as family group
conferences, the assessment resource centre, which delivers good quality parenting
assessments, and the Intensive Family Support Service (IFSS), which offers
significant support to some families and has contributed to reduced risk to children.


Inspection findings
quality of social work practice lead to delays in visiting children. This does not
enable timely and effective engagement with children and their families and
leads to delays in assessing risk and need. Current systems and practice are not
sufficiently robust or child-centred.
which had lost impetus and strategic direction. Assessments and plans have not
been completed on the majority of early help cases. A process has been
introduced from September 2015 to ensure that assessments and plans are
now undertaken. Early help services and the team around the child have not
been systematically quality-assured or monitored, meaning that inconsistencies
in the timeliness and quality of practice have not been subject to challenge or
improvement. The means that some children do not receive the right help at an
early stage. However, some good direct work is undertaken by the family
intervention team.
are not embedded, which leads to children not receiving an appropriate and
timely service. Social work intervention is too reactive and cases were seen
where an appropriate response did not take place until risks had escalated or a
significant incident had taken place. Very recently, more robust systems have
been put in place for early help, and there are early signs of improvement. For
example, the early help panel, which has been in place since April 2015,
effectively shares information and applies thresholds appropriately.
Procedures and processes are not sufficiently embedded or robust and there
are delays in screening and decision-making on contacts and referrals.
Slowness in decision-making includes cases where the initial screening had
assessed referrals as high or medium risk. This leads to delays in assessing risk
of harm to children. This is affected by a lack of capacity in the MASH and the
quality of referrals being too variable. In addition, a lack of understanding by
partner agencies about thresholds and pathways leads to a high number of
contacts that require no further action.
supervision and guidance, which means that they are not clear about all
aspects of their role. The majority of decisions in the MASH are appropriate.
However, delays occur after this initial decision and some children are exposed
to ongoing unassessed risk. The MASH has led to more effective engagement of
health partners, who increasingly seek advice on referrals. Repeat referrals that
were seen by inspectors highlighted lack of consistently effective decisionmaking, including insufficient consideration of historical information.


and their families. This leaves children for too long without needs and risks
being assessed and without plans being put in place to reduce risk. The
majority of assessments are not sufficiently robust. Assessments are not
comprehensive or proportionate to risk and need. For example, some
assessments are based on one visit to the child where a more in-depth
assessment would have been appropriate. Weaknesses in assessments include
lack of effective identification of risk factors and being too adult-focused, with
insufficient challenge to parents and little consideration of the day-to-day
experience of the child. There are delays in completing some assessments and
timescales for assessments are not consistently determined in accordance with
risk and need. A small number of examples were seen of inadequate
assessments and responses to child sexual abuse within their family, which
meant that children did not receive timely help.
Good parenting assessments are undertaken by the assessment resource
centre; some effective pre-birth assessments were seen that led to appropriate
action to help and protect children.
sufficiently taken into account in assessment and decision-making. There are
gaps in some children in need being visited, which do not enable good
relationships with social workers to develop. Children are seen alone in the
majority of cases. Most children on child protection plans are seen in
accordance with their plans.
thresholds have been met. However, strategy discussions do not consistently
include all relevant agencies and are mainly held between the police and
childrens social care. This means that any important information about the
child or family held by partner agencies is not taken into account. However,
there is some evidence of increasing involvement by health partners. In some
cases, there are delays in completing child protection enquiries. The majority of
decision-making following child protection enquiries is appropriate. However, it
is not yet consistent and the rationale for decisions is not always sufficiently
robust. There are delays in initiating some initial child protection conferences,
but with evidence of recent improvement. However, plans are not routinely put
in place to protect children before the initial child protection conference.
to assessments and child protection enquiries without any further action. The
rationale for decision-making at child protection conferences is not sufficiently
robust and risks are not always effectively identified. In some cases, there are
delays in recognising thresholds for initiating child protection processes. There
has been a recent rise in relation to children subject to child protection plans,
but the reasons for this have not yet been identified by the local authority. A
significant number of children are on plans for a second time. Evidence of


challenge was seen from child protection conference chairs, but this is not yet
consistent. Few children attend child protection conferences, although they are
offered advocacy. The advocates effectively represent the voice of children who
are aged eight and over. Parents and childrens views are not routinely
captured so there is no effective evaluation of their experience of child
protection conferences.
specific and measurable with clear timescales and outcomes. Many plans are
too adult-focused and do not effectively address identified risks; therefore they
do not offer sufficient protection for some children. Progress on plans is not
monitored well, and drift was seen by inspectors in some cases, including
where children were experiencing neglect. Core groups do not consistently
develop child protection plans. Examples were seen of well-attended core
groups. However, this is not always the case and a recent audit identified that
some key agencies working with families do not routinely attend core groups,
which undermines their effectiveness. In some children in need cases, there is a
lack of multi-agency planning due to the absence of regular children in need
reviews.
a lack of effective planning, lead to delays in effective intervention. One of the
findings from a recent multi-agency audit of children who live in households
where a parent misuses substances, suffers from mental ill-health, or where
there is domestic violence, was that there was insufficient information sharing
and joint working between agencies. This continues to be an area for
development in Torbay. Multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARACs)
are well attended, enabling information to be effectively shared. The local
authority has recognised that few referrals to MARACs are made by childrens
social care services and has introduced a risk assessment tool for social
workers. However, this is not consistently used. Representatives from childrens
social care do not attend all multi-agency public protection arrangements
(MAPPA) meetings, which means that important information may not be
shared.
for example ethnicity or religion, little consideration of this is demonstrated in
assessments and plans.
cases. Some cases, identifying low levels of need, could be closed. In some
other cases, up-to-date assessments and plans are not in place. This does not
enable effective identification of risks. In addition, examples were seen of
delays in recognising child protection thresholds and in addressing neglect and
permanence for children.
this as an area for development and is in the process of commissioning


additional mental health services to support the demand for therapeutic
provision.
as homeless are not compliant with statutory guidance. Assessments of need
are not routinely completed and are only undertaken when the young person
requests an assessment. Therefore, some homeless 16- and 17-year-olds do
not receive help from children's social care services. Some young people are
provided with multi-occupancy accommodation, including bed and breakfast,
without having their needs and risks assessed. The local authority cannot be
assured that these young people are being safeguarded effectively.
Assessments undertaken by childrens social care for 16- and 17-year-olds who
present as homeless are of variable quality and do not result in effective
planning, including whether the young person should become looked after.
Timescales for actions are not routinely in place and there is not consistent
evidence that agreed actions are monitored. There is insufficient rigour in
decisions to close or step down cases, which leads to some cases
inappropriately being closed to childrens social care before the risks to children
have reduced. However, social workers report good access to their managers
and social workers consult regularly with their managers on casework.
Caseloads are manageable and have reduced considerably over recent years.
effectively implemented and is used inconsistently by practitioners. Direct work
tools are not routinely used with children. In a minority of cases, good
examples were seen of the use of specific assessment tools to gain the views of
children. These helped to maintain a clearer focus on the child. Social workers
have received training in the new model and are very committed to this
approach. They are beginning to integrate this learning into their practice.
assessments are child-focused and the day-to-day experience of the child is
effectively assessed, risk is identified and the social worker is focused on
progressing the plan, with effective joint working between agencies. Social
workers have access to an established and effective family group conference
service. In addition, the intensive family support service provides good quality
support to families.
beginning to provide effective support to young people and to reduce the risks
to which they are exposed. Tackling child sexual exploitation is a high priority
for the local authority and its partners. Improved systems for tracking and
sharing information are in place. Missing Monday meetings take place, which
are attended by police, childrens social care, education, health and the
voluntary sector and provide a good forum for information sharing and action
planning to safeguard children. Missing and child sexual exploitation meetings


take place and there is some evidence of mapping of intelligence and disruption
activity. There is an increasing understanding of the local profile, which informs
planning and helps services to be targeted more effectively.
sexual exploitation and, as a result, plans are in place to raise awareness. While
social workers are aware of the risks of child sexual exploitation, the quality of
practice is still variable and risk assessments and robust plans are not
consistently in place. Some interventions are not sufficiently effective in
reducing risks to children. The quality of return interviews is variable and return
interviews do not always take place when children go missing from home and
care. Children do not therefore have a consistent opportunity to speak with an
independent person to share their wishes and feelings. Additionally some key
information concerning individual young people and their patterns of
absconding is not routinely gathered or collated and cannot therefore be used
to inform risk-reduction strategies. A significant proportion of interviews do not
take place within 72 hours and further discourage young people to share
information or experiences.
ensure that children at risk of harm are identified in a timely manner. The
educational needs of young people in Torbay are well prioritised. An attendance
improvement officer actively tracks and follows up children missing education.
The virtual head effectively monitors children being educated in alternative
provision. Currently, there are 51 children on reduced timetables; none of the
children are looked after by the local authority. There are no children looked
after out of area in alternative provision. Three pupils have special educational
needs and their progress and attainment are tracked and carefully monitored.
increase from the 99 recorded in 201314. The progress of children receiving
elective home education is monitored by the elective home education officer to
ensure that children receive a suitable education. The virtual school head
teacher also maintains an overview of these arrangements, including home
visits.
practice and nor does it provide sufficient performance management
information. The local authority has recognised this and improvements to the
system are being implemented.
information on female genital mutilation. Female genital mutilation has been
incorporated into current training and is included in the South West child
protection procedures. However, it has not been incorporated into key local
guidance. Currently, there have been no incidents of female genital mutilation
identified in Torbay.


are not sufficiently robust. Despite an increase in capacity to respond to private
fostering arrangements, the local authority is still not ensuring that the high
number of children who travel from abroad to attend language courses receive
initial visits within timescales or that their welfare is sufficiently protected.
During 201415, only a quarter of children received initial visits within
timescales.
not in place for the emergency duty team. The emergency duty team does not
consistently provide an effective response. Children are subject to high usage of
police powers of protection. Discussions between the police and childrens
social care do not consistently take place before the use of police powers of
protection; this means that alternative options are not fully considered.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Outcomes for children looked after in Torbay are not yet good. Permanency planning
is not considered for all children at their second review and this has led to delays in
securing long-term arrangements. Independent Reviewing Officers have not always
been effective in raising concerns.
No cases were found of children entering care unnecessarily. Once risks are
identified, thresholds for commencing care proceedings are well understood and
applied consistently. Most social workers know the children on their caseloads well
and visit them regularly. Good advocacy arrangements are in place.
The quality of assessments and plans for children in care proceedings is mostly good
and improving. The quality is more variable for other children looked after, meaning
that their needs and exposure to risk are not fully considered.
Children who go missing from care or who are considered to be at risk from sexual
exploitation are not responded to consistently and not all missing episodes trigger a
return home interview. The quality of some return interviews is poor.
Educational outcomes for children looked after, although improving at Key Stages 1,
well-considered personal education plans they receive good help and support.
There has been an increase in the number of foster carers recruited and the local
authority has a robust and well-targeted placement sufficiency plan, which includes
strong commissioning arrangements. There is sufficient choice of placement for
children with foster carers and consideration is given to achieving the best match.
This has led to good placement stability. Children have good access to education and
health services, both within and outside the borough. However, children looked after
wait too long to be seen by specialist mental health services.
The newly formed care leavers team keeps in touch with almost all care leavers and
provides helpful information and support. Care leavers are helped to become
independent but their pathway plans are not sufficiently comprehensive or ambitious.
Adoption is considered for children in care. However, there are low numbers of
adoptions for children older than five years and some children wait too long to be
placed with their adoptive families following an agency decision.


Inspection findings
both statutory neighbours and nationally. Torbay has developed a five-year
plan to reduce the number of children looked after through strengthening
services for children on the edge of care. However, this strategy has only
recently been implemented and has not yet impacted on the overall number of
children looked after.
However, decisions to look after children and young people are not sufficiently
timely. In the vast majority of cases seen by inspectors, opportunities were
missed by social workers to intervene earlier for children. Children are left too
long in situations of neglect and witnessing domestic abuse, without meaningful
work being offered to improve their circumstances. Children often enter care in
an unplanned way during a crisis, following a critical event or because the
police use their powers to protect children.
Children on the edge of care are offered intensive family support, brief
intervention therapy and parenting programmes. The service is currently
supporting 70 children in 30 families and typically offers a package of intensive
support work to families over 16 weeks. However, there is no performance
information gathered on a regular basis and managers are therefore not able to
evaluate the impact of this work effectively.
caseloads and have clear aspirations for their future. Visits to children, young
people and their families take place regularly and children are seen alone by
their social workers. Inspectors saw good examples of direct work with children
using recognised tools to help them to understand what was happening and to
gain their views.
section 20 voluntary placements. While this figure is below the national average
of 28%, a significant number of these cases seen by inspectors demonstrate
that childrens permanency is not sufficiently considered for this cohort of
children and young people. Managers are reviewing all of these cases to ensure
that the legal status is appropriate.
effective and monitored robustly. This work is comprehensively recorded on
files. Letters to parents setting out concerns are present on most files.
However, not all letters include the impact of these concerns on children or set
out expectations of what needs to change, so parents may not be clear about
what they need to do and by when. Family group conferences are timely and
effective and are used frequently to explore if more support is available for


children. Decisions to enter proceedings are appropriately made through legal
threshold meetings chaired by senior managers.
and improving as a result of increased challenge and scrutiny. Feedback from
the judiciary is that there has been a dramatic improvement in quality in the
last year. Assessments and plans are comprehensive, well evidenced and
completed in a timely way. The views of children and young people are better
reflected and considered where appropriate. The employment of an in-house
barrister has had a further positive impact on the standard and consistency of
reports and plans for children involved in care proceedings.
are thorough, address developmental needs well and capture the views of
children. Others are not completed in sufficient detail and do not reflect an
accurate picture of need; most lack analysis. Assessments are not routinely
updated and much of the information on file is out of date and not reflective of
the current situation. Even when circumstances have significantly changed, for
example a change of placement, assessments are not updated. While social
workers can articulate a clear analysis of risk for individual children, this is not
sufficiently reflected in all written assessments. Social workers do not routinely
take account of childrens histories or consider relevant documents when they
are allocated a case. This makes it difficult to get a sense of childrens stories or
understand their needs and how they can be helped.
information missing and others are too long and descriptive; this makes it
difficult to quickly establish the most important events in childrens lives.
their file and some clearly explain expectations and goals and involve children
in the process, others lack key information, have no timescales or clear goals or
desired outcomes for the child.
regularly and the views of children and young people are routinely sought.
However, the impact of the independent reviewing officers (IROs) is weak and
lacks consistent, purposeful scrutiny of casework and outcomes for children.
The quality assurance role of the IROs is not currently effective and lacks focus
on constructive challenge and direction when practice is not good. Management
arrangements for the safeguarding unit, where the IROs are based, have been
inconsistent and this has further hampered improvement in the service.
review and this has led to delays in making plans for a minority of children.
IROs do not consistently challenge this lack of timely planning. While an
escalation process is in place for IROs to raise concerns about poor practice,
drift in casework and subsequent delays experienced by children, this is not


always effective. Inspectors saw case examples where IROs had given specific
recommendations to workers in circumstances where children were
experiencing delay and these actions were outstanding several months later.
children and families on the service they have received is not routinely gathered
and does not contribute to service development or to priorities set within the
service. Similarly, feedback from families is not gathered by the IROs regarding
their experiences throughout the looked after process; this is another important
omission.
parents to share their wishes and feelings in reviews and other complex
meetings.
planned and considered and children and families were prepared for the return,
but other children returned home without thorough preparation and support or
contingency planning. When children are not living at home, contact for
children with their families is prioritised and generally well organised, with a
flexible approach.
proactive in ensuring that these children have immediate access to education
and health services to help meet their needs. Social workers visit these children
regularly and all placements are monitored for quality and value for money by
commissioning staff.
from home or care or are identified as being at risk of sexual exploitation are
not always effective. Some return interviews are completed by a commissioned
service and while this provides a good level of independence, information from
individual return interviews is not systematically shared with the social worker
of the child. This lack of communication does not enable effective assessment
and planning for the young person.
in Torbay. The local authority reports that 100% of initial and review health
assessments are completed on time. Similarly, 98% of children looked after are
reported to receive timely dental checks. Specialist nurses attached to the
looked after children team ensure that referrals to specialist services are made
where appropriate. These nurses also ensure that medical information provided
to the fostering panel regarding children is of good quality and supports
effective decision-making by panel members.
from Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS). The local authority
has recognised the delays and has invested 240,000 on a commissioned


CAMHS service, which currently works with 60 children looked after.
Additionally, the local authority has appointed primary mental health workers to
provide consultation to any social workers and foster carers who may require
advice. In addition, these staff provide dedicated therapeutic input to children
looked after. However, demand is increasing and waiting lists are getting
longer; children wait up to four months to be seen.
children looked after. The specialist teachers in the virtual school team provide
good support to the schools to help children improve their English and
mathematics through additional and after school lessons. They also improve the
self-confidence of the pupils and the capabilities of the teachers by running
Thrive courses that are highly regarded and well received. Educational
outcomes for children looked after at primary school are improving at Key
Stages 1 and 2; outcomes for children in secondary schools are still too low at
Key Stage 4. The proportion of children looked after who gain a minimum of
five GCSEs at grades A* to C, including English and mathematics, is low. The
gap in attainment between children looked after and other children in Torbay is
still too wide.
was 95.7% in 2014-15. This is in line with the national average and better than
the average for other children in Torbay. It is evidence of the effective working
and strong partnership between the schools, the virtual school and the
attendance officer.
reflects the close working relationship between the virtual school team and
schools.
outstanding by Ofsted. The head of the virtual school and her team monitor the
individual placements closely and provide additional support if necessary.
education plan (PEP). The PEP has recently been revised and schools find it
helpful in providing a clear focus for planning and reviewing the progress of
pupils. The voice and views of the pupil are clearly captured, showing how they
view their own performance and achievements. The Pupil Premium is
appropriately used to provide very specific help.
currently does not analyse these to inform planning. Transition arrangements
for children looked after with the local further education college are good.
placements within 20 miles of home. The focused recruitment drive for inhouse carers ensures that there is usually sufficient choice of placement for


children. When childrens social workers request a foster placement, they are
given a choice of carers with an analysis of what they can offer, which helps
them to make good choices of placement for children. Brothers and sisters are
placed together unless there is good reason for them not to be, and this is well
evidenced through effective assessment.
valued and listened to and have positive relationships with them. While
supervision is regular, the content of supervision sessions is not recorded
thoroughly. The majority of files seen by inspectors lacked management
oversight, direction and challenge. There is no evidence that managers are
giving direction to social workers and holding them to account for poor practice.
Caseloads are reported by social workers to be manageable.
system to record management notes and to store case records. Some key
documents could not be found by staff on files. The current electronic recording
system does not easily provide managers with key data and management
information and managers are therefore not able to maintain a consistent
overview of either staff performance or service development. For example, the
local authority could not provide information on the number or reasons for
foster placement breakdown.
considered. Managers have given consideration to the current and future needs
of the service and this is reflected in commissioning plans. This year, the local
authority has specifically recruited 47 new foster carers who are able to offer
homes for children with challenging behaviour as well as for older children.
Additionally, three specialist parent and child placements have been approved;
these placements enable vulnerable and high risk families to be assessed within
a family setting rather than an assessment unit.
strengths and vulnerabilities and include timely decisions and appropriate
checks. The quality of assessments and reports presented at panel meetings is
improving and is beginning to contribute to more effective matching
arrangements for children and young people.
them is good and children are well supported at all stages. Foster carers report
that bridging placements and moving children on to adoption are handled
particularly sensitively by social workers. Delegated decision-making processes
are being used appropriately and foster carers spoken to understand the
processes and implications of these arrangements.
authority for themselves and some felt pressurised into taking children that
they felt were unsuitable for their family. Other carers did not feel well


supported when they were going through difficult situations such as complaints.
Foster carers spoken to reported that support groups are often cancelled and
that social workers cancel visits. Carers reported significant variability in the
quality of social workers and felt that managers did not ensure consistently high
standards. One foster carer commented that, Social workers do what they want
and there are no consequences; some are absolutely brilliant and others do not
do a good job.
behaviours in children, provides foster carers with a consistently high quality
level of support and guidance and this is reported by foster carers to have
contributed to preventing some placement breakdowns and improving
outcomes for children looked after.
members who involve young people from the children in care council in
recruitment of senior staff, in commissioning of services and in celebration
events. While the corporate parenting board has good relationships with senior
managers, arrangements to scrutinise and challenge performance across the
service are under-developed and do not lead to ongoing improvements.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
led to some children not being placed in adoptive families in a timely manner.
Practice around early permanence is substantially under-developed. While there
are policies in place with regard to fostering to adopt and concurrency
arrangements, these are not routinely considered by social workers and as a
result, some children are potentially being denied the benefits of such
placements. Adoptive families do not have the information on which to base
decisions as to whether such arrangements are suitable for children placed with
them. The local authority has recognised areas where improvements are
necessary but has yet to consolidate these findings in an improvement plan.
too long before going to live with adoptive families. Recent performance against
the adoption scorecard for 201415 shows an improvement in timeliness; data
for the last year indicate the average time between children entering care and
moving in with their adoptive family was 432 days. Data also indicate the
average time between a placement order and matching for the local authority is
improving and for 201415 was 201 days. While this timeliness has improved
from 245 days in the previous year, this still exceeds the threshold target of


are not well embedded in Torbay. Of the 47 children who were either adopted
or placed for adoption in 201415, only four were aged over five years. All of
these children had an agency decision for adoption made before they were five.
Between April 2014 and March 2015, 15% of children looked after were
adopted. This performance is below the England average of 17% and the
statistical neighbour average of 24.2%. In the past year, 24 adoption orders
have been granted and at the time of the inspection, three children were
awaiting placement orders following an agency decision for adoption.
placements and six placements of brothers and sisters. At the time of the
inspection, the local authority had four children who were the subject of
placement orders who had not yet been matched. The local authority has
identified potential adopters for all these children.
The panel provides adequate scrutiny and challenge. The Agency Decision
Maker provides prompt scrutiny of panel recommendations and ensures that
children are appropriately matched in a timely manner with a family which
meets their needs. However, in the past year, there have been seven children
who have had a change of plan from adoption. All these children were aged five
or over. The rationale for such a change of plan was not clear in a significant
number of cases seen by inspectors, particularly where decisions were being
made from a change of plan to adoption to long-term fostering. The local
authority has recognised the need to review its permanency policy to provide
clarity around permanency decision-making for children, and ensure that
adoption is considered at a much earlier stage where appropriate for older
children.
family-finding once a decision for adoption had been made, this was not
consistent.
good. The local authority had identified this as an area for development and as
a result held a training day in order to improve consistency and quality.
Arrangements to quality assure permanence reports have been recently
strengthened and very recent examples are of more consistent and higher
quality.
introduction process. Examples were seen by inspectors of good direct work
being undertaken with children to assist them to understand the process and to
develop a secure attachment with their adoptive parents. This work ensured


that childrens wishes and feelings were comprehensively understood and
considered. However, in a small minority of cases, this process had been
hampered by a change of social worker at a critical point in a childs journey,
when a placement order was made.
the past year, there were only six new approvals of adopter families at panel.
Currently, the service has only five assessments ongoing. Assessments have
mostly been completed in a timely manner with minor delays outside the
services control. The reasons for any delay are clearly recorded. The authority
has effective recruitment arrangements with Adopt South West and the South
West Adoption consortium, with a rolling programme of information evenings.
position to meet the future projected demand for adopter families, particularly
in ensuring that they are in a position to offer placements for brothers and
sisters and older children. While current levels of family finding are low, the
high number of care proceedings the authority has initiated indicates that
future activity levels may be higher; this may leave the authority vulnerable to
an increase in future placement demand. The authority currently has six
adoptive families who have been approved and are awaiting a match. Two of
these families were approved in 2014 and four in 2015.
support which is reflected in the low level of disruption activity. There has been
only one placement breakdown in the past year, prior to an adoption order
being made. Families spoke positively to inspectors about the range and quality
of support offered. Families particularly highlighted the therapeutic parenting
course, reporting that it gave them a greater insight into their childs behaviour.
In addition to training provision, there are a number of support groups for
adopted young people, adoptive parents and birth parents, all of which have
received positive feedback.
where this is in the childs best interests. Letterbox contact is effectively
promoted by the local authority and ongoing advice to carers is offered in
relation to contact with birth and adoptive families.
for children with a good narrative that details their journey into care and to
adoption. Later-life letters were also of a good quality and comprehensive,
enabling children to fully understand the circumstances leading to their
adoption, as they get older.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
current care leavers. Of these, they have updated information on five and there
are only two care leavers about whom they do not have any current
information. This is an improvement from 201314, when the local authority
reported that they had no information on about 27% of their care leavers.
support and care. This included calling young people daily to check on their
progress and making sure they had attended appointments, helping them to
secure jobs, apprenticeships and housing. Good examples were seen of social
workers giving practical support such as helping young people move house and
emotional support such as offering mediation work to a young person and her
foster carer when they were experiencing difficulties in their relationship.
care leavers to develop independence and acquire emotional resilience in
coping with personal difficulties. Personal advisers are supportive and proactive
in ensuring that care leavers receive appropriate medical and health attention
for their needs.
information is too frequently communicated to them informally, without suitable
checks on whether they have received the full range of information and their
entitlements.
location has been a positive step and has enabled improved access
arrangements for care leavers to visit the team. Care leavers are already
making more use of professional services such as a care leavers nurse, and
mental health professionals. The new location for the team also provides
increased opportunities for meeting together, socialising and expressing their
views in a safe forum.
education college to provide suitable courses for care leavers. These courses
are often tailored to helping them gain or improve their English or mathematics
skills and qualifications. Other programmes help care leavers to improve their
qualifications and develop the skills needed to gain employment and progress in
education or training.
that they are aware of the risks and dangers of child sexual exploitation and
how this might affect them. Care leavers who go missing are identified and
receive a timely response to their needs of help and protection. Risks are


mostly identified in a timely way and while risk assessments seen by inspectors
varied in quality, all were at least adequate.
care leavers were placed in temporary emergency accommodation and this was
on a very short term basis. Care leavers receive appropriate help in finding
suitable accommodation. Checks are made to ensure the accommodation is
safe and that young people feel secure. However, once the details have been
recorded on the information system, follow-up checks for any possible issues
are not systematically made.
high quality support and guidance are under-developed and there is no formal
process in place to evaluate performance across the service. The quality in the
services being provided to care leavers varies too greatly and it is too
dependent on the help and advice provided by individuals such as personal
advisers.
contributed effectively enough to raising the aspirations of care leavers and
broadening their horizons. There is little evidence of how well or actively care
leavers are encouraged to participate in Torbays user surveys or other forums
for user groups.
young peoples circumstances; arrangements to help care leavers make a
smooth transition to becoming responsible and active citizens do not contribute
sufficiently well or significantly to helping care leavers improve and develop
themselves.
safety, accommodation and physical health. However, they do not use the
views of care leavers to make improvements or to record the effectiveness of
the process of decision-making and planning. The targets and timescales in
records and plans are not clear or well-defined. For example, behaviours and
issues such as drugs and alcohol are recorded clearly but the plans do not
indicate what actions might be taken that could lead to curbing or addressing
these behaviours.
steps and longer-term aspirations; they do not record whether the young
person has received advice and guidance and there is no monitoring of actions
agreed. They do not record adequately educational achievements, in order to
enable reflection and improvement.
guidance in a formal way for both academic and personal development at
different stages and phases of their education or chosen employment routes.


They have to rely too much on information from informal and casual sources
rather than more expert or informed professionals.
with sufficient rigour and urgency to make a positive difference. Although care
leavers have been involved in the design and production of the forthcoming
health passport, the use of their views to improve the service to care leavers is
under-utilised, such as in the commissioning of suitable and high quality
accommodation.
authority currently does not collect detailed information on destinations of
former care leavers in training or employment. At present, only one care leaver
is on an apprenticeship programme. This is in spite of the fact that the local
authority has made available 14 places for care leavers to take up
apprenticeships, but attempts to recruit have been unsuccessful.
positively at an end-of-year awards ceremony. The care leavers service is
working with current young people to involve them further in organising similar
celebratory events.
figure is lower than the national average for care leavers (39%). However,
about 66% of care leavers, numbering 111 young people, are in full- or parttime education or training.
former care leavers are studying in higher education. However, one former care
leaver supported by the local authority gained his Law degree this year.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Leadership, management and governance are inadequate. The local authority has
been ineffective in prioritising and challenging the quality of practice, in particular
with children in need of help and protection. Senior leaders have introduced new
initiatives and progressed a range of projects, but in doing so they have lost focus on
ensuring good quality frontline services to children and families.
Performance information is unreliable and therefore senior managers and elected
members are unable to use data and information effectively to improve the quality of
services. Local authority audits have been based on findings from an audit tool which
has not been fit for purpose. This has led to an over-optimistic impression of the
quality of social work and weaknesses in practice have not been sufficiently identified
and acted upon. The local authority has been slow in developing effective
performance monitoring to analyse performance and to drive improvement.
Management oversight of cases has not been rigorous enough to ensure that risks
are identified and managed and that services are of a good quality. Social workers
spoke highly of the support and availability of their line managers but there is little
evidence of challenge within supervision records. The lack of challenge and lack of
urgency to address poor practice are themes across childrens services, although
slightly less so for children looked after.
Senior leaders have not exercised sufficient management oversight and scrutiny over
new services such as the MASH and the single assessment team. Insufficient levels
of staffing in the MASH, lack of training and supervision have led to an inadequate
service with delays in children being seen and risks not properly assessed.
Improvements in early help services are now being driven forward but only recently
have assessments and plans been introduced.
Not all actions from previous inspections have been addressed, such as the provision
of services for perpetrators of domestic abuse. This is significant in Torbay where
domestic abuse features highly in cases held by childrens services.
The local authority has developed relationships with partners and strategic boards
with priorities for children and families aligned. However, this has not had an impact
on practice at the frontline.
Improvements across childrens services have been made in relation to the reduced
and manageable caseloads, the introduction of the MASH, the implementation of the
new social work model and increased social work capacity, as well as improving the
early help offer in Torbay.


Inspection findings
and families due to failures in oversight of practice, the use of unreliable data
and the lack of urgency in challenging and driving forward improvements. High
turnover within the senior leadership team over several years, combined with
inconsistency in management style, sickness absence and ineffective challenge
throughout the organisation, have adversely affected the speed and
effectiveness of improvement.
unreliability of performance information. The local authority has been slow in
developing monthly performance monitoring to help managers and leaders
understand and use data. Until September 2015, managers had not
systematically analysed performance data or effectively identified areas for
improvement across the service.
authority is aware of areas for improvement but it has not shown sufficient
urgency to address these deficits. Not all actions from previous inspections
have been addressed. For example, the 2013 inspection recommended that all
plans should have measurable outcomes, the health and wellbeing strategy
should contain actions and timescales, and services for domestic abuse
perpetrators should be developed; all have yet to be achieved.
system in producing reliable data, and during the inspection struggled to
provide some basic information. While a management dashboard is being
created to provide managers and leaders with more accurate data regarding
individual team performance, this is not yet in place.
local authority identified during the inspection that its own auditing tool was not
fit for purpose. This tool has led to the local authority gaining an over-optimistic
impression regarding the quality of social work, as many local authority audits
rated as good were judged by inspectors as requiring improvement and some
were inadequate. This means that weaknesses in practice have not been
sufficiently identified and acted on. Despite having a quality assurance
framework in place, managers and supervisors are not clear about what is
expected of them in how to complete audits.
are reported to staff via a quality assurance newsletter. Learning from audits is
communicated to staff but there is no indication of action plans being
formulated by managers to drive forward improvements. For example, a
thematic audit of children on child protection plans looked at 12 cases and
found that 10 had been subject to previous referrals. This key finding had not
led to a further investigation of repeat referrals in the service.


not ensured that risks are identified and managed and that services are of a
good quality. Case supervision notes on the electronic recording system are
regular but most are brief, do not set timescales and do not challenge workers
about practice. Inspectors have seen child in need cases closed, for example,
where meetings have not occurred regularly and risks have not been
adequately addressed, but they contain no comments or actions from
managers.
MASH, the single assessment team and a new casework model. However, the
focus on initiatives has resulted in the local authority not assuring itself that
frontline services are safe and effective. For example, the MASH is not yet
operating effectively and there are not yet sufficient numbers of staff who are
trained and supervised regularly to ensure that this team performs well.
not been adequately identified and assessed. There have been delays in seeing
children and the quality of assessments and plans has been variable. When
actions have been taken to improve practice, such as introducing the new
casework model, the local authority has not provided sufficient training,
supervision and oversight of practice to assure itself of an improved service for
children and families. The coordination and delivery of early help services have
also lacked effective oversight, scrutiny and drive to deliver improved and
coordinated preventative services in Torbay.
draft or have been revised in line with the improvement plan timescale and
during the course of the inspection. As a result, consistency in practice and
focus in some areas has not yet been achieved. For example, the MASH
operational procedures have not been signed off despite the MASH going live in
March 2015. The youth homelessness multi-agency pevention protocol and
practice guidance on children and young people missing from home, care and
education remain in draft. Services such as adoption do not have an adoption
carer recruitment strategy in place. While the current leadership team is
ensuring that staff are provided with a clear framework of expectations to work
within, this has not yet been embedded and as a result, the outcomes are not
evident.
leaders and elected members to discharge their individual and collective
responsibilities. There is now evidence of challenge between the Chief
Executive, DCS, LSCB chair and the lead member and this is beginning to have
an impact in some areas of the service. The Chief Executive is clearly focused
on establishing a consistent, robust and challenging leadership team to deliver
the improvement agenda in a timely manner. Individuals participate in strategic
boards such as the Health and Wellbeing Board and LSCB and there is evidence


of partnership working with priorities aligned, but this has not yet had an
impact on practice at the frontline.
Social Work Innovation Fund Torbay developments. A public services trust has
been established with police, probation, health, education and the voluntary
sector to pool budgets and develop services. This will develop an integrated
care organisation between hospitals, community-based health and adult social
care and with a proposal for childrens social care to be integrated in 2017.
These are recent developments and the impact of this work has yet to be seen.
enthusiastic group of elected members. The corporate parenting board is clear
about what it wants to achieve for children looked after and care leavers and
has established links with the children in care council. Board members know the
local authoritys strategic plans well and the priorities of the corporate parenting
strategy but could not explain to inspectors how they hold senior managers to
account for lack of progress. Their scrutiny and challenge of senior managers
therefore lacks rigour.
the commissioning of services. The JSNA gives a good overview of the local
community and its needs but has out-of-date information on children looked
after, on which to base service planning. A joint commissioning team has been
in operation since June 2015 and during the inspection updated the Childrens
commissioning plan and sufficiency strategy 20142019 to ensure that all
service areas are covered. The updated document continues to lack specificity
and actions on some key areas. For example, the document sets out what
domestic abuse services offer but does not address the lack of services for
domestic abuse perpetrators, which is a known service gap and one highlighted
at the 2013 inspection.
contains a workforce profile, recruitment and retention, success measures and
information for specific groups, such as entitlements for newly qualified social
workers. The local authoritys employment of agency staff has reduced from
workers while permanent staff are recruited. Due to an increase of 10 new
posts, the current vacancy rate is 23%. About 40% of the workforce are in their
first or second year of practice and managers have taken steps to protect
caseloads and mix new and experienced workers in teams.
remaining with Torbay for an average of seven years. The local authority uses a
talent management programme to develop and to mentor new managers,
which has led to 10 individuals being placed in secondment opportunities this
year. The local authority has had success with a grow your own programme to


support staff in gaining a social work qualification and take student placements,
which have led to these students taking up permanent appointments. However,
the turbulence within the senior management team over several years has
meant that staff have not had consistent messages about what is expected of
them.
on staff recruitment, retention and delivery and support of post qualification
training. A range of face-to-face and e-learning courses is available to staff
members and learning from audits and complaints is disseminated to staff via
bulletins and practice discussion. Training courses are evaluated at the time of
the course and one month later, but learning from training courses is not
followed up in supervision sessions to examine how staff practice has
developed.
workers. The DCS has led social work forums to hear directly about practice
issues. Feedback from social workers has been listened to and acted on, for
example, regarding the need for more direct time to be spent with families.
This has resulted in a pilot project giving additional administrative support to
social workers. This direct contact with frontline staff gives leaders a snapshot
of frontline services, but the lack of accurate data means that they do not have
a clear picture of performance.
producing clear written plans. The effectiveness of initiatives is not followed up
with children and families to assess the impact of changes of practice. The local
authority has gained some feedback from the children in care council and can
demonstrate learning from complaints, but gaining regular service user
feedback is under-developed.
of discussion between staff and managers. Most supervision files seen
contained brief recordings, did not demonstrate reflective practice or challenge
and there was a variation in frequency. Some new staff had not had supervision
for several months, despite being new to the role and to the local authority.
professionals are not sufficiently robust. Thresholds for referring to the
designated officer are not well embedded or understood across the partnership
and learning identified from cases is not used to inform training or raise
awareness across partner agencies. Where awareness raising has taken place,
an increase in referrals has followed.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
Executive summary
The Torbay Safeguarding Children Board (TSCB) is judged inadequate because it
does not currently discharge its statutory functions. The TSCB does not effectively
fulfil its core functions to assess the effectiveness of the help being provided to
children and families, including early help. The TSCB does not have robust multiagency performance information, an up-to-date and overarching business plan which
has been signed off by the Board, or an annual report for the period April 2014 
March 2015, to outline and evaluate the range of safeguarding work that needs to be
progressed. The TSCB has very limited mechanisms in place to understand the voice
or experience of the child.
Improvements to safeguarding practice have been slow to develop and there are
considerable delays to address key deficiencies, particularly in services for neglect
and domestic abuse. Apart from child sexual exploitation, the focus on local priorities
has been limited. The key function of monitoring of thresholds across Torbay has not
been undertaken in sufficient depth to understand or effectively evaluate current
practice. Evaluation and oversight of early help services have not been sufficiently
effective. The impact of this for children and families and the extent of the problems
have not been fully recognised.
The TSCB and executive board are appropriately constituted and meet regularly.
Recent improvements to the sub-groups since May 2015 have had very limited
impact. Quarterly themed multi-agency audits have been improved to ensure more
breadth and regularity. The section 11 audit process has been improved in 2015 to
provide more rigour and impact. Apart from child sexual exploitation, there has been
little evidence of changes to frontline safeguarding practice as a result of these
processes.
Safeguarding training, appropriate policies and procedures and the dissemination of
safeguarding practice across the partnership is in place. Best practice forums are
positively regarded by practitioners. Improvements are required to evaluate the
impact of training and to update key documents.
The Child Death Overview Panel processes are appropriate. Two serious case reviews
have been published in relation to Torbay in the last year and relevant issues and
learning from these have been identified by the TSCB and appropriately disseminated
to the childrens workforce.


Recommendations
the performance and effectiveness of local services that provide help for
children and young people (paragraphs 140, 143, 158).
consistently and robustly across Torbay (paragraph 152).
and families in Torbay regarding safeguarding practice are introduced and that
learning from this contributes effectively to the development of the work of the
TSCB (paragraph 155).
abuse and neglect so that it is clear where improvements are needed
(paragraph 156).

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
functions.
provided to children and families including early help, and the mechanisms to
assess and evaluate whether partners are fulfilling statutory obligations, are not
robust. While arrangements to quality assure practice and to monitor the
effectiveness of training to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
in place, these are under-developed. There is insufficient impact or progress to
the improvement of safeguarding practice across Torbay.
both are regularly attended by partners. Since May 2015, with the appointment
of a business manager, there has been recent improvement made to the subgroups to embed, monitor and increase the scope of safeguarding work
undertaken. The serious case review sub-group, which had been joint with
another local authority, reverted to a Torbay specific sub-group in July 2015.
Other sub-groups such as the training sub-group and the Peninsula Child Death
Overview Panel (CDOP) are working appropriately.
plan to outline the range of safeguarding work across all the relevant subgroups that needs to be improved or progressed. There is no annual report for
as further developing and fully embedding the voice of the child into the work


of the TSCB, and improving the multi-agency data set, are not in place. This
means that there is no current comprehensive overview of the quality and
impact of services delivered to children and families in Torbay.
of the TSCB attends key board meetings and has used his influence to align
safeguarding priorities with the appropriate strategic board. However, the TSCB
acknowledges that this work has still to show an impact on practice at the
frontline.
arising from serious case reviews, previous multi-agency case audits and an
understanding of local need. These include neglect, children looked after,
domestic abuse, child sexual exploitation and Think Family. Apart from child
sexual exploitation, the implementation of these priorities has been slow, with
limited impact or progress in these areas to date. For example, the neglect
strategy has not yet been completed, although work is underway in partnership
with the Health and Wellbeing Board. The graded care profile assessment tool
is not fully embedded, and services to address domestic abuse have not been
put in place.
effectively, or hold partners to account, as there is not a sufficiently detailed
and relevant multi-agency performance information data set in place. Systems
to routinely engage with young people and their families are not embedded.
understood the issues affecting operational practice. Despite it being identified
as a priority area in 201314 and audited in June 2014, practice or performance
have not been consistently audited or scrutinised by the TSCB since then. Delay
in prioritising early help is evident. For example, multi-agency auditing was
postponed from July 2015 to January 2016 and feedback to the TSCB has been
postponed from September 2015 to November 2015. The focus of work has
been on launching the early help strategy (April 2015), implementing systems
and processes, such as launching a referral form and producing step down
guidance, and for partners to identify representatives to sit on the early help
panel.
the independent chair in June 2015 has led to recent improvements, for
example the improved attendance of health professionals at initial child
protection conferences, adult mental health workers attending strategy
discussions and agencies better fulfilling their safeguarding duties via section 11
audits. However, a challenge log is not in place to underpin the positive
relationships and engagement between partner agencies that are developing.
section 11 audit process is completed by partners on a south-west peninsula-


wide basis. During 2015, the TSCB started to focus on improving the process to
ensure that more rigour and impact are in place. For example, partner agencies
were invited to attend events to present their findings. Challenge from the
independent chair regarding agencies that were found not to be compliant was
evident. A task and finish group has been initiated to ensure that the audit
process will have a sharper future focus and is sufficiently localised to be
relevant to practice in Torbay.
reviewed on a peninsula-wide basis, to ensure compliance with statutory
guidance. Effective communication of safeguarding practice via the TSCB
website and newsletters is in place. Staff spoken to during the inspection were
appropriately aware of the TSCB. Best practice forums are held regularly and
are well attended by partner agencies and used to disseminate key information
about safeguarding practice including issues arising from serious case reviews,
case audits and section 11 audits.
SCRs have been published in relation to Torbay in the last year and the issues
from these have informed multi-agency audits and have led to identified areas
for improvement and progression across partner agencies. Learning has been
appropriately disseminated to the childrens workforce.
scrutiny and categorisation of modifiable deaths across the south-west
peninsula area from 14% to 26%. The mortality rate in Torbay is lower than
the national average. There has been recent clarity sought with public health
officials in order to ensure that tight processes for disseminating relevant
information back to TSCB are in place.
regional south west peninsula group. These are currently being recommissioned
for further improvement.
purposeful. The impact on children and their families of poorly understood and
applied thresholds for intervention has not been identified. Partners report that
the updated threshold document is improved, but understanding by
professionals is still variable. The development of the MASH is in its early
stages, and for children and families there is no consistency in the response
provided to them.
the child sexual exploitation audit in April 2015 have been influential in
progressing safeguarding practice in this area, and this has had a positive effect
on frontline practice. Following this, a specific TSCB event was held to


disseminate learning and to highlight areas for improvement. The child sexual
exploitation sub-group is working effectively and links to the wider peninsula
group to ensure that all learning and systems are in place. A child sexual
exploitation coordinator has been a valuable asset to the progression and
implementation of the child sexual exploitation strategy across partner agencies
and partners reported positive progression and that responses on the ground
are more effective as a result.
priorities and happen quarterly, having improved from a low base two years
ago. Appropriate involvement of partner agencies is in place. Despite regular
feedback to the TSCB, there is little evidence that the MACAs have had any
significant impact in changing safeguarding practice across Torbay, with the
exception of child sexual exploitation and the initiation of a focus on early help
across partner agencies.
that their understanding and experience of safeguarding services informs the
work that it does. This is still in development despite this being a priority for the
TSCB in 20142015. No established links are in place between the TSCB and
existing childrens groups or youth groups. The multi-agency audit process
includes questions for children and young people and families, but this is not
fully effective. The TSCB quality assurance sub-group has recently set up a task
and finish group to look into this.
impact of this on safeguarding practice is limited. Think Family, children looked
after, neglect and domestic abuse are areas of previous TSCB focus, that have
now become priorities for the relevant strategic boards. There has been no
evidence yet that this influence has led to any improvements in the
effectiveness of safeguarding practice.
supported by all partners. Staff attendance at training is good, particularly by
health partners. The evaluation of the quality and impact of training is not well
developed. This is being addressed to ensure that appropriate staff capacity is
in place.
recent evidence of a rigorous and transparent assessment of the performance
and effectiveness of local services since March 2014. A draft business plan
discussion at the TSCB in June 2015.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Emmy Tomsett
Deputy lead inspector: Karen Wareing
Team inspectors: Paul dInverno, Andy Whippey, Louise Warren, Susan Myers, Peter
Green
Shadow inspectors: Julie Knight, Linda Bond
Senior data analyst: Donna Neill
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2016


