London Borough of Tower Hamlets
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 23 January to 16 February 2017
Report published: 7 April 2017

Childrens services in Tower Hamlets are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
There are widespread and serious failures in the services provided to children who
need help and protection in Tower Hamlets. As a result, too many children remain in
situations of actual or potential harm for too long. Insufficient scrutiny by the chief
executive, the director of childrens services (DCS) and politicians has meant that
they did not know about the extent of the failures to protect children until this
inspection. In the majority of cases referred to them by inspectors, managers and
leaders had to take immediate action to ensure that children were safe, that their
needs were met and that plans to safeguard them were progressed appropriately. In
addition, as a result of identifying current risks to children, inspectors requested that
the local authority review several aspects of the service urgently, including private
fostering arrangements, care leavers in custody, the arrangements for the Public Law
Outline (PLO) and the psychosocial team meetings.
Services for children in care or who need to be adopted and those for young people
leaving care are not yet good enough. Some services have significantly deteriorated
since the last inspection of childrens services published in 2012, when the local
authority was found to be good overall with outstanding features. The DCS took up
an interim position in July 2015 before her permanent appointment in March 2016.
Despite uncovering a deeply worrying picture regarding the services provided to
children, there has been insufficient rigour by senior leaders in challenging weak
management oversight. When changes have occurred, progress has been limited or
not sustained, and improvements remain fragile. Senior leaders have accepted the
inspection findings and are determined to improve outcomes for children.
A significant challenge facing the local authority is instability in the childrens
workforce. Staff turnover overall has reduced slightly, but in the assessment and
intervention team it has significantly increased, from 10% in 2015 to 30% in 2016.
An improvement and inspection board established in September 2016 has had
limited impact. The board lacks an overarching strategic plan to systematically drive
the extensive change required. This is a serious omission by senior leaders.
Performance management and quality assurance systems are not underpinned by
reliable management information. This is largely due to social workers and managers
not updating records on the electronic recording system. Many assessments and
plans are of poor quality. Senior leaders have not been effective in challenging the
entrenched culture of non-compliance with basic social work standards. The local
authority as a whole has failed to ensure professional accountability and, as a result,
too many children have remained in neglectful and abusive situations for too long.
Inspectors found a lack of understanding of what constitutes a private fostering
arrangement. Superficial assessments failed to consider whether children had been
trafficked or abandoned by their parents, and basic safeguarding checks were not
conducted in most cases.


The application of statutory thresholds is inconsistent. This is apparent from the first
point of childrens services intervention, including out-of-hours services, core
safeguarding activity such as section 47 enquiries, child protection investigations and
entry to care. Strategy discussions do not include all relevant agencies.
Too many children spend an extensive period at the pre-care proceedings stage, with
no review or progress against agreed actions. Consequently, some children and
young people who need to be in care wait for too long. This leaves too many at risk
of significant harm. When children do come into care, planning improves for most of
them. This is despite the significant increase in care proceedings and numbers of
children now in care, as a recognition of the previously high threshold. Children who
are adopted or looked after or care leavers receive better and more consistent
support. Stronger social work practice in discrete areas enables more children to
settle and to have appropriate plans made for them. Many social workers visit
children in care within statutory timescales. Children in care and care leavers report
positive relationships with staff.
The timeliness of adoption is improving, and adopters are positive about the service
that they receive. Prospective adopter reports and child permanence reports vary in
quality. The agency decision-makers scrutiny and oversight of adoption panel
recommendations for children being adopted are not sufficiently effective, as a lack
of capacity means that some reports are not read prior to decisions being made.
The local authority and its partners have been effective in prioritising and developing
a strategic response to child sexual exploitation and actively delivering services to
counter the risk to children from radicalisation and female genital mutilation. A wide
range of awareness raising has taken place in the community. However, operational
social work practice to tackle sexual exploitation is weak. The local authority
recognises that it needs to understand better the connections between child sexual
exploitation, missing children, youth violence, gangs and radicalisation.
An extensive range of services are commissioned to support children in the
community. Effective monitoring and advice in relation to some complex cases take
place through a well-established multi-agency social inclusion panel.
There is a wide range of resources and multi-agency working to support children
who have disabilities. The local authority has good systems for identifying and
recording those children who go missing from education. Headteachers in Tower
Hamlets understand well the processes for monitoring and reporting absenteeism
from schools.
There is strong partnership working between the multi-agency public protection
arrangements and multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARAC). MARACs take
place every two weeks. They are well attended by relevant partner agencies, and
there is timely reporting on actions.


The prevention of violent extremism team has developed an extensive knowledge of
radicalisation. Skilled workers have a detailed understanding of the issues facing
children in Tower Hamlets.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


Inspection findings


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)



Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home, which was judged to be good
at its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in July
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
July 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The DCS has been in post since March 2016, following eight months as the
interim DCS.
 The chief executive has been in post since October 2015.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since
October 2016.
 The local authority uses the Signs of Safety model of social work.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 65,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Tower Hamlets. This is 22% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 34% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 33% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 42% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 81% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British and Black or Black British.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 75% (the national average is 20%)


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 in secondary schools is 71% (the national average is 16%).
 Tower Hamlets is a very diverse borough and has the highest level of deprivation
in England (the Income Deprivation Affecting Children Index 2016).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 January 2017, 3,149 children had been identified through assessment as

being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 31 January 2017, 401 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 62 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 298
(46 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 31 January 2017, 18 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from 22 at 31 March 2016.
 In the two years before inspection, six serious incident notifications were
submitted to Ofsted, and two serious case reviews (SCRs) were completed.
 There were two SCRs ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 January 2017, 333 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 51 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 305 (47 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016.
Of this number:
authority area
 three live in residential special schools3, all of whom live out of the
authority area
 eight live with parents, of whom three live out of the authority area
 In the past 12 months:
 there have been 12 adoptions
returned to be looked after


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


 four young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to
independent living
 no young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in houses
in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Take immediate action to ensure that work with children and their families is
compliant with basic practice standards and that poor practice is challenged
across all service areas.


Take steps to ensure that thresholds are consistently applied and that children
requiring statutory intervention receive it.


Ensure that strategy discussions include all relevant agencies and that robust
arrangements are in place to protect children while child protection
investigations take place.


Improve the quality of assessments and plans for children to ensure that
purposeful work takes place to prevent drift, and to protect children in need of
help and protection and children in care.


Ensure that independent reviewing officers (IROs) and child protection chairs
provide sufficient challenge to plans.


Take immediate action to ensure that management oversight and supervision
are strengthened and that all work is recorded appropriately to an acceptable
standard.


Urgently improve the quality and timeliness of services for children who are at
risk of becoming involved in gangs and serious youth violence. Ensure the
alignment of those services with those for children who go missing and those
who are vulnerable to sexual exploitation and radicalisation. Ensure that
comprehensive and accurate intelligence and data inform service
developments.


Ensure that risks to children who go missing from home or care are assessed
by social workers and their managers, and that all missing children are
offered a return home interview within 72 hours.


Take urgent steps to ensure that social workers and managers receive
relevant training to counter child sexual exploitation, and that children
identified as at risk of sexual exploitation are subject to a risk assessment and
offered responsive and appropriate help.


Review the arrangements for private fostering to ensure that practice is
compliant with statutory requirements, that assessments include relevant
information and that reviews are meaningful and timely.


Ensure that children benefit from effective and timely processes under the
PLO that address all risks for children and are thorough and well managed.


Urgently address the sufficiency of emergency and unplanned placements so
that childrens needs can be met appropriately when they become looked
after.



Improve the quality of child permanence reports to ensure that all areas are
fully evidenced, including details of all brothers and sisters and relevant
medical information.


Ensure that the agency decision-maker reads and considers all adoption panel
paperwork, panel minutes and recommendations before reaching her
decisions and that she clearly records her own reasons for the decisions made.


Implement the workforce strategy as swiftly as possible to improve workforce
stability and capacity. Undertake a training needs analysis to ensure that the
workforce is appropriately trained in order to achieve improvements and
consistency in the quality of practice.


Summary for children and young people


Inspectors found that services to children in Tower Hamlets have become
worse since the inspection in 2012. This means that children who need help
and protection do not always have the right help to keep them safe.



Managers do not always check that social workers are doing what they should
to make sure that children and families receive the help that they need quickly
enough.



Sometimes, social workers do not talk to all the people who have important
information to help them to decide the best thing to do.



Some children are left in unsafe situations for too long. Once the decision has
been made for them to be looked after by the local authority, planning
improves. Children who are adopted, children in care and care leavers have
better support.



Most children in care live in good foster homes, but there are not enough
families who can offer homes to older children.



Children living with family members and foster carers are generally settled.
They are helped to keep in touch with their families if they cannot return
home. Children have good support if they are sad or worried. They enjoy
learning, and many are doing well at school.



The Children in Care Council provides children with direct access to leaders in
the local authority. Children suggest changes and improvements that they
believe will make things better for children looked after. The Children in Care
Council is actively seeking the involvement of younger children through the
development of the Young Stars group.



Care leavers are positive about the support that they have from their personal
advisers. They like the warm, positive and safe environment at the careleaving service centre.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Inadequate

Summary
Services to children in need of help and protection in Tower Hamlets are
inadequate. Serious and widespread failings across all core social work teams,
including the early help hub, the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH),
assessment and intervention, and family support and protection teams, leave
children at risk of harm. These failings are characterised by weak managerial
oversight at all levels. The local authority has not ensured that basic social work
practice is of a good enough standard. Managers, including child protection chairs,
do not provide sufficient overview or challenge of social work practice. As a result,
children do not receive timely responses to ensure that risks and needs are met.
Inspectors identified over 25 cases in which the needs of children in need of help
and protection had not been recognised or robustly assessed. Senior managers
took immediate action to address the concerns and to review a number of services
as a result of inspection findings.
An inconsistent application of thresholds for statutory intervention and a lack of
recognition of risk are common features in too many childrens cases. There is
chronic drift and delay at too many points of intervention, including for children
who need statutory intervention, child protection enquiries, return home interviews
or children who are subject to pre-proceedings work. Overall, assessments lack
sufficient consideration of previous history, and the analysis of risk is poor. The
majority of plans are weak and lack focus on the outcomes for children. This leads
to a lack of purposeful and effective work, leaving children without the support
that they need. The response to children at risk of sexual exploitation or who go
missing is not good enough. The risks are minimised in a significant number of
childrens cases. Too many return home interviews do not take place or are too
late, leaving children at continuing risk of harm.
There is a lack of understanding of what constitutes a private fostering
arrangement, leaving children at risk.
An extensive range of services are commissioned to support children in the
community. Intensive monitoring and advice in relation to complex cases take
place through an effective, well-established, multi-agency social inclusion panel.
There is a wide range of resources and multi-agency working to support children
who have disabilities. The local authority has good systems for identifying and
recording those children who go missing from education. Headteachers in Tower
Hamlets understand well the processes for monitoring and reporting absenteeism
from schools.


Inspection findings

Services for children in need of help and protection are inadequate. Senior
managers were not aware of the extent of the serious failings until this
inspection. These weaknesses have left children insufficiently protected from
harm. Inspectors identified over 25 cases in which the needs of children in
need of help and protection had not been recognised or robustly assessed. In
addition, senior managers needed to take urgent action to ensure that
children and young people were safe in several service areas identified by
inspectors.


The local authority has very recently improved its early help provision to
children and families through the creation of an early help hub. The hub
provides a telephone advice line, facilitates access to services and supports
professionals in completing early help assessments. Intensive monitoring and
advice in relation to complex cases take place through an effective multiagency social inclusion panel. However, in cases seen by inspectors, there is
limited impact on improving outcomes to avoid problems escalating. Early help
assessments sampled by inspectors are overly focused on educational issues
and behaviour. Too many lack essential information to ensure that children
and families receive effective support.


Responses to contacts and referrals from the public and partner agencies have
recently improved, and the majority of decisions are now made within 24
hours. A review of the MASH in March 2016 resulted in action to address
serious deficits. However, the application of statutory thresholds remains
inconsistent. This is particularly evident for children living in situations of
domestic abuse and children at risk of sexual exploitation. Inspectors referred
to senior managers a number of childrens cases that had been either stepped
down to early help services or closed to the MASH, even though the threshold
for statutory services had been met, because children were not receiving the
right level of support and protection at the right time. Senior managers
responded quickly to the inspection findings, and actioned a review of all
domestic abuse referrals made to the early help hub to ensure that children
were receiving the appropriate services.


While strategy discussions are mostly timely, not all relevant agencies are
involved, which means that vital background information is not available to
inform effective decision-making.


Overall, the timeliness of assessments has improved from a low base.
However, the assessment quality is poor, risk is not rigorously analysed, and
there is insufficient consideration of childrens historical information and their
ethnic and cultural needs. The voice of the child and that of parents are
evident in the majority of assessments, but direct work with children to
understand their lived experiences is weak. Management oversight of


assessments is poor and does not provide sufficient action to ensure that
children receive timely help and protection.

Too many child in need plans and child protection plans are inadequate. The
objectives of the work are not clear, timescales are vague and childrens
voices are not evident. Social workers do not visit children regularly enough.
Core group meetings include relevant professionals, but do not ensure that
plans systematically measure progress. This leads to a lack of purposeful and
effective work. There is a lack of urgency and understanding of risk, and too
many children experience unacceptable drift and delay. Managers do not act
quickly enough to address this, adding to the delay and leaving children in
situations of actual or escalating risk of harm.


Child protection conference chairs do not have sufficient oversight and do not
provide appropriate challenge. Most chairs acknowledged to inspectors that
they are not good at recording concerns. They do not always use the formal
alert system to challenge poor practice and, instead, have informal
conversations with social workers and managers. There is no monitoring of
agreed actions from informal conversations until the next review conference,
which could be six months ahead. This adds to the drift and delay experienced
by too many children.


Despite an extensive review in November 2015, work to strengthen the PLO
and pre-proceedings work remains poor. Thresholds for instigating the PLO
remain inconsistent, which means that children subject to pre-proceedings
letters spend extensive periods at this stage with no review. A lack of robust
tracking, poor management oversight and inconsistent planning continue to
hamper timely decision-making about applications for legal orders. This leaves
too many children at risk of continuing or actual harm when they have met
the threshold to be in care.


Children living with neglect, parental substance misuse or domestic abuse wait
too long to receive appropriate help. The deterioration in family relationships
and escalation of emotional and behavioural difficulties increase childrens
vulnerability to becoming involved in gang activity and serious youth violence.
In a survey undertaken by the young mayor, children said that their
overwhelming concerns are gang violence and associated postcode wars. The
level of serious youth violence and knife injuries in Tower Hamlets is high. As
a result, some children live in an environment of violence and fear.


The arrangements and responses to the needs of children who go missing
have been strengthened, with an operational panel in place and a
commissioned service providing return home interviews. The missing
coordinator has recently taken responsibility for making all referrals for return
home interviews. However, operational practice remains weak. Information
sharing with the youth offending team is not well coordinated. Social workers
do not consistently refer children for return home interviews. In just over half


of the cases seen by inspectors, there were no return home interviews, and
there are delays to a significant number of those that do take place. As a
result, the opportunity to uncover vital information, identify risks and take
timely protective action is lost, leaving children at continuing risk. In most
cases seen, social workers did not accurately record missing episodes. This
not only means that data is unreliable, but it also hinders management
oversight, adding to delays and risks to children.

The operational response and practice to tackle child sexual exploitation are
weak. The child sexual exploitation coordinators work is separate from
mainstream social work practice. Social workers and managers do not have
sufficient understanding of sexual exploitation, and too many have not had
essential training. Managers do not always comply with actions proposed by
the child sexual exploitation coordinator. This results in continued risk to
children.


At the time of the inspection, 18 children were reported to be living in private
fostering arrangements. Inspectors found a lack of understanding of what
constitutes a private fostering arrangement. Superficial assessments had failed
to consider whether children had been trafficked or abandoned by their
parents. Basic safeguarding checks had not been conducted in most cases.
The private fostering panel, designed to review all private fostering
arrangements, had not met for 12 months. As a result, the risks to children
were unknown, leaving children in potentially harmful situations. The local
authority took immediate action to review each case when inspectors brought
this to its attention.


The local authority has good systems for identifying and recording those
children who go missing from education. Headteachers in Tower Hamlets fully
understand the processes for monitoring and reporting absenteeism from
schools. Managers have good partnerships with other boroughs to share
information about children coming to Tower Hamlets and children who are the
authoritys responsibility but who are placed out of the borough. They have
effective systems to oversee the missing child register. There are 133 children
currently on the register, three of whom are children looked after. The local
authority has good partnerships with schools, which effectively implement the
protocols and processes for referral when a child is missing. In addition, the
local authority has well-established safeguarding arrangements for children
who are found to be in unregistered schools.


Managers implement well-established and effective systems to monitor the
home education team at the authority keeps in touch with almost all families.


The local authority arrangements for considering allegations or concerns about
staff or volunteers are safe and effective. There is a comprehensive tracking


system. The work is child focused, and strategy meetings are proportionate,
independently chaired and inclusive of a range of appropriate agencies. There
is evidence of effective links with faith communities and awareness raising in
partnership with the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB).

There is a wide range of resources and multi-agency working to support
children who have disabilities. Social workers in the children with disability
team demonstrate child-centred practice and a good understanding of
childrens needs. Assessments are comprehensive and include brothers and
sisters. Children in need and child protection practice is satisfactory. Regular
feedback sheets demonstrate that children and families are happy with the
support that they receive.


There is strong partnership working between the multi-agency public
protection arrangements and MARACs. MARACs take place every two weeks,
due to the high volume of serious domestic abuse incidents in the borough.
MARACs are well attended by relevant partner agencies, and there is timely
reporting on actions. However, inspectors found that too many children living
in families affected by violence do not receive the appropriate level of help
and protection.


The prevention of violent extremism team has developed extensive knowledge
of radicalisation. Skilled workers have a detailed understanding of the issues
facing the children who live in the local authority. As a result, inspectors saw a
number of examples of creative and sensitive work to engage families,
thorough strategy discussions and child protection investigations to help to
protect children from violent extremism.


The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Outcomes for children looked after are not yet consistently good enough. While
recent decisions made to bring children into care are appropriate, too many take
place in an emergency. Nevertheless, when children do come into care they are
safer, and planning for them is better.
Choice and availability of placements are limited, particularly in meeting older
childrens needs. However, most children live within 20 miles of home in stable
placements that meet their cultural, ethnic and religious needs. The fostering
service is actively recruiting new carers, and it supports carers well. Care
proceedings are effective for most children in progressing plans for permanence.
Social workers see the majority of children regularly, but assessments, plans and
direct work are variable in quality or are not clearly recorded. Inconsistent
responses for some children at risk of sexual exploitation, involved with gangs and
violence, or missing from care mean that their needs are not fully understood or
met soon enough. The timeliness of initial health assessments is poor, but review
health assessments and support for emotional well-being are well established.
Almost all children have their care plans reviewed regularly by IROs, who know the
children well.
The majority of children in care attend good or outstanding schools. Personal
education plans show an improvement in the setting and monitoring of targets,
and a clearer picture of the childs behaviour and emotional well-being.
Corporate parenting is well established and the Children in Care Council is active,
with effective plans in place to develop the Young Stars group. Annual events and
activities are held to celebrate childrens achievements.
Adoption is considered by the second statutory review for all children who cannot
return home to their birth families. The local authority is successful in securing
potential links for children who have complex needs.
The care leavers service stays in touch with almost all of its care leavers.
Accommodation in the borough is well established and safe. A small minority of
care leavers have some particularly good outcomes and are accepted into training
or higher education. Too few care leavers are aware of their entitlements, but they
receive good support when they get into difficulty.


Inspection findings

At the time of the inspection, Tower Hamlets was looking after 333 children.
For too many children, the decisions to look after them are not timely enough.
This impacts on the local authoritys ability to keep them safe and to improve
outcomes for them. Nevertheless, when children come into care they are
safer, and planning for them improves. Better practice in discrete areas of the
service results in more effective support and care, enabling children to settle
and have appropriate plans made for them.


In most cases, recent decisions to accommodate children are appropriate.
However, decisions are often made in an emergency and are not timely
enough or effectively planned to respond to significant escalating risks while
children remain at home. For example, the local authority reported that, of 22
children who became looked after in January 2017, only 10 admissions were
planned. Three very young children had remained in a police station
overnight, as there was no placement available.


Services to children on the edge of care are in place, but they are fragmented
and require consolidation to address the complexity of older childrens needs.
A more systemic multi-agency service (Safer Lives) is due to be implemented
in April 2017. Some children returning home from care do not receive
sufficient support, leading to a small number returning to the care of the local
authority.


Effective management action when children are subject to care proceedings
avoids unnecessary drift and delay. Parallel planning and permanence plans
are progressed speedily for most children, and appropriate use is made of
family group conferences, connected people and special guardians to ensure
that children are placed permanently with family members who reflect their
ethnic, cultural and religious backgrounds. There has been an increase in the
number of special guardianship orders granted since 201516.


Following action by the divisional director for childrens services in 2015 to
tackle drift and delay, there has been a significant increase in children subject
to care applications. The judiciary and the Children and Family Court Advisory
and Support Service (Cafcass) report positive and effective relationships with
the local authority. Timeliness of care proceedings, at 29 weeks, is
consistently improving and is almost in line with the national average of 28
weeks. An in-house parenting assessment team effectively manages and
produces social work assessments, which the judiciary and Cafcass report to
be of good quality. This means that, for most children subject to care
proceedings, there are no delays in decision-making about their futures.


Cases seen by inspectors evidence that social workers visit most children
regularly and within statutory timescales, and the children who met with
inspectors reported positive relationships with staff. However, for a large


majority of children, the quality of work undertaken needs to improve. Their
wishes and feelings are not fully recorded on case files, and direct work with
them is superficial. Management oversight is inconsistent and variable for too
many children. For a minority of children, there is better practice, with
evidence of good engagement and an appropriate focus on ethnic, religious
and cultural issues and use of interpreters.

Assessments seen by inspectors were not of good quality for most children, as
they were not comprehensive or analytical enough, and some were either not
in place or out of date. Not all assessments take account of the childs history.
A lack of understanding of risks for some older children means that their
needs are not fully addressed. Care plans for most children are not specific
enough. Better plans identify effective and timely care planning, particularly
for younger children and those in care proceedings.


Almost all children have their care plans regularly reviewed by IROs, who
know them well. Caseloads for IROs are manageable. Managers are aware
that current practice needs to improve further. Evidence of informal and
formal escalations are appropriate, but escalations require more incisive
challenge by IROs to improve social work practice further.


The local authority reviewed section 20 arrangements effectively in January
small number of children already living in long-term fostering placements is
subject to delay, and means that these children do not benefit from the
stability and emotional security that this will offer them.


Children in care who are at risk of offending are provided with a designated
case officer, who also works out of the borough, to ensure continuity of
relationships. Bespoke commissioned services are available for children who
have substance misuse problems. However, the response to children who are
at risk of sexual exploitation, involved in gangs and violent behaviour or
missing from care is insufficient, as risks are not always understood or fully
analysed. Therefore, some children do not receive the correct level of help
and support.


The timeliness of initial health assessments is poor. For example, between
April 2016 and January 2017 only 4.2% were conducted within expected
timescales. Improvements to gain medical consent from birth parents when
children first become accommodated are now in place to address this, but the
impact is not yet evident. Performance of review health assessments is much
better, at 85%, and both improvements to processes and an additional nurse
are in place. The looked after children specialist nurse offers continuity to
children and travels out of borough to achieve this. Emotional well-being and
child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS) support is well
established. The CAMHS in social care team offers timely and appropriate
consultation and guidance to children and foster carers.



There are insufficient local placements for children looked after and a lack of
choice and availability, particularly for emergencies and unplanned
placements. Inspectors saw evidence of the impact of this for children. For
example, senior managers did not know that a child was in an unsafe
placement until this was identified by inspectors. Placements for children who
show challenging and complex behaviour do not always fully meet their needs.


However, a large majority of children are placed with their brothers and
sisters, with carers who meet their ethnic, religious and cultural needs. Longterm placement stability is high. Contact arrangements with family members
are well supported and supervised by trained staff. Children who met with
inspectors reported that social workers had acted on their requests for
changes to contact with family members. Children also reported being able to
access sporting and educational activities and to benefit from interesting
holiday experiences.


Effective and specific fostering recruitment has led to an increase in the
number of fostering households, but there is still a limited availability of
placements for older children. Commissioning plans to improve residential
provision have been developed with other nearby local authorities, but these
plans will not address immediate pressures or priorities.


The fostering service is well established and is mostly compliant with statutory
guidance. There are some weaknesses in the timeliness and quality of
fostering assessments, and delegated authority is not in place for all carers.
Foster carers benefit from established support through relevant training,
support groups and CAMHS consultations. The Mockingbird initiative provides
linked foster carers with consistent peer support and promotes placement
stability.


Corporate parenting is well established, and the Children in Care Council is
active and influential in suggesting and making changes to service
developments. The new Young Stars group is in development. Appropriate
annual celebratory events and activities, including a successful summer
school, are in place. Advocacy services are available for children, and the
independent visitor service offers positive support and opportunities to 12
young people.


Most children looked after (85%) attend good or outstanding schools. None
attends an inadequate school. The recently appointed virtual school
headteacher is improving the support that children looked after receive with
their educational attainment and progress. In 201516, the large majority of
children achieved good skills at the expected standard in English and
mathematics by the end of primary school. By the end of key stage 4 at
secondary school, a small minority of children achieved five good GCSEs,
better than their peers nationally. However, at key stages 1 and 4, childrens


attainment remains too low. The very large majority (92%) of the authoritys
children looked after go on to participate in post-16 education and training.

The majority of personal education plans include a clear picture of the childs
progress, emotional well-being and behaviour. Targets for helping children to
improve their skills are specific and useful. For a few children, there are delays
in establishing a baseline of achievement at the start of secondary school.
There is insufficient continuity and planning for children when they progress to
post-16 education and training, and there is not enough clarity in plans about
the impact of additional funding (the pupil premium). However, the virtual
headteacher has good oversight of the strengths and areas for improvement.


No child looked after was permanently excluded from school in 2015/16 and
fixed-term exclusions were 8% in 2015/16, down from 12.2% in 2013/14. The
proportion of children looked after who miss school due to authorised or
unauthorised absences is around the average rate for England as a whole,
according to the most recent published data in 2014/15.


The local authoritys arrangements for alternative provision provide a good
range of learning options and alternative strategies to help children looked
after to re-engage in learning, both in and out of the borough. Currently,
three children looked after attend alternative provision.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement

Adoption is being considered by the second statutory review for all children
who cannot return home to their birth families. Since April 2016, 10 children
have been adopted whose profile shows a mix of ethnicities, brother and
sister groups, or an age of over five years. The local authority is successful in
securing potential links for children with complex needs or disabilities, and one
child is currently placed under a foster-to-adopt arrangement.


In most cases seen, permanency planning meetings are held regularly,
ensuring that the progress of a search is kept under review. The local
authority works well with the East London Adoption Consortium, the Adoption
Register, Adoption Link and other agencies to exchange information and
secure links for children and waiting adopters.


Recent data shows that the timeliness of adoptions is improving, but it is still
some way off national thresholds. As only a small number of children are
adopted each year, a delay for one or two children can have a dramatic effect
on timescales, and this has been the case in Tower Hamlets. The year to date
figure for the average time between a child entering care and moving in with
his or her adoptive family is 509 days. Although this is an improving picture, it
is still behind the current threshold target of 426 days.



The average time between a local authority receiving court authority to place
a child and the local authority deciding on a match to an adoptive family also
shows some recent improvement. The year to date figure of 233 days is close
to the England average, but is still behind the threshold target of 121 days.


The recruitment and preparation of prospective adopters are thorough. A
range of information, guides and a website provide useful information
regarding adoption. The preparation course, run in conjunction with the East
London Adoption Consortium, is comprehensive and provides adopters with a
good, basic understanding of the needs of adopted children. Adopters spoken
with during the inspection talked of the value of the course, along with the
learning that they had gained from guest speakers such as adopters, foster
carers and birth parents.


The quality of prospective adopter reports is too variable. While all reports
seen were detailed and contained all required checks and references,
assessments were not adequately quality assured. Some contained
grammatical and recording errors, while others lacked sufficient analysis of
prospective adopters history and experiences to assist workers in the
matching process. Not all assessments are completed within the six-month
timescale.


Child permanence reports are of mixed quality. All reports seen consider
various permanence options and reasons for an adoption recommendation. In
the better-quality reports, social workers descriptions and observations bring
children to life, along with detailed accounts of their birth family and origins.
In the weaker reports, information such as evidence of adoption medicals, the
medical advisers comments and details of brothers and sisters are missing. In
these cases, accurate and up-to-date information is not available for children
and adopters to assist them in understanding a childs identity and history,
either now or in the future.


Overall, the quality of matching is effective. There have been no adoption
disruptions since 201415. Adoption placement reports and adoption support
plans clearly describe how adopters will meet a childs needs and the support
available. Adoption panel minutes reflect a thorough scrutiny of cases, with
panel members asking relevant questions and providing clear reasons for
recommendations. However, panel minutes also show that missing or
muddled information is insufficiently challenged. This means that adoption
paperwork is not updated to assist workers who are considering a match or to
help childrens and adopters understanding of events.


The agency decision-makers scrutiny and oversight of adoption panel
recommendations are poor, as she is not reading the papers presented due to
a lack of capacity. This means that she is not taking a sufficiently considered
or thorough approach to lifelong and life-changing decisions. This also means
that she is not able to form a view about the quality of the adoption panels
recommendations or the quality of frontline practice.



In the small number of cases in which adoption decisions are reversed, there
is no evidence that childrens looked after reviews are being held to change
care plans, and no reports are being sent to the agency decision maker
requesting that a decision is rescinded. This lack of oversight by team
managers, independent reviewing officers and the agency decision maker
means that these childrens permanence plans are being allowed to drift.


A range of effective post-adoption support is provided, which includes the
facilitation of direct contact, letterbox arrangements, birth records counselling
and intermediary support. Requests for support from the agency or to the
adoption support fund are detailed and well argued, resulting in financial and
practical support to sustain permanence.


Life-story books and later-life letters are of good quality. Life-story books start
from where the child is now, and are beautifully presented with clear
information regarding the new family, birth family and the adoption process.
Later-life letters are sensitively written, with anecdotes and observations
which bring the childs history to life.


Adopters who met with inspectors were positive regarding the preparation,
assessment and support received from the agency, and all said that they
would recommend Tower Hamlets to others.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement

The care leaving service team is in touch with 98% of its care leavers (200 out
of 204). Personal advisers know most of their care leavers well. Twenty-seven
young people currently stay with foster carers after the age of 18 under the
local authoritys arrangements for staying put. Personal advisers develop
sustained working relationships with young people.


The team is ambitious in its work to improve outcomes for care leavers.
Personal advisers create a positive and safe environment at the care leaving
service centre. They help young people to understand how to look after
themselves, for example in developing skills such as cookery and money
management, and support them if they need help. Care leavers said that
these sessions have enabled them to understand better the importance of
healthy eating and setting aside budgets for their daily and weekly necessities,
such as food and utilities.


A local authority audit in 2016 found that the service is not aspirational
enough for some young people. This group of young people consists of
unaccompanied asylum-seeking minors and young people who were left in
neglectful and abusive environments in their early life and who became looked
after in their adolescence. More work is needed to improve earlier joint
planning and effective transition between the children in care and care leaving


services. There are gaps in services. Some young people have difficulty
accessing post-traumatic abuse work, for example, and there is ineffective
work to prevent youth violence or involvement in gangs.

Support to care leavers in custody (15 at the time of inspection) is variable
and inconsistent. Young people in young offenders institutions, who will move
to an adult prison at the age of 18, experience a decline in the level of support
from the care leaving service. Personal advisers lack the necessary skills and
knowledge to undertake the complex work. Therefore, young people are not
adequately prepared for release with the ability to change their previous
negative patterns of behaviour. In cases sampled by inspectors, all involving
young people serving long sentences for serious youth violence, none had
received effective help at the earliest point of need. Most had been displaying
challenging behaviour from a young age, but their needs were unassessed,
and poor intervention failed to recognise and prevent exploitation by gangs.


Almost all care leavers have up-to-date pathway plans, and there are notable
examples of good outcomes. However, many plans lack clarity on priorities
and actions. Target setting is too often not specific enough, and too many
deadline dates for actions are linked to the date of the next review rather than
the needs of the young person. There is insufficient knowledge about care
leavers prior educational achievements or barriers to learning in order to
understand and identify their needs better.


Team managers do not undertake routine quality assurance checks of
pathway plans. The views of young people about their experiences are not
sought. The majority of management oversight on cases is task and action
focused. The analysis does not contextualise history and previous abuse or the
impact on the young persons emotions, behaviour, future risk-taking
behaviours and outcomes.


The care leaving service and the service for children looked after are now
under a single service manager. The manager is building a stronger
collaborative working relationship with the virtual school to establish better
transition arrangements for young people, as they become care leavers. The
local authority has recently employed a key stage 5 worker and a specialist to
provide better advice and guidance on options for learning, post 16.


In 201516, 58% of care leavers progressed to further or higher education,
employment and training. This was above the average for England as a whole,
but remains too low. The proportion has remained around this figure for the
past three years. The care leaving service has well-established arrangements
for helping young people, who may not have been successful in their learning,
to find useful traineeships. Advisers provide good support for the small
number of care leavers in higher education. In 201516, around 40% were
not in education, employment or training, which is too high. However,
managers have recognised this and have secured funding to expand workbased learning opportunities.



Most care leavers live in suitable accommodation (94% in 201516), and
personal advisers have helped to sustain this well, over time. The local
authority has a good range of housing available at short notice, particularly in
the borough, to support young peoples move towards independence. Personal
advisers assess fairly when a young person is ready to move into independent
accommodation. Almost all care leavers said that they feel safe in their
accommodation.


Insufficient availability of suitable accommodation outside the borough has
resulted in a small number of young people living in unsuitable
accommodation. The local authority is revising its commissioning
arrangements with the intention of improving the service, particularly for outof-borough placements.


Appropriate arrangements for mental health and health assessments are in
place for young people coming into the care leaving service. The looked after
children specialist nurse makes sure that they have documents on their health
histories. When a young person has complex needs, the nurse who works with
children looked after makes sure that the care leaver has access to health
services in their local area. Emotional well-being for care leavers is
appropriately considered, and support is available for them currently via
consultation with CAMHS for children looked after. Plans for a new post for
CAMHS, based in the care leavers service, are due for consideration in spring


Care leavers who met with inspectors presented a fair and balanced view of
the service. They recognise the good work that the care leaving service does
to support them. However, they did not know about either their legal
entitlements or some aspects of the service well enough, such as the pledge
and the Children in Care Council. This concurs with the managers view that
the service needs to be more user focused and that the young people need to
be encouraged to have a more active role in shaping the service.


Leadership, management and governance

Inadequate

Summary
The leadership, management and governance of childrens services in Tower
Hamlets are inadequate. The chief executive, DCS and elected members did not
know about the extent of the failures to protect children from harm until this
inspection. An inspection of safeguarding and looked after children services in July
backdrop of significant instability and change in leadership at political, corporate
and managerial levels, services have significantly declined, particularly for children
in need of help and protection. A lack of critical enquiry, combined with an overreliance on inaccurate performance information and an over-optimistic selfassessment, means that senior leaders and politicians have failed to take effective
action, leaving children at risk of harm.
An improvement and inspection board established in September 2016 has not been
effective. It lacks an overarching strategic plan to drive the extensive change
required. Political and operational leaders are not members of the board and do
not have an accurate understanding of the weaknesses across the service. Leaders
and managers are unable to assure themselves that children in Tower Hamlets are
safe.
At every level, the application of thresholds is inconsistent. Weaknesses in
recording in childrens case files mean that it is impossible to understand how
critical decisions about childrens lives are made or what has happened as the
result of intervention. Performance management and quality assurance systems
have not been effective in challenging the entrenched culture of non-compliance
with basic social work standards. This is a corporate failure by the local authority
that leaves too many children in neglectful and abusive situations for too long.
The local authority and its partners have been more effective in prioritising and
developing a strategic response to child sexual exploitation and actively delivering
services to counter the risk to children of radicalisation and female genital
mutilation. A wide range of awareness raising has taken place in the community.
Nevertheless, more work is required to understand the crossover between child
sexual exploitation, being missing, youth violence, gangs and radicalisation.
Corporate parenting arrangements are a strength, and there is good engagement
from children and young people. Political leaders have been effective in ensuring
additional financial support in response to increasing demands across the service.
Following this inspections findings, senior politicians and local authority leaders
gave assurances that immediate action will be taken to protect children and that
they will fully accept all inspection recommendations.


Inspection findings

Inspectors identified serious and widespread failings across the service for
children in need of help and protection. Services have deteriorated in all areas
since the inspection of safeguarding and looked after children services in
have not accurately addressed critical weaknesses in management oversight
or social work practice. As a result, elected members and senior leaders
cannot be confident that children in Tower Hamlets are safe.


The DCS took up an interim position in July 2015 before her permanent
appointment in March 2016. Despite uncovering a deeply worrying picture
regarding the services provided to children, actions taken to tackle some of
the deficits, such as a review of the MASH, workforce development, increased
child-level data and an improvement and inspection board, have not been
sufficiently systematic or effective in addressing the widespread concerns, and
consequently children in Tower Hamlets have been left at actual or potential
risk. Senior managers and leaders have not been successful in delivering the
changes quickly enough to tackle the deficits in frontline operational activity.
When service improvements have occurred, they remain fragile and, in some
areas, the progress has been too limited or not sustained. In response to the
inspection findings, the current senior leadership team has demonstrated a
determination and commitment to improve services.


The divisional directors span of responsibility is too broad to address the
widespread and serious concerns. Consequently, senior managers were
unaware of a number of serious and critical practice issues identified during
the inspection, for instance babies and young children living with domestic
violence. Further examples include children left unprotected and at risk of
significant harm due to poor management oversight, and weak assessment
and recognition of what constitutes a private fostering arrangement. In
response to concerns raised by inspectors, the local authority took appropriate
action to provide additional senior operational management capacity. This lack
of capacity should have been identified and tackled sooner.


During the five months prior to the inspection, the improvement and
inspection board, chaired by an external consultant, has overseen a wide
range of practice issues through monthly meetings. The board has had limited
impact. While board minutes evidence detailed discussions about data and
audit findings, the board lacks a coherent, overarching strategic plan to drive
the change required. This impedes the local authoritys ability to track and
evidence progress. Service plans are in place, but they lack sufficient detail
regarding the delivery of key targets. Leaders are not held to account for
improving services. The lack of involvement in the board by the DCS, the chief
executive and the lead member has limited its effectiveness and contributed
to a lack of corporate ownership of the shortfalls in services for vulnerable
children. This is a serious omission.



Senior managers have not been effective in addressing poor practice by firstand second-line managers. An entrenched culture of non-compliance with
basic social work standards continues to be a significant weakness. This has
led to delays in progressing work effectively, which have left some children in
situations of escalating and actual risk of harm. Inspectors identified a number
of children for whom senior managers had to take immediate action to ensure
their safety.


At every level, the application of thresholds is inconsistent. This is apparent
from the first point of childrens services intervention, including core
safeguarding activity such as child protection investigations and entry to care.
Children spend extensive periods in the pre-proceedings stage of the PLO,
with no review or progress against agreed actions. As a result, too many
children experience significant delay and remain in situations of risk for too
long. Case recording by social workers and managers in many childrens case
files is so poor that it is not possible to tell how decisions are reached
regarding childrens lives or how intervention is reducing risk.


Social work practice in response to the risks of child sexual exploitation is
inconsistent. Social workers and managers lack an understanding of sexual
exploitation and do not consistently use assessments to identify risk or focus
plans on reducing vulnerabilities and improving outcomes for children.
Inspectors identified a number of children for whom social workers had not
recognised the potential signs of child sexual exploitation. This was
particularly evident in the MASH and in the paediatric psychosocial hospital
meeting, at which inspectors referred seven childrens cases back to the senior
managers. This demonstrates that too many children are not having the
protection and support that they need.


The local authority and its partners have been more effective in prioritising
and developing a strategic response to child sexual exploitation. A wide range
of awareness raising has taken place in the community. However, more work
is required to understand links between child sexual exploitation, being
missing, youth violence, gangs and radicalisation. Children who go missing
from home and care are a priority for the local authority and its partners.
Nevertheless, too few children who go missing receive a return home
interview. This is a missed opportunity to learn, understand and identify
patterns and trends to reduce further incidents.


The overview and scrutiny panel meets regularly and has appropriate crossparty political attendance. The panel has considered a wide range of issues,
including the Children and Families Plan, and the chair has led a
comprehensive review on the Prevent duty. However, scrutiny does not offer
robust challenge to senior managers on the effectiveness of services for the
most vulnerable children in Tower Hamlets. For example, the improvement
and inspection plan has not been on the panels agenda, and members were
not aware of its existence at the time of the inspection.



The collation and analysis of reliable performance information remain a
challenge to the local authority. This is largely due to social workers and
managers not updating records on the electronic recording system. Daily
child-level data is now available to managers, and the local authority reports
that this has led to some very recent improvements, but more work is
required to ensure that measures are in place to understand performance in
all areas. For example, the local authority does not report on children in need,
and the performance information relating to missing children is inconsistent.
This weakens the local authoritys capacity to analyse and respond to dips in
performance.


A quality assurance framework, relaunched in June 2016, provides a robust
case auditing and management oversight model. However, it is not yet
delivering much-needed scrutiny of performance management. This is due to
non-compliance by managers in conducting audits, combined with a lack of
understanding of what good practice looks like. There is no robust system in
place to ensure that specific tasks from audits are consistently completed,
resulting in continuing drift and delay for too many children. For example, an
audit of section 47 child protection enquiries carried out in May 2016 identified
significant weaknesses in safeguarding practice. These weaknesses included
poor assessment of risk, an over-reliance on parental explanations and a lack
of professional curiosity and judgement. These weaknesses continued to
feature in a subsequent audit carried out in December 2016 and were
common features in a number of cases seen by inspectors.


A significant challenge facing the local authority is the instability in the
childrens workforce, with high vacancy rates and use of agency staff at both
social worker and manager levels, although overall vacancy rates are lower
than the London average. Caseloads remain variable across the service, and
the highest caseloads are in the assessment and early intervention teams.
This has directly affected this areas turnover of staff, which has increased
significantly from 10% in 2015 to 30% in 2016. A draft workforce strategy
(January 2017) has informed the childrens services transformation redesign,
which is ready for implementation. The local authority expects to reduce
caseloads to a maximum of 18 children, but, at the point of the inspection,
this had not been achieved.


An appropriate range of training is available to staff, but a training needs
analysis has not been conducted, and there is no overall record of staff
training. The local authority does not rigorously evaluate the impact of training
to inform understanding regarding its effectiveness or enable it to focus
attention on areas of the greatest priority. Most supervision records seen by
inspectors contained brief records, and did not demonstrate reflection or
challenge to poor social work practice.


The local authority has a variety of commissioned and in-house services for
children and families. Services commissioned are based on identified needs,
informed by the joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA) and a separate


safeguarding childrens factsheet. The local authority has agreed key priorities
and has recently set up a joint executive commissioning group to take this
work forward, in the absence of a commissioning strategy. Senior leaders and
partners recognise that a more integrated approach is required from across
the partnership to provide effective services and to improve outcomes for
children and families.

Established links are in place to the Health and Wellbeing Board (HWBB), the
children and families partnership and the LSCB. The DCS is a member of all of
these forums. The Children and Families Plan appropriately focuses on a range
of key priorities for children. The JSNA has shaped the HWBB strategy. For
example, a key priority is to develop an integrated system to strengthen
commissioning arrangements at an operational level to support and prevent
children coming into care. Children, led by the young mayor, have attended
the board and directly influenced the CAMHS transformation plan, resulting in
the clinical commissioning group changing the language used in its written
materials regarding children with mental health issues. Further work is
required to ensure greater collaboration between various boards, in particular
the community safety partnership.


The DCS was active in the recruitment and appointing of a new chair of the
LSCB in October 2016. Links between the chief executive, DCS and lead
member are clear, and there are regular, formally recorded meetings. The
chief executive chairs bi-monthly corporate safeguarding meetings to ensure
awareness of risks across the council. However, there are no formal links
between this group and the improvement and inspection board, and this
reduces the chief executives knowledge of frontline practice and impedes his
understanding of the widespread and serious concerns.


Corporate parenting arrangements are strong. The lead member chairs the
corporate parenting board effectively and has good representation from
elected members. Children looked after and care leavers attend and co-lead
the meetings. The board utilises appropriate challenge to partners to improve
services for children looked after and fulfils its responsibilities well. For
example, the board endorsed a successful growth bid to increase the provision
for the education and training needs of care leavers, organised a summer
school and increased social activities with the Children in Care Council.


Strong partnership work to counter the risk to children from radicalisation is
having a positive impact. The preventing violent extremism team works with
children and families and completes good-quality assessments and targeted
work to reduce risks and improve outcomes for children.


There has been effective work through community events, including a
harmful practice conference, to raise awareness of female genital mutilation.
The female genital mutilation specialist social worker has forged effective links
with health and education, identifying 133 children who could be at risk.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
Executive summary
The LSCB in Tower Hamlets is judged to be inadequate, as it is not discharging all
of its statutory functions. Insufficient monitoring of the quality of frontline practice
has meant that the board was not aware of the failings to protect children until
this review. An independent review of the board was commissioned by the DCS in
September 2016. A new independent chair was appointed in late October 2016,
with a view to responding to the findings and recommendations of the LSCB
review. The chair is effectively refocusing the boards priorities by increased
scrutiny and challenge.
The LSCB annual report 201516 provides an assessment of the effectiveness of
local services and some analysis of their impact. It identifies three key priorities for
the board in 201617, although without a clear rationale for their prioritisation with
regard to competing issues. Further work is required to ensure synergy between
various boards, in particular with the community safety partnership, to ensure
tighter joint priorities and to reduce duplication. The board receives a quarterly
performance report that highlights issues that require further understanding or
analysis. The performance dataset requires refinement, and there is insufficient
alignment to the boards key business and priorities. There has been limited case
file audit activity during 201617, impairing the boards ability to be assured of the
effectiveness of frontline practice with respect to the safeguarding of children at
risk of sexual exploitation and neglect. However, funding for a data analyst is in
progress, and the LSCB is undertaking an audit of harmful sexual behaviour, in
partnership with the NSPCC.
The board has developed a local profile of child sexual exploitation victims and
trends, and delivered a wide range of awareness raising activities, including the
recruitment of young safeguarding champions, to engage with schools with regard
to sexual exploitation and associated risks. An essential profile of perpetrators and
of the relationship between youth violence, gang activity and child sexual
exploitation is not yet in place.
The board has effective processes to review child deaths, serious incidents and
cases of concern. Learning from SCRs has been widely shared, and partnership
learning led to a review of threshold guidance and some positive service
developments. The board has a thorough learning and improvement framework,
following a comprehensive review of its priorities for learning, built from national
and local findings from SCRs and thematic reviews. There is an extensive and wellutilised multi-agency training offer. However, the board cannot yet demonstrate
the impact of learning on frontline practice and outcomes for children.


Recommendations


Urgently review monitoring and governance arrangements to ensure that the
board is fulfilling all of its statutory functions.



Prioritise multi-agency monitoring of frontline practice to ensure that the
board has effective awareness of the quality of practice and its impact on
outcomes for vulnerable children.



Ensure that the business management capacity of the board is sufficient to
meet the need.



Ensure that the board prioritises the response of the partnership to the issues
of youth violence and gang activity and their relationship to child sexual
exploitation, including the development of a comprehensive problem profile.



Ensure that the effectiveness of multi-agency training is monitored and
evaluated, including training for staff in recognising and assessing risks to
sexually exploited children.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

Tower Hamlets Safeguarding Children Board is judged to be inadequate, as it
is not effectively discharging all of its statutory functions. The relationship
between the recently established executive board and the wider LSCB is not
effective in facilitating the monitoring and evaluation of the impact of the
boards work programme, and there remains confusion over the differing
functions and purpose of the two bodies.


The board has an excessively large membership, limiting meaningful debate
and effective decision-making. The lead member has not exercised her
responsibility as a participating observer at board meetings since her
appointment in May 2015, weakening her ability to scrutinise and hold the
DCS to account. Board agendas are extensive, but are not sufficiently focused
on the core business and key priorities. The new independent chair is
reviewing the boards governance arrangements, structure and membership.
He is also seeking to ensure connected priorities across the community safety
partnership, the Safeguarding Adults Board and the LSCB. There has been
limited case file audit activity during 201617. Board member agencies have
signed up to the pan-London information sharing protocol, but legitimate
concerns with respect to information sharing and consent issues have delayed
the completion of the two multi-agency case audits commissioned by the
quality assurance and performance subgroup. Consequently, the board is not
assured of the effectiveness of frontline practice with respect to the
safeguarding of children at risk of sexual exploitation and neglect.



IROs, child protection conference chairs and designated officers reports for
the effectiveness of these critical service areas.
basic and it does not promote the work or function of the board to the wider
community. This has long been recognised by the board, and progress has
been too slow.
of local services and some analysis of their impact in respect of the nine
support has recently been secured. The chair has appropriately identified that
the additional capacity should be targeted to ensure that the board can deliver
its core functions, in particular in the areas of governance and quality
assurance.
chair held meetings with each partner to hold them to account for the
progress of actions identified. Thematic areas for improvement have been
identified and progressed, for example in ensuring that commissioning
arrangements include explicit reference to safeguarding responsibilities in line
with section 11 standards, although compliance with this has not yet been
tested.
sufficiently focused on core business and key LSCB priorities. There is no
performance dashboard in place to ensure the easy identification of trends.
young people through the awareness raising and engaging communities
(AREC) sub-group. Consultation with the youth council identified risks
associated with social media as a major issue for children. This led to the
active recruitment of young safeguarding champions. These children have
been trained and supported by the National Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) and the youth service, and are currently
developing a social media awareness raising video, which they plan to take
into schools during 2017.
voluntary sector. The group collates and distributes a safeguarding calendar of
key national and local safeguarding events and associated activities, and
supports networking around the mutual sharing of safeguarding information
and learning opportunities. For example, the group is coordinating a
programme of events on and around the national child sexual exploitation


awareness day. In addition, the LSCB holds a joint annual safeguarding
awareness month in collaboration with the Safeguarding Adults Board.
appropriately ambitious and informs the boards well-utilised training offer.
The impact of learning on practice and on outcomes for children has not been
evaluated.
the last two SCRs has been disseminated across the partnership, resulting in
positive multi-agency collaboration. For example, CAMHS developed a new
conduct disorder pathway, co-locating staff within childrens social care
effectively and providing consultation for children who display harmful
behaviours. However, the board has not been sufficiently rigorous in ensuring
an effective partnership response to the safeguarding risks associated with
youth violence and gangs, which have emerged from these reviews.
incidents and cases of concern. The case review sub-group ensures that the
commissioning of learning, training and audit activity is linked to its findings.
There is an effective child death overview panel (CDOP) that takes a proactive
approach to identifying themes and issues emerging from its work. There is
good multi-agency engagement, which supports the timeliness of reviews.
Actions are tracked and monitored effectively. The CDOP annual report 2015
been taken to ensure that learning leads to appropriate preventative action.
plan. However, the delay to the thematic case file audit has meant that the
impact of the strategy on improving frontline practice remains unassessed.
Progress against the action plan is reported on a quarterly basis to the board
and, when appropriate, issues preventing progress are escalated. For
example, the lack of a multi-agency sexual exploitation data analyst and
intelligence officer limits the LSCBs ability to understand the boroughs
perpetrator profile and the links to youth violence and gang activity, or to
ensure that activity and resources are appropriately targeted. This has been
escalated, and a funding decision for an analyst post is awaited.
and trends in relation to the nature of exploitation activity. Together with the
AREC sub-group, this has led to more targeted and focused work in key
schools and greater emphasis on the increasing prevalence of online
grooming. A wide range of activities have taken place to engage with
communities to raise awareness of child sexual exploitation. Of particular note
has been the engagement with imams and other community leaders to secure
their promotion of awareness raising seminars being held in mosques, schools
and other community venues. This has led to an increase in related referrals


in the borough, and consequently the identification of more children at risk of
exploitation.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This includes children and young
people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and starting
their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the young people whom it is trying to
help, protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted and one social care regulatory inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Brenda McLaughlin
Deputy lead inspector: Linda Steele
Team inspectors: Natalie Trentham, Louise Warren, Karen Wareing, Steve Stanley,
John Roughton, Kate Malleson, Maire Atherton.
Senior data analyst: Tania Corbin
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock SHMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance, Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-Ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


