London Borough of Wandsworth
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 24 November - 17 December 2015
Report published: 16 February 2016

Childrens services in Wandsworth are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
The standard of social work practice for children and young people and the quality of
leadership, management and governance have declined since childrens services in
Wandsworth were last inspected in June 2012. Services for children who need help
and protection and for care leavers are inadequate. Leadership, management and
governance in the borough have failed to prevent this serious decline.
Lack of effective scrutiny by senior leaders, elected members and managers means
that they were not aware of the serious deficits concerning unsafe practice for too
many vulnerable children until this inspection. Managers at all levels of the
organisation do not have sufficient oversight of front-line practice. For children in
need of help and protection, this has resulted in the inappropriate application of
thresholds for intervention and service provision, delays in children and young people
being seen by social workers and inadequate recognition and management of risk.
This left some children at risk of harm. Strategy discussions take place solely with
the police, which is not in line with statutory guidance and results in information not
being shared appropriately. A number (10) of care leavers with high needs have
spent unacceptably long periods in unsuitable accommodation without the necessary
support being in place. This makes them more vulnerable.
The quality and regularity of social work supervision is improving but it does not yet
assure good and safe enough practice. The implementation of the signs of safety and
well-being framework is giving social workers a consistent model on which to base
their practice, but this is not yet embedded well enough across all parts of childrens
services. There is good organisational support in place for social workers, who have
low caseloads. However, there is a lack of management oversight and a failure to
sufficiently challenge poor practice. This has left some children at risk of harm or
experiencing drift and delay.
The local authority has a suite of widely distributed performance information,
including data, that is used effectively in a variety of areas to improve practice.
Nevertheless, inspectors found significant and fundamental gaps in the information
reports. If available, this missing information would have alerted senior leaders and
elected members to the fact that there were serious failings in the protection and
support of children. Although the local authority has made extensive use of
externally commissioned and internal audits, these audits either failed to identify the
deficits found by inspectors or, where they did identify them, this did not lead
managers to develop and implement robust action plans to improve services.
Where inspectors identified children at risk of significant harm, the local authority
took decisive action to intervene and protect them. During the inspection,
management oversight was strengthened in the referral and assessment service,
including the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH). An audit was undertaken of
recently closed cases. This led the local authority to review the closure decision in

The quality of assessment and planning across all service areas is variable, ranging
from inadequate to good. Poor-quality assessments are characterised by delays,
insufficient account being taken of the childs history, failure to identify and
accurately assess risk factors in the childs situation and insufficient engagement with
the child and their family. Some children have been left for too long in situations
where they are neglected. Plans are too vague, with a lack of specific and
measurable outcomes by which to measure progress. Assessments and plans,
including pathway plans, are not routinely updated to reflect changing needs or
circumstances. Some children looked after are returned home from local authority
care without a sufficient assessment or support plan in place.
Partnership arrangements to protect children at risk of child sexual exploitation are
well established strategically and operationally via the sexually exploited multiagency panels (SEMAP). These are not consistently underpinned by robust practice
and more work is required to ensure that all sexually exploited children are
effectively identified and protected. The number of return interviews completed after
a missing young person is found is increasing. However, the risks of young people
going missing are not managed consistently, nor are outcomes aggregated to inform
wider intelligence about children and young people at risk of CSE or involved in risky
behaviours such as substance misuse.
Although the local authority has various strategic strengths, for example user
participation and workforce planning, and has clear accountability structures in place,
it has not yet set up a corporate parenting board dedicated to and accountable for
improving outcomes for children looked after and care leavers. This has left the
inconsistency in the quality of service delivery unchallenged. Care leavers have
insufficient accommodation and training and employment opportunities, and weak
permanence planning has resulted in some children waiting too long for a permanent
home.
Senior managers do not track permanence plans involving long-term fostering or
adoption to ensure progress in achieving timely placements. Family-finding starts too
late. The local authoritys work to ensure sufficient good placements for looked after
children and to commission these placements efficiently is underdeveloped. The local
authoritys sufficiency strategy recognises that there are insufficient fostering
placements for children needing emergency placements, for adolescents and for
brothers and sisters who need placements together. However, it does not address
the need for suitable accommodation for care leavers with high support needs or the
fact that none of the adopters currently approved are suitable matches for the
children waiting. This results in insufficient placement choice, care leavers placed in
unsuitable accommodation and in delays for children in need of adoptive homes.
Good support is provided to children in need of a placement by the access to
resources team. The placement support team offers a variety of interventions to help
maximise the success of placements. The virtual school monitors the education of

children looked after and has been effective in improving educational attainment and
outcomes for children and young people with complex needs. The quality of postpermanence support is good.
Social workers know their children well and some evidence of purposeful direct work
was seen. Advocacy is provided through commissioned services. This is supporting
young people to engage with the multi-agency meetings that concern them and
helping to constructively resolve any complaints they may have.
An early help hub and a family information service help practitioners and families to
access information on the range of services that make up the local authoritys early
help offer. This offer is benefiting an increasing number of children and families. The
quality of early help assessments varies. The impact of the services provided is
difficult to measure through the team around the child meetings. Nevertheless,
parents spoken to said they had benefited from a wide range of support and advice,
programmes and group activities, which are enabling them to develop their parenting
skills. The Family Recovery project is improving outcomes for the children who it
supports.
Participation is a strength in the local authority, and young people play a positive role
in developing and improving services. Members of CLICK (the children in care
council) and care leavers all spoke positively about their engagement with the local
authority and the range of activities they are involved in that help to develop and
improve services.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)



Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home. This was judged to be
outstanding at its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was
in May 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for looked after children
was in May 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since April 2014.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since July
 The local authority bases its early help and social work practice on the Signs of
Safety model.

Children living in this area
 Approximately 60,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Wandsworth. This is 19% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 22% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:


in primary schools is 20.3% (the national average is 15.6%)

 in secondary schools is 19.3% (the national average is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 43% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Mixed, Asian/Asian British and Black/Black British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:


in primary schools is 46.1% (the national average is 19.4%)



in secondary schools is 44.7% (the national average is 15.0%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 October 2015, 1,731 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 October 2015, 201 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 193 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 October 2015, seven children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is no change from seven at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, five serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and one serious case review completed.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 October 2015, 220 children are being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 37 per 10,000 children). This is the same as 220 (37 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015. Of this number:





authority area



authority area



two live with parents. Of these two, 0% live out of the local authority area




 In the last 12 months:


eight children have been adopted






returned to be looked after



independent living



in houses of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Strengthen management oversight so that thresholds and child protection
procedures are applied appropriately and robustly, ensuring that all children in
need of help and protection are seen promptly and given the right service at
the right time.


Ensure that robust performance information is available to support effective
management scrutiny and challenge to poor practice at all levels of the
organisation.


Improve the quality of audit activity so that managers and elected members
have accurate information about the quality of practice across all teams and
can use the findings to strengthen organisational and individual performance.


Ensure that all staff receive regular supervision, in line with the local authoritys
supervision policy, that provides direction and challenge to poor practice.


Ensure that strategy discussions comply with statutory guidance and that the
skills and resources available in the MASH service are used more effectively to
involve relevant partner agencies in information sharing, planning and decision
making.


Ensure that care leavers currently placed in bed and breakfast accommodation
receive comprehensive support based on a robust assessment of risk and that
plans are in place to swiftly remove these young people from such unsuitable
accommodation.


Establish a corporate parenting board dedicated to and accountable for
improving outcomes for children in care and care leavers.


Ensure that the quality of social work, early help assessments and direct work
with children is consistent. Also ensure that all plans detail specific actions,
timescales and responsible individuals and are subject to regular review.


Ensure that children at risk of child sexual exploitation are consistently
identified and protected.

return home interviews so that risk can be managed effectively and outcomes
analysed to inform intelligence.
targeted services, ensure that decisions are based on a thorough assessment
of need and risk.


delivers placement choice, appropriate permanent homes for children who can
no longer live with their birth parents and safe and suitable accommodation for
care leavers.
regular scrutiny, challenge and oversight from managers and independent
reviewing officers (IROs).
use of internal and external resources to secure permanent homes for children.
evaluate the impact of the work completed with parents and children and
evidence how improvements are to be sustained.
leavers, in particular with regard to pathway planning and provision of a range
of suitable accommodation and employment and training opportunities.
work practice, supports effective managerial oversight and provides accurate
performance information.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children and young people are not good enough and need to get
much better.
 Those children who need help and protection do not get the right services as
quickly as they should.
 Although managers were not able to spot problems in services themselves,
when inspectors pointed them out they were keen to sort them out as soon as
possible.
 Parents who have difficulties managing at home say that support services in
childrens centres are a great help to them. Wandsworth has families from many
ethnic backgrounds and those spoken to during the inspection feel that services
welcome them.
 The best social workers are reliable, friendly and keep children and families up
to date with what is happening. Inspectors found that some social workers need
to improve what they do.
 When the council decides it needs to look after a child it is for a good reason.
Sorting out a permanent home for a child does not happen quickly enough and
the council needs to get children into a stable home sooner.
 Young people are positive about their foster carers and feel part of the family.
However, the council finds it hard to attract enough foster carers.
 Almost all looked after children attend good or outstanding schools and their
attendance is good. Those of primary age do well at school but those of
secondary age do not do so well. More need to get good GCSEs.
 Not all young people who leave care move into suitable accommodation. This
makes it difficult for them to get on with their lives. It is pleasing that some go
on to study at university but worrying that too many others do not settle into
education, work or employment.
 The children in care council, known as CLICK, is outstanding. It gives young
people, council leaders and managers a place to share views and improve
services. CLICK members enjoy holidays together and have been involved in
revising the councils pledge to children looked after and care leavers and
developing a welcome pack for children newly looked after.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection are
inadequate. Serious concerns across the service leave children at risk of harm.
Management oversight, the application of thresholds for intervention and the
recognition of risk are weak in too many cases seen by inspectors. Case supervision
is variable in both frequency and quality and in too many cases it is ineffective in
protecting children and proactively driving plans forward.
In all cases seen, strategy meetings do not comply with statutory guidance, which
means that information is not appropriately shared. The resources and the skill mix
of other professionals based within the MASH service are not being used effectively
either to share information or make effective decisions.
Managers and social workers have failed to recognise the need for a section 47 child
protection investigation on far too many occasions. When concerns have been
identified, the response to assess risk and provide appropriate protection has not
been swift or robust enough. Unacceptable delays in visiting children have occurred
too frequently, leaving these children subject to ongoing risk of harm.
The quality of assessments ranges from inadequate to good. In some cases,
insufficient weight has been given to the childs history alongside existing risk
factors. In others, children have been left for too long in situations where they have
been neglected before decisive action is taken to protect them. Stepping down to
early help or targeted services or closing a case where risk has not been reduced is
common practice, including before some assessments are fully completed and before
risk is adequately assessed. Diversity and the cultural needs of children and families
are not consistently addressed in all assessments and plans.
Practice relating to identifying and responding to young people at risk of child sexual
exploitation is inconsistent and some young people have been left in potentially
exploitative situations for too long. Though practice is improving, when children go
missing, return home interviews are not yet routinely undertaken. As a consequence,
the local authority is unable to collate information and fully understand why children
go missing or whether episodes where children have gone missing are linked to
them being at risk of exploitation.
Although the number of early help assessments is increasing, their quality is
variable. Services provided by childrens centres are well regarded by parents, and
sustained interventions by, for example, the Family Recovery project are leading to
better identification of need and improved outcomes for some children and families.
Children living in private foster care arrangements are protected effectively. The

service is overseen and monitored by a named social worker. Responses to
notifications and visits to children are timely.
Inspection findings
inadequate. Serious failings across the service have been identified as a result
of this inspection, and these have left children at risk of harm and insufficiently
protected. Inspectors identified a number of cases where the needs of children
in need of help and protection were not being adequately assessed. This
included 11 children referred to the local authority by inspectors because of the
serious nature of the concerns, eight of whom were at immediate risk of
significant harm. In the majority of these cases, children were left at risk of
significant harm in unassessed situations. In all such cases identified by
inspectors, the local authority took decisive action to intervene and protect
children. During the inspection, management oversight was strengthened in
the referral and assessment service, including the MASH service.
recognition of risk were inadequate in a number of cases seen by inspectors.
Referral pathways into the MASH service are clear and most referrals are
allocated promptly to social workers. However, on too many occasions,
managers and social workers have failed to recognise the need for an
immediate section 47 child protection investigation. In some cases where risk
has been identified, the response to assess and provide appropriate support
and protection has not been swift enough. This includes cases where children
have been at risk of sexual exploitation and where children have had
unexplained injuries. Delays in visiting families and seeing children at risk have
been as long as 10 and 12 days, and in one case 24 days, from the time of the
referral. (Recommendation.)
supervision varies in frequency and quality and in many cases it is ineffective in
protecting children and proactively driving plans forward. Managers are
insufficiently challenging and are overly optimistic in many cases. Action to
protect children is not sufficiently decisive and results in delay and drift for
some children. (Recommendation.)
has not been reduced and before assessments are fully completed and risk is
adequately assessed. Assessments are concluded even though too little
observation of and discussion with the parents/carers and children have taken
place to gather the information required to ensure a full assessment of need
and risk. (Recommendation.)


do not comply with statutory guidance. In all cases seen, social care and the
police were the only participants in the discussion. The resources and the skill
mix of other professionals based within the MASH service are not used well
enough to contribute to the overall decision-making process to safeguard
children. This means decisions are based on incomplete information.
(Recommendation.)
discussions to initial child protection conferences, recently identified that
strategy discussions were not making the best use of the professional networks
available in the MASH team. Despite this finding, there has been no
corresponding improvement in practice. Internal audits undertaken in the first
six months of 2015 judged most strategy discussions as good, indicating that
audit activity is not yet robust enough in identifying deficits in practice and
driving practice improvement. A strength-based learning review in March 2015
raised some concerns about practice, including delay and drift in some cases,
but there is little evidence of learning to improve practice from this review.
(Recommendation.)
and good assessments, they also found cases where childrens needs had not
been adequately assessed. In poor assessments, there are significant delays in
completing the assessments and addressing risk, no reviews are carried out,
and the assessments are not updated following a major event in a childs life.
Childrens histories are not routinely considered and used to inform decisions
being made about them. As a consequence, in too many cases, assessments
are not thorough enough and result in further assessments being undertaken
when cases are referred back to childrens social care and re-opened. This
creates delay and drift, which leaves some children living in difficult
circumstances for too long before action is taken to protect them.
(Recommendation.)
cases. Where practice is good, inspectors saw the effective use of big story
books to help children understand their past experiences. Baking sessions and
the three houses tool are used to ensure that childrens voices are heard and to
inform assessments and plans. Parents and children are now more engaged in
initial child protection and review conferences, supported by an externally
commissioned advocacy service. Two family centres provide good-quality
parenting assessments where proceedings are being considered or have been
initiated.


focus on outcomes and do not set out clearly who will undertake an action
within an agreed timescale. Children in need plans are not reviewed regularly
enough and this leaves some children at potential risk of harm when more
robust action is required to escalate concerns. Contingency planning for
children is a weak area of practice. In most cases seen, the plan simply makes
reference to convening a legal planning meeting should the childs
circumstances not improve. This does not support families in understanding the
serious consequences of their failure to protect their children.
(Recommendation.)
over 15 months. The local auhority reports that the number of children on
longer-term plans has significantly reduced from 5.6% in August 2015 to the
current figure of 0.7%. This ensures that children are not kept on plans
indefinitely, and where plans are not helping to make sustained progress in the
childs situation, alternative actions to protect children are rightly being
considered. The proportion of children on repeat child protection plans  at
England average of 16.6%. The timeliness of child protection conferences and
core groups is mostly good, with most held within statutory guidelines. Ninetyeight per cent of visits to children subject to a child protection plan are made
within 15 working days. This is a significant improvement on 201415, when
some cases for up to two months, mean information is not always readily
available. On one occasion, a delay of 24 days from the time of the strategy
discussion to the outcome of the discussion being available on the system left
the social worker unclear about what action to take next in a particularly
complex situation. The local authority acknowledges that there are data quality
issues in childrens specialist services. For example, while overall re-referral
rates continue to remain relatively low at 18%, compared with the England
average of 24%, inspectors noted that some cases were re-opened with a new
assessment before the previous case had been properly closed down. Failure to
close cases on the ESCR in a timely way will impact on the accuracy of the rereferral figures reported. (Recommendation.)


consultation and advice to social workers on some complex case work,
including child sexual exploitation, parental substance misuse and domestic
abuse. Inspectors identified inconsistencies in the identification of and response
to children at risk of child sexual exploitation, with some children experiencing
inaccurate assessments of risk and insufficient protection. When concerns are
identified accurately, social workers use a risk-based assessment tool to
determine the level of risk and refer to the sexual exploitation multi-agency
panel (SEMAP). The panel ensures that appropriate action is being taken to
safeguard and promote the safety of the child referred. In a small number of
cases, inspectors saw effective mapping exercises being completed by
managers and social workers to identify risk, consider known hotspots in the
area, make links to other children at risk and put strategies in place to protect
children. (Recommendation.)
significant number of return home interviews have not been completed within
timescales and in too many cases they have not taken place at all. An external
organisation has recently been commissioned to undertake all return interviews
relating to children living at home. As a result, this is an improving picture. The
local authority currently does not collate or aggregate information provided in
these interviews and so does not fully understand the root causes of absence
or whether missing episodes are linked to children at risk of exploitation.
(Recommendation.)
in assessments and plans. The local authority recognises that social workers
need support and training to enable them to have more confidence in talking to
children and families about their racial and cultural backgrounds. Where
diversity and cultural needs are addressed in assessments and plans, it is done
purposefully, enabling a better understanding of a childs experiences.
services and the disabled childrens team engages well with children and their
families. There has been a recent lack of consistency in management oversight
of this team and this is impacting on timeliness in the delivery of plans and in
their review. The hospital-based service provides a service mainly for unborn
babies and children with serious diseases attending the hospital. This is
providing timely interventions, with some improved outcomes evident. The outof-hours service provides a sufficient emergency response to children and their
families who need a service outside of normal office hours, although the nature
of its response is limited by having only one social worker on duty during each
shift.


conference in October 2014 on the subject of neglect. Before launching the
neglect strategy in March 2015, it started to help practitioners consider the
impact on children who are neglected. While the increase in children being
placed on a plan as a result of neglect (currently 36%) cannot solely be
attributed to the conference, raising awareness of the issue is having a positive
impact on practitioners practice across the partnership in responding to
neglect. The increase in early help assessments (EHAs) is an example of where
better identification of need means that children have the potential to receive
help and support much earlier in their lives.
families in accessing information on a range of services that make up the local
authoritys early help offer. This is becoming increasingly effective. The early
help IT system (EHITS), a secure web-based system for professionals to draft
EHAs and for lead practitioners to share information, is enabling wider
engagement across the partnership to support early intervention and
prevention. Overall, the service has seen an increase in the number of EHAs
supporting children and families, an increase in the number of professionals
from partner agencies taking the lead in identifying the need for an EHA and an
increase in the number of children receiving early intervention through targeted
and specialist services. In March 2015, there were 2,849 open EHAs.
Assessments, while variable in quality, are leading to more families and
children receiving an early help service to support their needs.
The signs of safety and well-being framework is used well in assessments to
identify what is working well and what needs to be addressed. All the EHAs
seen contained plans to tackle concerns; however, these varied in quality, with
few containing specific and measurable targets. Almost none had clear
timescales for actions to be completed by. The well-being and safety scale is
not routinely completed. Progress and the impact of services provided are not
effectively measured in review meetings, but a revised template has recently
been introduced with the aim of improving the monitoring of outcomes for
children and families. (Recommendation.)
made to feel welcome and consequently felt less isolated in their community.
They felt they had benefited from a wide range of support and advice,
programmes and group activities to enable them to develop their parenting
skills. They were able to give examples of practical and emotional skills they
had developed that had helped them to care for their children. Service users
from diverse ethnic backgrounds reported that they and their families had
benefited from culturally sensitive support through early help services and local
childrens centres. This has enabled them to better integrate into the
community and to understand and accommodate social norms that differ from
their own cultural upbringing.

survivors of domestic violence and abuse, including mental health provision and
housing services. Multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC)
arrangements are satisfactory. They appropriately consider all cases of highrisk domestic violence.
previous years, with an increased number being placed in school within a
shorter time. Secure processes are in place to monitor those children missing
education, with the local authority assuring itself that a suitable school place
has been confirmed before ceasing its monitoring. Effective networking across
schools and partner organisations supports the prompt placing of vulnerable
children in schools. There are few instances where a child is taken off roll by a
school. Where this does occur, the local authority challenges headteachers
appropriately. There are currently no looked after children missing education
and, where such an instance arises, an education welfare officer takes swift
action.
Project (WISP), enable secondary pupils new to the area to be educated
temporarily while a permanent school place is arranged. Good work is taking
place to explore the links between persistent pupil absences and, for example,
potential child sexual exploitation, with the aim of sharing information with
schools and taking action.
of front-line staff in keeping children safe. It involves appropriate external
organisations such as community safety. The programme has been successful
and its reach is being extended to further education, initial teacher education
and early years settings.
variable. In some cases, efforts to engage young people and their families in
mediation work to enable them to return home were evident, and in others,
young people were appropriately accommodated under section 20 of the
Children Act 1989. However, in a small number of cases, there was
inappropriate use of bed and breakfast accommodation without it being clear
how these young people were being safeguarded in such accommodation. This
accommodation is not suitable for a young person.


There are currently seven private arrangements in place. Cases seen showed
that good outcomes are being achieved for children with effective oversight of
the service by one dedicated worker. Raising awareness of private fostering is
a significant aspect of a social workers role, including within hard-to-reach
communities. Social workers have been successful in reaching the Somali
community through attending the Somali family network group. Leaflets are
printed in a number of languages and distributed to target areas to support
early identification of children living in private arrangements. Responses to
notifications and visits to children are appropriate and in line with the national
minimum standards for private fostering arrangements.
concerns about adults who care for and work with children are currently shared
between IROs and child protection conference chairs on a daily rota. These
arrangements have the potential to lead to inconsistency in the application of
thresholds and decision making. Senior manager oversight helps to ensure
consistency in these areas and a review is underway, which is considering
capacity and management oversight of the service. Cases seen during the
inspection evidenced that children are appropriately safeguarded through the
designated officer process.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Children only become looked after when it is in their best interests, but not all
assessments take sufficient account of the childs history or show sufficient
engagement with children and families.
Provision for care leavers is inadequate as too many have been placed in bed and
breakfast accommodation for long periods of time. Their safety and support needs
have not been adequately assessed or provided for. The number of care leavers who
are not in education, employment or training (NEET) is too high. The lack of clear
routes to employment and training means that too few care leavers access available
opportunities.
Not all plans for permanence are made with sufficient urgency. This leads to drift
and delay for children waiting for a permanent home. Most plans are not specific
enough. Managers and IROs do not scrutinise, challenge and oversee the plans
effectively to ensure that they are kept on track. The lack of a permanence tracker
to enable senior managers to oversee the plans exacerbates this situation.
Although still low when compared with the national average, the number of adoption
decisions made by the agency decision maker has risen during the past year. A lack
of direction and urgency in securing timely adoption has led to a service review and
action plan for change. In key areas, such as family-finding and the timely
recruitment of adopters, further improvements are needed.
The process for commissioning of placements is under developed and relies too
much on the purchasing of individual placements, usually without planning and at
short notice (spot purchasing). The recently developed sufficiency strategy focuses
on fostering. It makes no reference to the current mismatch between approved
adopters and children waiting, nor to its insufficient accommodation for care leavers
with high needs. Placement matching processes are good and enhanced by the
access to resources teams engagement with young people to discuss the most
appropriate match. Support provided by the virtual school and the designated nurse
for children looked after ensures that children placed outside the borough are not
disadvantaged regarding their health and education needs.
Children feel listened to by their social workers and well supported by their carers.
Foster carers are supported well by social workers and other professionals to
maintain placements and receive training and mentoring to enhance their knowledge
and skills.
Children at Key Stage 1 and 2 do well, making at least the expected rate of progress
in their education. At Key Stage 4, outcomes are much weaker, with poor GCSE

results. Of this group, the majority have special educational needs. No child looked
after is currently missing education, and absence rates are declining. However,
personal education plans do not always provide children with a clear progression
plan.
The placement support team is effective in offering a local child and adolescent
mental health service (CAMHS) for children/young people who can self-refer, and
this includes support for those young people out of the area. It provides an advisory
service for other professionals and for carers. Post-permanence support is effective.
Carers are given assistance to manage behaviour, maintain contact arrangements
and sustain placements.
The children in care council, known as CLICK, is outstanding. Its participation in
service development is well embedded and it acts as a source of support and advice
to staff and their peers.
Inspection findings
interests. In most cases seen, risk was properly assessed. For a small minority,
there were delays in taking action, leaving some children at home in situations
where they were neglected. In most cases, children were visited swiftly
following admission to care and childrens views were well recorded.
sufficient and accurate information to lead to robust plans. Inspectors saw
some good assessments that covered historical and key factors and thorough
exploration of risks and protective factors. Children and families were well
engaged. In cases that were less good, there was inconsistent involvement of
children and families, poor chronologies and lack of depth and clarity leading to
poor-quality planning. (Recommendation.)
seen where children and young people have returned home. This is due to a
lack of focus on what work has been completed with parents and how change
will be sustained. In better cases, more effective work was evident. For
example, in one case it was clear that the childs home situation had improved
due to social work support to the disabled mother of a child, harnessing
support from the extended family and regular involvement of a parenting
worker and other support services. (Recommendation.)


variable. In some cases, there is evidence of social workers making sustained
efforts to engage young people in discussion about reducing risk. In these
cases, risk assessment tools are used, with good liaison between carers and
other professionals to address concerns, along with regular reviews at the
sexual exploitation multi-agency panel (SEMAP). (Recommendation.)
November 2015 evidences 370 episodes of looked after children going missing,
which is a sharp rise from the 89 reported during the same period in 2014.
During June to November 2015, 30 children looked after had at least one
missing episode. All 30 were reported to have been offered a return home
interview and all but three accepted at least one interview. This has not been
borne out in cases seen during the inspection, where very few independent
interviews were seen on case records. It is therefore unclear how reliably
return interviews are being offered and taking place and what use is made of
the information gathered. (Recommendation.)
childrens needs. Using the signs of safety model, the concerns about children
and what needs to happen to effect positive change are described well.
However, the specific actions that need to be taken, who needs to take them
and in what timescales are less well defined. In too many cases, childrens
immediate needs were well considered but longer-term plans such as achieving
permanence were overlooked, resulting in drift and delay. (Recommendation.)
delays in management decision-making and in the completion of assessments
of children and carers. Managers and IROs oversight in these cases has been
ineffective due to a lack of challenge and absence of timescales. Lack of
management oversight has been compounded by the absence of a permanence
tracker to provide senior managers with an overview of the children waiting for
permanence and to enable them to monitor this effectively.
(Recommendation.)
permanence, family-finding is not being driven forward with sufficient urgency.
From the childs individual permanence tracker, it is possible to see the familyfinding activity for each case with the use of local consortia, features in
publications and local authority activity days. The recently developed early
permanence planning panel shows good consideration of cases but does not
set timescales for the activity required, which is left to individual workers
discretion. The local authority has been slow in developing a permanence
strategy but now has a comprehensive document that reinforces the principles
and processes of permanence planning, with a clearer focus on parallel
planning.

has recently introduced a multi-agency care and resources executive panel
(CARE) to consider placement requests, placement options and support. This is
too recent to evidence impact.
November for family group conferences and only five have not proceeded to
conference. However, the local authority recognises that more needs to be
done to embed this area of work as some connected persons assessments
have been delayed due to the limited use of conferences in identifying family
members.
purchasing rather than collaborative agreements involving other neighbouring
local authorities and independent providers. The local authority is working to
strengthen its commissioning process with the introduction of some additional
dedicated staff. It has recently developed a sufficiency strategy and has also
undertaken a review of its fostering service to ensure that it has a sharper
focus on recruitment, retention and support of carers. Currently, the local
authority has insufficient foster carers to meet its needs and struggles to place
older teenagers, sibling groups and children with complex needs. A focused
recruitment drive has led to three new carers being approved this year, with six
in assessment and five booked into preparation training. Although this is a
promising start, it coincides with a review of all the local authoritys foster
carers and the loss of some long-standing carers. This has resulted in a net loss
of 17 carers this year and the recruitment activity will need to be sustained in
order to meet future demand. (Recommendation.)
been worsening over recent years and at 31 March 2015 stood at 13.9%,
which compares with the national average of 11%. Although long-term
placement stability for children in placement for two or more years was below
comparators in March 2015, at 60.3%, it has now improved to 69.6%.
Improving placement stability has been identified as a priority and some early
indicators of success have been seen in placement planning. For example,
access to resources team (ART) members have met with young people to
consider placements and share expectations to secure the best match for the
young person. This, alongside improvements in introductions between young
people and carers, is leading to improved matching.


local judge report that the quality of work presented to courts is good, with
evidence and analysis provided by social workers who know the cases well.
Applications to courts are timely, but the timescales of proceedings are outside
local and national averages at 31 weeks. A legal tracker is in place to monitor
cases through the court process. Cases seen in the Public Law Outline process
show clear letters before proceedings, well-evidenced court statements and
parenting assessments of very good quality.
they do a good job. Local authority data indicates that 94% of visits are
currently within timescales. Social workers know the children well and there is
evidence of some purposeful work with them, for example using a childs
drawings of his superhero to discuss the positive qualities he could emulate.
Young people are helped to understand their rights and responsibilities via
information contained in the pledge and booklets about being in care.
complaints made by children, young people and their advocates rose from 55
in 201314 to 69 in 201415. Forty out of 69 complaints (62%) were upheld.
An independent agency provides individual advocacy. In 201415, eight
complaints were made using this service. Forty young people contacted the
service during the year and 32 (80%) were assisted to resolve issues without a
formal complaint being made.
assessment, which is above the English average of 90%. Ninety-two per cent
had up-to-date immunisations, which is also above the English average of
English average of 86%. Health assessments seen were of good quality, with
detailed background histories recorded alongside child development and
discussion of health needs and actions.
Access, delivered through a partnership between the South West London and
St Georges Mental Health Trust and the local authority. This has improved:
pathways to services; consistency in the application of thresholds; and waiting
times for services. Two clinical psychologists are also based in the effective
multi-disciplinary placement support team. They provide one-to-one
therapeutic work with children and are involved in running a twice-weekly
therapeutic network and consultation service for professionals, carers and
young people who can self-refer. This team also offer services to children
placed out of borough.


vast majority of whom (92%) attend good or outstanding schools. Educational
outcomes for the very small cohort at Key Stages 1 and 2 are at, or above,
national expectations for all children, with most making at least expected
progress in reading, writing and mathematics. Key Stage 4 outcomes in
national comparators for children looked after. Of this group, 65% had special
educational needs (SEN). The local authority has a good understanding of the
educational needs of these pupils and takes action, often through the pupil
premium grant, to improve their outcomes.
school to provide a better quality service to young people, parents, carers and
schools. Virtual school team members collaborate well with schools.
Headteachers across the borough report favourably on the quality of support
that they receive. Children looked after out of borough are afforded the same
good level of support from the virtual school.
premium grant is increasingly well targeted to support interventions such as
one-to-one support, enrichment and additional tuition. Guidance to schools
usefully supports them in devising sharp, pupil-focused applications and
ensuring that procedures are in place to monitor the impact of the grant.
Academic results are not yet, however, reflecting these interventions.
has had some impact, but the plans lack consistency and sufficient
management oversight. The PEP process often fails to link sufficiently with, for
example, SEN reviews or school reports to enable young people to have a clear
progression plan. In the better PEPs, targets were set with the child and gave
clear guidance on how they could improve. Pupils progress was clearly
described and a structured plan with achievable, personalised targets was
agreed. Pupils had a good grasp of what they needed to do to improve. In the
poorer instances, PEPs carried no useful information, targets or progress
records and key participants did not always attend PEP meetings. Children and
young people looked after therefore do not benefit from a single
comprehensive mechanism to enable them to improve their educational
performance.


such an instance arises, an education welfare officer takes swift action. Rates
of persistent absence for children looked after continue to drop. Over the last
three years, the improvement has been from 12.5% to 8.2%. Front-line staff
and service managers are working well to reduce this even further. There has
also been a decline in pupils in receipt of fewer than 25 hours education, a
drop of 33% since the previous year. Five children looked after currently
receive fewer than 25 hours. Alternative provision is of good quality, is
monitored effectively by the local authority and is quality assured in
conjunction with neighbouring boroughs. The local authority uses this
alternative provision appropriately for its own children to extend their hours in
education. Where other providers are used for alternative provision, a member
of the virtual school will visit, assess the suitability and initiate a PEP.
disadvantaged. Where necessary, they are supported by the virtual school and
the looked after children designated nurse. In cases seen, health, education,
contact and all other needs were addressed. Children and young people living
out of area are kept informed of the children in care councils CLICK groups
and have access to activities. Young people living out of the area can join in
meetings via Skype before attending an activity.
mentioned good introductions to carers and their families. All young people
said they feel part of the family and gave examples of carers helping with their
education and supporting them in contact. One young person described her
carer as amazing. I love her. She is like a mum. Young people said that they
knew why they were looked after and some had life story books and
information regarding their family history.
and parenting capacity, along with the type of child they will do best with.
However, not all connected persons assessments demonstrate how carers will
meet the individual needs of children. There are 23 approved in-house carers
without an up-to-date Disclosure and Barring Service check due to a backlog
with the London Metropolitan Police. The local authority has completed risk
assessments and is putting in extra visits to these carers while the backlog is
reduced, and is requesting checks earlier to avoid this lack of compliance with
regulations.


workers and the virtual school. Examples of post-placement support seen
during the inspection include assisting carers with behaviour management
strategies, play therapy and supporting foster carers own children in dealing
with aggressive behaviour from a fostered child. Foster carers receive training
and use support groups to enhance their knowledge and skills. Carers said that
they know what they should do if children go missing, for example due to
training, availability of written information or direct support from other
professionals. In addition, all new carers receive mentoring for their first year
from a more experienced carer.
permanence panel, with effective scrutiny of how carers will meet the needs of
young people. Recommendations to the agency decision maker are well
recorded but it was not always clear how carers would meet the long-term
needs of the children presented. The quality of special guardianship order
(SGO) support plans seen were good and the service offered by the postpermanency support team shows effective working with carers. For example, it
supported an SGO carer with contact and managed the ensuing questions of
why the child could not live at home.
an improvement from the 201415 figure of 61%. Reviews provide evidence of
thorough discussion regarding what is working well, what the worries are and
what needs to happen. However, the plans arising from these reviews are not
specific enough in many cases, focusing on a particular worry, such as
education, and not on all future needs.
pictures and DVDs for disabled children and opportunities for young people to
chair. Better contact with children between reviews is being developed with the
help of CLICK in using social media. IROs have raised 27 practice alerts and 18
care planning alerts this year, which is a rise from 23 in total for 201415.
However, the impact of these alerts is not clear as IROs could not identify the
trends arising and how learning is informing future practice. An externally
commissioned agency provides an advocacy service for children looked after
and helps them secure constructive resolution of complaints.
local authority. There is ample evidence of CLICK being involved in service
development, such as revamping the pledge for different age ranges,
producing booklets for children and young people entering care, staff
appointments, assistance with foster care recruitment and offering support to
each other. The group meets regularly for work and play and their engagement
throughout the service is evident.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement.
(201213) to 8% (201314) to 6% (201415). The local authority has fewer
children leaving care through adoption (an average of 10.5% for the period
authority has not been rigorous enough in ensuring that adoption is achieved
for all children for whom it represents the best route to permanence. However,
the number of children with an adoption plan has recently begun to rise, with
with a total of 10 for the previous year.
children who are harder to place. Of those adopted during 201415, 54.1%
were from ethnic minority backgrounds, as compared with the 8% England
average, and 13.5% were aged over five, as compared with the 5% England
average. Of those currently placed for adoption: two are over the age of five,
three are from ethnic minority backgrounds, and two are siblings.
entering care and being placed for adoption is 519 days, which demonstrates
an improvement for that 12-month period. However, the local authority
acknowledges that for 201516 the number of days will be higher. For these
children, timeliness is adversely affected by the complexity of their needs or by
delays relating to inter-country adoption. The local authority understands these
children and the reasons for delay well and is taking appropriate action to
secure them with permanent homes.
receiving court authority to place a child and then deciding on a match was 254
days. The local authority reports that this slightly improved during the threeyear period 201215 to 224 days (unpublished scorecard data). In the threeyear period 201114, the average number of days between entering care and
being placed for adoption was well above the national average and the
government target. Although timeliness is improving, it is not improving
enough to keep up with the reducing government target.


consistent management oversight and the loss of experienced staff. These
have impacted on the timeliness and quality of services for children and
adopters. A lack of management direction has led to connected persons
assessments becoming a priority for the service. This has resulted in a
corresponding lack of capacity and focus on adoption. A statement of purpose
is in place but this is out of date. Current tracking mechanisms are in place for
individual children, which evidence the family-finding activity undertaken, but
they provide too much detail, rather than focusing on key milestones in the
childs journey. There is a lack of basic data for managers, such as timeliness of
adopter assessments. These factors have led to a lack of urgency and drive in
securing permanence for children through adoption.
on adoption, and a recent adoption review identified a number of areas that
required improvement. A comprehensive action plan is in place, set against
each of the key recommendations. A review of the adoption panel membership,
the development and launch of a permanence strategy and an adoption
recruitment strategy are now in place. A tracker to assist senior managers to
monitor the delivery of permanence plans is under development. Although the
number of children with an adoption plan is increasing, improvements in
timeliness are not yet clearly evident for children and families.
enough. There is no dedicated resource for family-finding and no uniform
process followed by the whole service, and so the process relies too much on
individual workers discretion. There is, however, effective use made of the
regional consortium, voluntary agencies and activity days. There are currently
whom 15 are the subject of a placement order. However, of these, only one
child is linked and this reflects the lack of drive to identify and secure
placements. When a prospective match is identified, formal meetings, including
with prospective adopters, lead to carefully considered matching and plans of
introduction.


to meet the profile of children currently waiting for adoption. The local
authority has refreshed its website and made links with faith and community
groups. However, the strategy is still in its infancy and has not yet impacted on
front-line practice. There are currently 15 households approved, with nine
currently linked to a child. Although the strategy identifies the need for
adopters for sibling groups, school-age children and children from ethnic
minority backgrounds, recent approvals have not enabled any new matches to
be made. This means that matches will have to be identified from other
sources, creating further delay. Adopters wait too long from approval to
matching, with 91% (201114) waiting more than three months between
approvals and matching. This is well above the statistical neighbour and
England averages of 59% and 58%.
routes of permanence are fully explored with them, for example fostering to
adopt and concurrent placements are underdeveloped. There is currently only
one child benefiting from a foster to adopt placement, which is a spot
purchased placement. This is a missed opportunity to provide consistency of
care for children and to reduce the number of changes in placements that
children experience.
appropriately experienced for this role. There is a central list of panel members
with a broad range of professional backgrounds. Some members, including the
chair, have been on the panel for a long time. A fixed term of office is now in
place to refresh the membership to ensure that it better reflects the
community. The level of debate, questioning and decision making from the
panel is appropriate, with well-considered matching. Assessments referred to
panel are variable in quality and not always completed within timescales.
Prospective adopter reports do not always reflect the key skills of potential
adopters and how these impact on their parenting ability. Some child
permanence reports (CPRs) were unhelpfully critical of birth parents, but
inspectors also saw evidence of some good-quality CPRs that gave a sense of
the childs journey and identified their specific needs.
reports that detail the panels activity and identify practice issues. Senior
managers in the local authority receive these but there is no comprehensive
overview of the years activity or analysis of trends to improve services to
children and families.
were comprehensive and sensitively written and would help children
understand their pasts. Cartoons are used creatively to explain to children
difficult issues in a child-friendly manner.

adoption support throughout their childhood and beyond through the postpermanent support services. Adopters value the broad range of support that
they receive, including assessments to support family therapy, enhanced
adoptive parenting courses and support in helping children understand their
pasts. There are currently 282 children receiving linked support and advice
services, with 83 families receiving direct contact and support, including
promotion of contact with birth families. The number of adoption disruptions is
low: none during 201415 and one in the current year.
The graded judgement about the experiences and progress of care leavers
is that it is inadequate
accommodation to meet the needs of care leavers. During the past year, the
authority has placed 10 care leavers in bed and breakfast accommodation for
periods of time ranging from four to 34 weeks. At the time of the inspection,
there were four care leavers in bed and breakfast accommodation, two of
whom had been in such accommodation for almost six months. Risk
assessments have not taken place, nor have the young peoples pathway plans
been reviewed to address their change in circumstances. This has resulted in
an absence of comprehensive support plans to ensure their well-being.
(Recommendation.)
leavers aged 18, 19 and 20 are in suitable accommodation. The local authority
relies too much on semi-supported and independent accommodation. There is
a lack of accommodation for care leavers with high support needs. Some young
people spoken to by inspectors indicated that they had been placed into
independent accommodation before they were ready, and therefore had
struggled to maintain their tenancies. The local authority does run an eightweek independence preparation group three times a year. It also runs monthly
groups for care leavers, where the young people choose the topic discussed.
However, there needs to be a greater focus on preparing young people with
the key skills necessary for successful independent living.
with in-house foster carers are very low (four). There is a Staying Put policy in
place, with foster carers having been clearly consulted on its implementation.
However, this arrangement is not embedded sufficiently within in-house
provision to enable more young people to take advantage of this provision to
facilitate their journey to independence. The local authority has recognised that
it needs to increase the numbers of care leavers in such arrangements to
enable greater stability in their transition to adulthood.


have not always had SMART targets to identify progress to be made. In a
number of cases they are completed without young peoples engagement. The
local authority has identified the need to improve pathway planning and has
moved from the pathway plan being located within the updated assessment
record to being a standalone document. This has helped improve young
peoples engagement with the planning process as well as improve the quality
and timeliness of the pathway plans. The local authority is now reporting that
earlier in the year. However, pathway plans are not reviewed when young
peoples circumstances and needs change, which means that they are not then
effectively supported. (Recommendation.)
their university career. For the year 201415, 15% of care leavers moved into
higher education, a greater proportion either than statistical neighbours or
nationally. The proportion in employment or training (16%) and those who
were NEET (44%) was, however, worse than both statistical and national
comparators. Figures from the local authority for the current year (201516)
indicate a similar picture. There is insufficient involvement of the local authority
as a corporate parent in offering employment, training and development
opportunities within the council. Nor is there a comprehensive multi-agency
skills and apprenticeship strategy with clear routes to employment and training
for young people. (Recommendation.)
supporting vulnerable care leavers. Those young people who are engaged with
their personal advisers receive good support to develop their aspirations, with a
focus on directing them towards constructive activities such as volunteering or
sport. The impact of these efforts on educational and vocational outcomes is
still not sufficient.
relating to a young persons health history and about relevant community
health provision. Inspectors saw evidence of efforts to address young peoples
health needs through their pathway plan and of referrals being made to
appropriate adult services. A dedicated mental health worker has been
appointed to work exclusively with care leavers, starting in January 2016. This
will enhance the accessibility and provision of input around emotional health.
leavers (over 90%) but is currently not in contact with eight despite efforts
made by the local authority to maintain contact.


availability and level of support they received from their personal advisers.
Several examples were given by young people of where their personal advisers
had made a difference for them. Young people in custody are receiving
appropriate levels of support and the leaving care service and the youth
offending service work well together to support young people when released.
the role of the participation worker and about their role in reviewing the pledge
and meeting with elected members. During the inspection, positive examples of
young people contributing to the improvement of the service were seen, for
example participation in appointments to senior managers posts and in training
and development programmes for staff and foster carers.
collaboration with young people. This includes information about what children
and young people are entitled to. However, there is no system in place to
confirm that this has been received. As a consequence, some young people
spoken to by inspectors were not aware of all their entitlements. The local
authority has recognised the need to increase its use of information technology
to increase the accessibility of relevant information.
covers all the major areas where improvement is necessary, such as better
monitoring of pathway plans. Some of the actions of the plan have been
implemented, such as increasing the management capacity of the service,
strengthening emotional health provision and ensuring more vigorous oversight
of the contract with the commissioned provider. Overall, however, it is too
early to evidence any sustained impact in the crucial areas of education,
employment and training provision and the range of safe and suitable
accommodation.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Leadership, management and governance are inadequate. Lack of effective scrutiny
by senior leaders, elected members and managers at all levels that they were not
aware of the serious deficits in practice for too many vulnerable children until this
inspection. Sufficiently robust management oversight is not in place for those in
need of help and protection. This means that risks to children and young people are
not always identified.
Weak management oversight has led to poor practice not being challenged and
childrens needs not being met. Social workers feel supported by their line managers
and caseloads are low, but this is not leading to consistent compliance with basic
social work practice.
There are fundamental gaps in performance information central to ensuring effective
scrutiny by senior leaders of safe front-line practice. Improvement in the quality and
regularity of supervision, while a priority improvement area identified by local
authoritys own audit activity, remains insufficient.
When the local authority was informed of children potentially at risk of harm, it took
swift and determined action to safeguard them. Throughout the inspection, the local
authority demonstrated a clear commitment to addressing the weaknesses identified
by the inspection.
Although the local authority has a variety of strategic strengths and clear
accountability structures are in place, it has yet to set up a corporate parenting
board dedicated to and accountable for improving outcomes for children looked after
and care leavers. As a result of insufficient suitable accommodation being
commissioned, too many care leavers live in bed and breakfast accommodation for
extended periods of time. Lack of focus and timeliness has meant that children wait
too long for permanent placements.
Partnership arrangements to protect children at risk of child sexual exploitation are
well established strategically and operationally via the sexually exploited multiagency panel (SEMAP). These are not consistently underpinned by robust practice.
More work is required to ensure that all sexually exploited children are effectively
protected. Children missing from home and care are not routinely interviewed on
their return. When return interviews do not take place, risks can remain unexplored.
Leaders and managers place a strong emphasis on user participation, and the views
of children and young people are secured and understood. The virtual school
monitors the education of looked after children and has been effective in improving
educational attainment and outcomes for children and young people with complex
needs.

Links to the Health and Wellbeing Board (HWBB) and Local Safeguarding Children
Board (LSCB) are strong. Senior leaders take an active role, resulting in sharply
focused priorities effectively targeted to meet the needs of local children.
Inspection findings
anticipation of this inspection, assessed most services as good. This is
inaccurate. During the inspection, the local authority revised its position and
took swift action to remedy the poor practice identified with regard to some
children. Nevertheless, it is concerning that managers at all levels were not
aware of the serious and significant unsafe practice for too many children until
this inspection.
authority has undertaken a thoughtful and well-planned approach to combining
previously separate adult and childrens statutory departments. A thorough
end-to-end review conducted by the Chief Executive and the Director of
Childrens Services of services for vulnerable children and adults has provided a
clear vision for service improvement. However, during this transition period,
senior, middle and front-line management has not been sufficiently rigorous in
challenging and monitoring the quality of services being provided to vulnerable
children.
of compliance with basic social work practice in key areas. Improvement in the
quality and regularity of supervision, while a priority area identified by the local
authoritys own audit activity, remains insufficient; it does not consistently
accord with current policy. While the majority of social workers have low
caseloads and receive regular supervision, there is both a lack of management
direction and a failure to consistently challenge poor practice. This leads to
delays in effectively progressing work for some children, which has left them at
risk of harm. For example, in the majority of poor practice cases identified by
inspectors and referred to the Director of Childrens Services during the
inspection, action was required by the local authority to ensure that children
were appropriately safeguarded. The action taken regarding individual children
was immediate and thorough. Action was also taken to strengthen
management oversight in the referral and assessment service and to undertake
an audit of recently closed cases. This led to 15% of the cases audited being
reopened for further assessment. (Recommendation)


ensuring that the local authoritys corporate parenting panel responsibilities are
met, is ineffective and lacks focus. While the lead member and senior officers
aspire to provide high-quality services for vulnerable children living in the
borough, the current approach is fragmented. The recently established
corporate parenting panel is advisory and can only make recommendations to
the VCOG. It cannot therefore drive improved outcomes for children looked
after and care leavers. This lack of a dedicated and accountable strategic group
has left the inconsistency in the quality of service delivery unchallenged. A lack
of critical enquiry and ineffective monitoring has meant that care leavers with
significant needs have lived for extended periods of time in unsuitable
accommodation. (Recommendation.)
distributed performance data being used effectively in some areas to drive up
practice. For example, the timeliness of initial case conferences has risen from
weekly performance information but do not use it to ensure that children are
being effectively protected. Nevertheless, inspectors found significant gaps in
fundamental performance information, which if available would have alerted
senior leaders and elected members to the fact that managers and social
workers were not fully compliant with the local authoritys basic social work
practice standards. More work is needed to ensure that the electronic social
care record consists of accurate and up-to-date information.
(Recommendation.)
commissioned strength-based learning review in March 2015 identified
concerns about quality and timeliness of assessments; variability in how
regularly they are carried out; the impact of supervision of staff across
services; and concerns about quality of performance in driving up standards.
Actions from this audit had not been fully addressed at the time of the
inspection. Internal case audits are not demonstrating rigour in judgements
about the quality of work carried out. In contrast, although the local authority
did identify some variability in quality, the audits for the purpose of this
inspection were more robust. Inspectors agreed with 80% of the local authority
judgements and where deficits in practice were found, appropriate action has
been taken to ensure that childrens needs are met. (Recommendation.)


Board, Director of Childrens Services and Chief Executive are in line with
statutory guidance and are subject to appropriate and formal governance
protocols, so officers are held to account. The joint strategic needs analysis
(JSNA) has a strong focus on the needs of children and young people so that
local needs are known and priorities shared and understood. The children and
young peoples plan (201215) has been superseded by the departmental
business plan, first introduced in April 2014. This emphasises the key role
effective partnerships play in developing and improving services.
leaders taking an active role, resulting in sharply focused priorities being
targeted effectively to meet the needs of children and families. This ensures a
joined-up and aligned approach to commissioning services, which is informed
by the Healthy Child programme, the JSNA and Local Safeguarding Children
Board priorities. For example, joined-up working with the clinical commissioning
group has led to a coherent and well-received health offer to schools. A review
of the CAMHS has led to improved access to the service.
creating three new posts dedicated to improving commissioning and
contracting activity. The local authority has a range of effective commissioning
partnerships meeting the needs of local children. For example, the local
authority is a member of the South London SEN Commissioning Partnership of
in independent non-maintained special schools and independent specialist
colleges. Nevertheless, the local authority recognises that improvements are
required in securing suitable accommodation for care leavers and in securing
placement choice and timely permanent homes for children looked after.
(Recommendation.)
established. The response to learning from the Jay Report (2014) concerning
child sexual exploitation in Rotherham was swift. This included bespoke training
for a number of departments, including housing and accident and emergency
departments, and raising awareness in schools. Presentations to elected
members has built on the police-led Operation Make-safe. They have included
visits to hotels and taxi companies on a rolling programme. There is online
training on awareness of child sexual abuse and G-Mapping groups.


arrangements are well embedded and this is a strength. Senior managers in
social care, the police and education understand the nature and extent of local
issues. They have identified and targeted hot spots and have systems in place
to evaluate and monitor risk. Referral pathways to SEMAP are clear. However,
the quality of practice with children suffering or at risk of sexual exploitation is
not yet consistently good. Inspectors identified significant concerns in relation
to some children who met the threshold for child protection where procedures
were not followed. This meant a small minority of children were left without the
appropriate level of support and care. (Recommendation.)
multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH). This is analysed and a weekly report is
provided. Although improving, when children return after going missing, return
interviews are not completed promptly enough and information from interviews
is not collated to identify pattern and trends. The local authority has recently
commissioned a voluntary agency to carry out independent interviews when
children reported missing return home and has plans to extend this service to
children in care. The local authority has secure processes to record the location
and status of all children missing from education. Monitoring arrangements are
effective, for example if a child in care is missing, the education welfare officer
makes contact on the first day of absence and takes appropriate actions.
(Recommendation.)
views of children and young people are known and understood through
surveys, casework, the Youth Council and the lead members engagement with
CLICK, the children in care council. The views of the children and young people
are acted on and influence how services are delivered. Examples include their
direct involvement in recruitment of school nurses and in the innovative Police
U think tank, which is helping to divert young people from criminal activity.
The local authority has a strong commitment to responding appropriately to
complaints from children, ensuring that they have support from independent
advocates leading to a timely resolution of concerns. The lead member for
childrens services is experienced and committed and demonstrates a sound
understanding of progress against current priorities, including child sexual
exploitation.


and retaining strong front-line services. Turnover rates and the use of agency
staff, at 16%, is lower than comparable boroughs. The appointment of a
dedicated principal social worker is enhancing the profile of childrens social
work within the department. Staff are kept up to date with social work
developments and best practice through a combination of face-to-face and
online training, external courses and conferences and external award
programmes. Staff and managers have easy access to training events via the
online childrens social care portal. The content of the training programme is
informed by appraisal outcomes and feedback from participants. It covers
neglect, child sexual exploitation, children missing from home and care, the
Prevent duty and female genital mutilation. It is a flexible programme and can
be adjusted throughout the year as necessary.
social workers assessed and supported year in employment (ASYE). Good
partnerships are in place with two local universities from whose social work
courses they recruit into their ASYE scheme. A social work career pathway is
also in place.
taken a wide-ranging multi-agency approach to developing and implementing
its Prevent delivery plan. This is evidenced through its Workshop to Raise
Awareness of Prevent (WRAP) training delivered to schools, further education
colleges and youth services; work with community groups; and project work
with young people. It has established a clear referral pathway for young people
thought to be at risk of radicalisation that ensures that risk is assessed through
the Channel panel and wider needs are addressed. This helps ensure the safety
and well-being of young people.
judges, and attendance at the Family Justice Board is good. It is keen to liaise
and it is well on board with the issues when they meet. The local authority is
efficient and organised in its applications to courts and works openly to address
issues as they arise.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) in Wandsworth requires improvement
to be good.
Wandsworths LSCB complies with its statutory responsibilities and the requirements
of the statutory guidance Working together to safeguard children (2015). Partners
are well engaged on the work of the Board, challenge each other constructively and
hold each other to account. Safeguarding is appropriately prioritised by partners and
well evidenced through section 11 audit reports.
Monitoring and oversight is rigorously undertaken by the Board through performance
data analysis and audit. However, systematic analysis of the Boards key
performance indicators has not been sustained over the past year.
Multi-agency and individual agency audits have been undertaken on behalf of the
Board. However, repeat audits have not been completed, and significant areas of
concern identified in a concurrent inspection of the local authority childrens help and
protection services had not been recognised by the Board.
Learning from serious case reviews and from child deaths is rigorously implemented
through a process of dissemination, including learning events for partners.
The Board routinely oversees services to safeguard vulnerable young people,
including those at risk of child sexual exploitation and those going missing. However,
it has not ensured consistency of practice or aggregation of information on these
young people to inform service development.
A wide range of multi-agency safeguarding training is provided and e-learning
modules have recently been developed to enhance this. However, the impact of
training is not yet sufficiently evaluated.
The Board has clear and appropriate priorities, incorporated into a realistic business
plan.


Recommendations
collated, analysed and reported to partners, enabling them to evaluate the
impact of multi-agency practice to safeguard children.
conducted to enable partners to evaluate the impact of safeguarding practice in
each individual agency. Ensure that learning from audits is used to improve
practice and fresh audits are undertaken to evaluate impact.
sexual exploitation and those who go missing. Ensure that there is appropriate
challenge when deficits in practice or failings in the analysis of return interview
outcomes are identified.
partner agencies. Ensure that agencies are challenged appropriately when they
do not consistently apply thresholds.
evaluation of its impact on practice and outcomes. Ensure that the assessment
of training needs from agencies includes information from long-term evaluation
to better enable the Board to commission future training.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
Together to Safeguard Children (2015). Governance arrangements between
the Board and other strategic partnership boards are clear and well established.
A joint protocol between the Health and Wellbeing Board, the Community
Safety Partnership, the Safeguarding Adults Partnership Board (SAPB) and the
Annual Review Partnership Forum clearly sets out the relationship between
these groups. Many of the senior managers from partner agencies are
members of a variety of these boards, which facilitates communication and
ensures that childrens issues are considered. Issues from these groups
relevant to the Board are routinely discussed by the LSCB. Early in 2015, the
Health and Wellbeing Board recognised that it had not ensured that childrens
issues were sufficiently considered in its programmes. It has now addressed
this.


significant changes over the past four years. She is tenacious and is well
respected by colleagues from partner agencies. She appropriately raises issues,
exerts challenge and enables partners to do so. The chair works closely with
the local authority Chief Executive, the Director of Childrens Services and the
local authoritys elected members to ensure that safeguarding children and
adults is given the highest priority.
who actively engage in its extensive work programme. The flat structure of the
Board, with an executive, a full board network group and four sub-groups
means that all its groups have challenging work programmes. This is efficiently
administered through a small business unit.
practice to safeguard children. As a result, the significant concerns identified
through the concurrent inspection of help and protection services in
Wandsworth had not been recognised before this inspection. The Board has
effectively monitored and evaluated the effectiveness of early help services. It
has considered reports on the development and impact of early help support
for a wide range of vulnerable children and families. It has provided robust
critique and challenge, for example in relation to the completion of medicals for
looked after children. (Recommendation.)
recommendation from a previous local serious case review (SCR). It has
systematically undertaken themed audits, some based on issues arising from
the SCR. In the past year, the LSCB has commissioned themed audits in
relation to children missing from home and care, children looked after who
have returned home and child sexual exploitation. Learning from these has
been disseminated to staff and the community and incorporated into training
events. Several multi-agency audits programmed for this year have been
delayed, in part due to this inspection and also because of the capacity
demands on partner agencies. While the findings of audits are reported to the
Board and included in a tracked action plan, the Board recognises that it has
not re-audited or undertaken other work to assure itself that the issues arising
from the audits have been addressed or improved. For example, the LSCB
undertook an audit of the MASH in 2014 and had planned to undertake a
further audit from May 2015. However, this had not been completed at the
time of this inspection due to capacity issues. As a result, the LSCB missed the
opportunity to identify the significant concerns found in the concurrent
inspection. (Recommendation.)


interrogates reports on key safeguarding issues and performance information
and analysis on behalf of the Board. This is underpinned by a working group
tasked with developing and analysing key performance data from all the LSCB
partner agencies. Throughout 2015, this working group has refined the
extensive core performance data routinely gathered by the Board. It has also
reduced the number of indicators to make them more manageable and better
linked to the Boards priorities. These have recently been agreed by the LSCB
executive, together with clear methods for partners to collate and analyse data.
However, throughout 2015, while the Board has received extensive data and
analysis in individual reports on the specific service areas it has reviewed, it has
not received reports on the synthesised analysis of all its key performance
information. This is now scheduled for early 2016.
through an exemplary range of section 11 self-assessment audits. The format
of these has enabled extensive engagement of agencies and practitioners,
including close involvement from general practitioners. Learning from these
was incorporated into an independent report and widely published. This has
enabled the LSCB to help partners to improve their individual safeguarding
practice and to identify some common areas that required improvement. These
have been systematically addressed by the Board, for example to ensure that
all staff and volunteers know who their safeguarding lead is and who to speak
to if they have concerns. The Board has engaged extensively with the local
community and has active lay and voluntary sector members. It has sought to
better engage local faith sector groups and recognises that more needs to be
done.
These are in line with pan-London procedures and incorporate signs of safety
models of practice. Clear and detailed threshold procedures have been widely
published and overall are well understood by partner agencies. These align well
with partners threshold and eligibility procedures, in particular for access to
local childrens social care services. However, these thresholds are not applied
consistently within childrens social care services and this had not been
recognised by the LSCB before this inspection. (Recommendation.)


children and families. It has robustly monitored the safeguarding needs of
looked after children, particularly those placed out of the area. It provided
positive comment and challenge on reports, including a multi-agency themed
audit on looked after children. The Board effectively monitors services to raise
awareness of and prevent female genital mutilation; children privately fostered;
children whose carers have mental health concerns; and those at risk of
domestic or substance abuse. The Board has strategically overseen services to
support children at risk of sexual exploitation and those missing from home,
care and education, influencing the development of these and raising challenge
where practice could be improved. However, despite challenge exerted by the
chair, the LSCB has not sufficiently ensured that learning from return interviews
for children missing is aggregated, nor has it identified the inconsistent practice
in relation to children at risk of sexual exploitation. (Recommendation.)
attended by relevant partners. It robustly fulfils its statutory functions. The
number of child deaths for Wandsworth children in recent years is relatively low
and these have been effectively considered by the panel. While no general
themes have been identified from local cases, panel members are linked to
pan-London CDOP groups and make good use of regional and national learning
and research. Support for the bereaved families is routinely considered and the
panel has appointed a bereavement worker to work directly with them or
signpost them to other support services. A significant proportion of child deaths
relate to children who live out of the area, who are taken to the local hospital.
The panel has established close links with the hospital and ensures prompt
communication with the familys home authority.
individual agency audits is overseen by a sub-committee of the LSCB. Learning
from the last SCR in the area, published in 2014, has been effectively
disseminated and incorporated into learning events for partners. An internal
management review conducted by the LSCB for an SCR commissioned by a
neighbouring authority has been recently published by that authority. While
monitoring of action plans is primarily the responsibility of the commissioning
LSCB, the Wandsworth LSCB plans to monitor the recommendations of this SCR
that pertain to agencies in Wandsworth.


developed and delivered on behalf of the LSCB. The sub-group overseeing this
was, until recent months, not directly managed through the LSCB, and its
membership is being refreshed. Training is provided in relation to the key
priorities of the Board, using learning from case audits and internal
management reviews. The programme includes core child protection work for
different experience levels, and current national issues such as child sexual
exploitation. The training programme has been particularly successful in
engaging general practitioners. The programme is clearly linked to the learning
and improvement framework established by the Board. Learning is delivered
through traditional classroom-based events, learning events and conferences.
Overall, these are well-attended, although some recent events have been
cancelled due to lack of take-up. The LSCB has considered alternative methods
of providing training and has recently introduced e-learning modules to enable
safeguarding training to be more readily accessible. Initial take-up has been
positive, but it is too early to assess how many have completed these courses.
training on improving practice and outcomes for children. Traditionally, it has
used participants self-reporting questionnaires, immediately following courses,
which overall are positive. In the past year, the Board introduced self-reporting
questionnaires from participants three months after the course; however, the
response rate has been poor, despite the chair writing to all partners. The
training sub-group has explored different methods of evaluating the impact of
training, making use of learning across London and other LSCBs. It has recently
commissioned an e-learning evaluation and impact model, but this has not yet
been implemented so it is not possible to assess its impact. (Recommendation.)
account of the work of the board and contribution of its partners to ensure that
children are safeguarded. It describes in detail key areas that the board has
overseen and reviews what the board has achieved in addressing its priority
areas for the year. These include oversight of early help services to safeguard
children; vulnerable young people, particularly those missing from home, care
or education; young people involved in gangs; and those at risk of child sexual
exploitation. The report does provide some analysis of the impact of the Board,
for example in relation to the extensive activity by partner agencies to raise
awareness and tackle concerns about female genital mutilation and domestic
abuse, although members acknowledge that wider analysis of the impact of the
Board could be strengthened.


in the context of the relative size of the area, the capacity of the small business
unit and the amount of time that the chair is commissioned to undertake her
work. The Board has reviewed and developed appropriate priority areas for
improving ways of involving young people to inform LSCB development. The
views of young people have been used well over recent years to influence the
work of the Board, through engagement with a variety of groups representing
young people in the area and through the use of questionnaires.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other, and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people, and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Carolyn Spray
Deputy lead inspector: Brenda McLaughlin
Team inspectors: Helen Cawston, Karen Wareing, Lisa Summers, Andy Whippey,
Tony Gallagher, Pietro Battista
Shadow inspectors: Tony Theodoulou. Tracey Zimmerman
Senior data analyst: Patrick Thomson
Quality assurance manager: Nicholas McMullen


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners
of all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children
and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


