West Berkshire Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 3 March  25 March 2015
Report published: 13 May 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services are inadequate
There are widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed
or at risk of harm. Leaders and managers have been ineffective in making
improvements in this area. The characteristics of good leadership are not in place but
failures have been identified by the local authority and are being effectively
addressed.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.2
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Inadequate

permanence

Requires Improvement


Requires Improvement


Requires Improvement


Requires Improvement


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in West Berkshire are inadequate because:
Leadership and Management
 There are widespread and serious concerns about the protection and assessment
of children who are most vulnerable to harm. The pace of change since the last
inspection has been too slow. Performance declined significantly in 2014 and,
despite remedial action by senior managers, child protection and children in need
services are inadequate.
 The local authority does not have a stable workforce. A significant proportion of
social workers and managers in key social work teams are agency staff and
turnover is high. This has resulted in children experiencing unacceptable
disruption, uncertainty and inconsistency.

Missing children and Child Sexual Exploitation
 Risk assessment of children vulnerable to sexual exploitation is inconsistent.
Action plans to protect children and young people from child sexual exploitation
are not always effective or shared with professionals working with the child.

Quality of practice
 Frequent changes of social workers and managers mean that plans to reduce risk
for children lose momentum. Too many children have experienced unacceptable
drift and delay in having their needs met. A significant proportion of child
protection enquiries, assessments and plans for children are poor.
 Weak operational management oversight, supervision and quality assurance
processes mean that poor practice is not sufficiently challenged and childrens
needs are left unmet.
 Where risks to children are not reducing, the local authority does not consider
legal action soon enough.
 Overall, plans for children are not outcome focused, and in some cases fail to
address risk, contingency planning and visiting frequency. Child protection chairs
do not provide sufficient challenge to bring improvement in these areas.
 The Independent Reviewing Service is not effectively fulfilling its function.
Independent reviewing officers (IROs) do not consistently drive forward plans to
ensure progress for looked after children. Looked after and adopted children do
not receive timely or good quality life story work or later life letters.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Leadership management and governance

Implement the following areas for improvement from the previous inspection:
 Legal advice is sought when necessary and this leads to appropriate action
and timely legal intervention.
 Management oversight is both reflective and challenging and focused on the
childs experience, current risks, needs and strengths and the effectiveness
of the current plan and interventions.
 Ensure core groups and child protection conferences effectively monitor
cases to ensure that where there is a lack of progress in improving a childs
situation this leads to robust action.

Quality of practice

Prevent unnecessary drift and delay in all stages of social work intervention.
Ensure, through robust management oversight and decision-making, that work
with children and their families is purposeful, timely and of a consistently good
standard.

Child Sexual Exploitation

Ensure that screening tools are always used where there is a potential risk of
child sexual exploitation, and that action plans are outcome-focused and shared
with all professionals working with the child.

Workforce

Implement the workforce strategy as swiftly as possible to improve workforce
stability and ensure that children have consistent social workers, who see them
on their own and with whom they can develop meaningful relationships.

Areas for improvement

Leadership management and governance

Develop a revised and updated looked after children strategy, aligned with the
sufficiency strategy and based on a clear analysis of current and future need,
with clear actions to address these.


Ensure that the corporate parenting board and children in care council (R:Vue)
consistently contribute to improved outcomes for looked after children.



Conduct a robust test of assurance of the dual role of the Director of Childrens
Services (DCS) and act on its findings.


Ensure that all operational and strategic managers understand and use the
management information and data available to them in order to oversee and
improve practice and performance.

Quality of practice

Ensure that assessments and plans are of a consistently good standard, with
analysis and consideration of risk and protective factors and the individual
needs of all children in the family.

supervision policy, and that rigorous tracking of plans for children takes place
through this process.

Looked after Children and Adoption
assessments and that looked after children and care leavers have prompt
access to services from Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS).
significant changes in their circumstances.
record of the outcome of their review.
and that good quality life story books and later life letters are completed for
adopted children in a timely manner.

Care Leavers
development.
health histories and their entitlements.


ensuring that assessments and plans are updated when young people
transfer into the care leaver service



strengthening the involvement of care leavers in their pathway
planning process




ensuring that care leavers have detailed pathway plans that address
their health and educational needs, with clear targets and outcomes.

The local authoritys strengths
Team (DART), the Family Intervention Team (FIT) and the Family Support
Team (FST), is effective in delivering intensive and bespoke support to children
and families who may be subject to domestic abuse, at risk of family
breakdown or who are on the edge of education and care. Good outcomes have
been achieved with families and their children, and these outcomes are well
evaluated and documented, ensuring that lessons can be learned and practice
further improved.
a steady increase in referrals for early help from across services and from
families themselves. Professionals bring a wide range of experience and
knowledge from diverse backgrounds, including health, youth services, schools
and children centres. They make sure that children and families receive swift
access to the most relevant services that will result in positive and sustainable
changes for them.
very good standard.
looked after children in family placements is high.

Progress since the last inspection
children services (SLAC) was in August 2012. The local authority was judged
adequate for its safeguarding services and good for looked after childrens
services.
work teams has become a significant challenge for West Berkshire, particularly
over the past 12 months. The local authority has recognised this challenge and
has responded by investing in an ambitious and creative recruitment and
retention strategy, but it is yet to have significant impact.
HFF as the early help hub in the district. This is proving to be effective in
coordinating the early help offer and supporting the involvement of a wider
range of partner organisations, including a dedicated health visitor, in good
quality early help work. The local authority has thought creatively about how it
can respond to local need in a way that achieves statutory compliance, quality


and good value for money. The Adopt Berkshire collaboration and tripartite
training arrangements are two examples where this is proving to be effective.


Summary for children and young people
 The last time Ofsted inspected West Berkshires safeguarding and looked after
children services was in 2012. The inspection judged that safeguarding services
were adequate and services for looked after children were good.
 In this inspection in March 2015, inspectors found that some things have not
improved, like making sure that when families problems get more serious a social
worker assesses their needs properly and arranges help so that problems do not
get worse.
 Over the past year it has become much harder for managers to employ enough
social workers to do this important work.
 Many social workers have left after a short time, and promised help hasnt always
been provided. This is difficult for some parents who havent been sure what they
should do to make their childrens lives safer. It is especially hard for children and
young people, who have been upset about having to say goodbye to social
workers they are just getting to know.
 Because of how worried inspectors are about the help being provided to children
who most need help and protection, they have judged these services to be
inadequate. Services for children who are looked after and care leavers require
further improvement but are better, along with adoption and leadership and
management.
 Leaders are working very hard to employ more social workers and to improve the
help provided. The social workers and support workers that inspectors met are
committed to their jobs and care about the children and families they are trying
to help. They would like to see services for vulnerable children and families
improve.
 Inspectors have said that more looked after children should be helped to join the
R:Vue children in care council, and senior managers and politicians should spend
more time getting to know looked after children.
 More work needs to be done to improve the accommodation provided to young
people who have left care. Feeling safe and secure where they live is important to
these young people if they are going to achieve the things they are capable of.
 In other areas, things are working well. Services like the Help for Families team
are supporting families who are just beginning to have problems. This is helping
parents and children to improve their lives. It is good that children who cannot
live with their own families are found a new permanent family, and a high
number of looked after children live with their carers without having to move too
often.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area
 Approximately 35,700 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in West Berkshire. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 11% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 8% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 7% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 8% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Mixed and Asian or Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 6% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 5% (the national average is 14%).
 Polish is the most spoken language of new pupils in the districts schools and
Portuguese the second. This has been the pattern for the past seven years. There
is a well-established traveller community in the district, including settled traveller
families.
Child protection in this area
 At 28 February 2015, 874 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 28 February 2015, 134 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 107 at 31 March 2014.
 At 28 February 2015, four children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from three at March 2014.
Children looked after in this area
 At 28 February 2015, 176 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 50 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 160 (45 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014. Of this number:


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


authority area
 four live in residential special schools4, of whom 75% live out of the
authority area
 one lives with parents, within the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been five adoptions
returned to be looked after
 eight children and young people ceased to be looked after and moved on
to independent living
 one young person ceased to be looked after and is now living in a house
of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home, which was judged adequate in
its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of West Berkshires safeguarding arrangements for the
protection of children was in August 2012. The local authority was judged to be
adequate.
 The previous inspection of West Berkshires services for looked after children was
in August 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services also has responsibility for adult services. She
has been in post since March 2013.
 The Chair of the LSCB has been in post since August 2014.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
Partner agencies understand and appropriately apply thresholds. A range of effective
early help services and prompt referrals for early help services are making a
difference to children, young people and their families.
However, there are serious and widespread weaknesses in services for children who
need help and protection. An over-reliance on agency staff in key social work teams,
and the continual workforce churn, is severely restricting the local authoritys ability
to provide a consistently safe and effective service.
Too many children have experienced drift and delay because of constant changes of
social workers and managers. As a result, children remain in situations of potential
risk of significant harm for too long. Unassessed risk and a lack of progress to
improve outcomes for children are common features in too many cases.
Families express frustration about how difficult it is to develop a trusting and
meaningful relationship with their social worker. They are unclear what they have to
do to make progress.
Poor practice is evident in too many cases. There is chronic delay in progressing
assessments and plans to protect children and meet their needs. Management
oversight of social work practice is inconsistent and weak, and leaves poor practice
unchallenged.
Initial child protection conferences are not timely, and children subject to child
protection plans do not see their social workers as often as they should. Child
protection chairs do not rigorously monitor or challenge delays in the progression of
plans.
When risks for children escalate or do not improve, legal meetings are not held
quickly enough.
Social workers do not consistently use screening tools to identify the level of risk of
child sexual exploitation. As a result, plans are not focused on reducing risk.
Delay in effective case management was noted by inspectors to be widespread
across all four core social work teams, including the contact, advice and assessment
service (CAAS).


significant needs or are vulnerable to harm they are not consistently or
effectively assessed, supported or protected. Too many of these children do not
receive the timely services they need. Social workers and operational managers
report that services have been in crisis for some time. The local authority is
aware of these weaknesses, with audit activity regularly identifying inadequate
practice. In October 2014, senior managers recognised that services to children
were weak and that this inadequacy would take time to address. Although
appropriate actions are starting to address the significant shortfalls, for example
through the restructuring of the referral and assessment service and the
appointment of interim managers, the changes are very recent and staff
instability is still a significant problem. For too many children, the assessment
and help they have recently experienced or are still receiving is not good
enough.
or recent delays in children receiving support or protection. These delays did
not relate to one specific area of practice, but were widespread across three of
the four core social work teams, including the contact, advice and assessment
service (CAAS). The connection between these concerns and significant
workforce instability is clear and known, but this does not negate the impact on
children, young people and their families. These children have waited too long,
either for needs and risks within their families to be recognised; or for the
escalation of concerns to a level where there is a sharper focus on risk, such as
a strategy discussion, S47 enquiry or child protection conference; or for legal
advice to be sought regarding whether the care threshold has been met. In
four of these cases, actions relating to the assessment of child sexual
exploitation had not been completed in a timely way. In the majority of cases
seen by inspectors where children had recently become looked after, there had
been a lack of effective or purposeful work to understand or reduce risk and
need. This led to children being left at risk of significant harm for too long.
service (CAAS) were appropriate. In the vast majority of cases, decisions are
appropriate and made within 24 hours. However, inspectors saw cases that
were stepped down to a lower level of help inappropriately. For example, in one
of these cases, a child had been physically assaulted and was not spoken to or
assessed by a social worker prior to being stepped down to the HFF service.
of prioritisation in protecting children. Where managers and audits identify poor
practice there is insufficient evidence of effective action taken to address
deficits. The local authority identified that a failure to follow through on
previous audit recommendations was a big issue in October 2014, with a total
lack of progress on inadequate audits. This was still evident in this inspection.
long to complete and the majority lack sufficient analysis. In February 2015,


authoritys own target timescale. Where assessments are good, they are
detailed, descriptive and analytical, and the wishes and feelings of children are
evident. However, during the assessment period, support is inconsistent and
children are regularly waiting too long to be helped.
children, including worry work and the three houses model. However, this
practice is not consistent. Inspectors saw three cases where brothers and
sisters in the family had not been considered and risks were overlooked. One of
these was a child protection enquiry where only one child in the family was
included in the assessment of risk.
well recorded. However, the majority only involve police and social care. As a
result, not all information is available to make informed decisions. The large
majority (76%) of S47 enquires were not of a good enough standard. Deficits
included three blank S47 enquires, delays in completing risk assessments and
failure to consult key agencies. Inspectors saw delays in progressing the
strategy discussions, S47 enquiries or child protection conferences. This
delayed the multi-agency consideration of risk.
conferences (ICPC) held within 15 days of a strategy discussion, with a rise
from a low base of 50% in May 2014 (year to date) to 78% in February 2015
(year to date). However, this still means that for 22% of these children,
decision-making about the level of risk within their lives is delayed.
improvements. Overall, plans for children are not outcome focused, and in
some cases fail to address risk, contingency planning and visiting frequency.
Plans do not address the individual needs of children, because brothers and
sisters have generic plans. The majority of plans lack achievable timescales and
are not used to routinely drive and measure improvement and progress. One
parent spoken to by inspectors said, how do they know if things are ok?
Nobody comes, nobody phones, meetings get cancelled.
linked to outcomes; they lacked timescales and in some cases were overly
focused on adults rather than the needs of the children. The local authoritys
own re-audit of children in need plans in April 2014 identified that a third of
plans did not have actions and timescales that were achievable.
Inspectors found inconsistent use of the Public Law Outline (PLO) to bring
about improvements at an early enough stage, particularly in seeking legal
advice where risk is increasing or change is slow. Chronologies and historical
family information are not used to make prompt decisions on current casework.


Inspectors saw examples where known, long-term risk had not been reduced or
acted upon to protect children. At the time of the inspection, 35 cases (56
children) were subject to PLO proceedings and 19 cases (27 children) were in
the court arena. Inspectors sampled a fifth of the cases on the local authoritys
legal tracking system. In the majority of these cases subject to PLO, drift and
delay were evident. The delays were because of poor quality evidence resulting
in social work statements having to be rewritten, parenting assessments not
being progressed, social workers leaving the authority and delays in making
applications to the court. In four cases where care proceeding had started, the
judiciary had specifically expressed concerns about delays in making
applications to the courts for (section 31) interim care orders, and about the
lack of planning and progress.
delay in undertaking an assessment, convening an ICPC, and arranging legal
planning meetings to consider thresholds for PLO. As a result, there were
delays in parents accessing legal advice, and in parenting assessments and
plans being made for the children.
local authoritys own timescales. According to the local authoritys figures, the
frequency is inconsistent (December 2014, 92% on time; January 2015, 78%
and February 2015, 89%). This means that one in ten children is not seen as
often as needed.
child protection plans. Neglect featured in 62.1% of plans, emotional abuse in
parental substance misuse in 37%, and adult mental health problems in 22% of
child protection plans. In a number of cases, sexual abuse and child sexual
exploitation were significant risk factors, but only two children are subject to
child protection plans under the category of sexual abuse. The local authority
acknowledges the disparity in the use of child protection plan categories but an
under-representation continues. This means that plans do not always address
the risk of sexual abuse, and the local authoritys understanding of the
prevalence of sexual abuse within its vulnerable children population is reduced.
authority has been slow to introduce a tool to help social workers to understand
the impact of neglect within families. A pilot involving four cases has only
recently started. Insufficient focus on the childs needs and timescale for
change for families where neglect is a risk factor was also highlighted as a
concern in the previous inspection in 2012.
to children in West Berkshire. Forty-three per cent of children between the ages
of seven and 18 who have a child protection plan are benefiting from an
independent advocate to support them through the process, which includes


meeting the young person regularly, attending conferences with them and,
where appropriate, speaking on their behalf. Conference chairs know it is a
valuable service for children that enables them to be at the centre of the child
protection process.
example, research supported the social workers analysis of the case.
a case where appropriate action through multi-agency strategy meetings was
taking place where risks were identified.
reviews all children who are missing, vulnerable or at risk of child sexual
exploitation. The meeting effectively shares intelligence on potential victims and
perpetrators. At the time of the inspection, two young people were considered
to be high risk and four medium risk. Targeted police operations have resulted
in successful prosecution, and five abduction notices have been served since
January 2015. Raising awareness of child sexual exploitation has taken place in
the town centre of Newbury and with hoteliers, fast food outlets and taxi firms.
and action plans are not always in place or robustly monitored. Therefore
children are not effectively protected. The local authoritys audit of child sexual
exploitation in December 2014 identified that children in need plans, child
protection and care plans do not always reference the involvement of the child
sexual exploitation operational group, or that the young person is at risk of
child sexual exploitation. As a result, important information is not always
available to all professionals involved.
meetings, ensuring that the links between missing children and child
exploitation are robust. A pool of 40 specially trained professionals makes
contact with all children and young people who go missing. The majority of
return interviews occur within 72 hours. Return interviews seen were of a good
quality in the majority of cases. Police and childrens services share information
from safe and well checks and return interviews to identify patterns and trends.
shown as a reason for children going missing. Nineteen (17.7%) young people
refused to participate in a return interview and, where children have been
missing only once, 24 (22.4%) received an information pack highlighting the
risks they may be exposed to, and signposting to relevant support services.
Advice to professionals is provided through CAAS, and an assessment of need is


undertaken by a social worker. Three current private fostering arrangements
are being appropriately monitored. However, in one case there was evidence of
a delay in making an initial contact through a home visit. In another case, the
assessment had not been properly progressed because of an error in
transferring information from CAAS.
work with children are well embedded. The service benefits from two
designated officers (LADO), each with a specific responsibility, including
working with schools to provide advice, training professionals, raising
awareness of the reporting process and attending strategy meetings. Cases
seen by inspectors show that the local authority has appropriate reporting
processes in place. Referrals are responded to in a timely way and appropriate
action taken. Disciplinary action and, in some cases, a criminal prosecution
ensures that children are protected by robust action. In 201314, there were
homelessness service for the six unitary authorities which make up Berkshire.
Close links with the CAAS and key personnel within West Berkshire provide
systems for ensuring that referrals and action taken are immediately reported
to day staff. Information on children who go missing is reported through a
separate email account to the young persons social worker, the youth
offending service and the missing person co-ordinator. The implementation of
the management information system has been relatively recent and, as a
consequence, it is too early to see how effective it is in enabling any analysis of
trends to inform future practice development.
homeless. CAAS offers mediation in order to reduce the risk of homelessness.
Where young people and families are requesting help to resolve their
difficulties, the intervention is effective. However, attempts to engage hard to
reach homeless young people are not consistently assertive. In one case seen
by inspectors, a vulnerable young person was re-directed to housing, and
insufficient subsequent attempts were made to ensure that his needs were
being assessed and met.
and support services. In cases sampled by inspectors, HFF referrals were
targeted at the right level of support. They demonstrated good management
oversight and clear decision making about the levels of support needed, and
whether cases should be stepped up for more intensive or statutory
interventions or stepped down.
good results. In September 2014, 137 of 145 families had achieved positive
outcomes.


simpler than the previous Common Assessment Framework process. They
attend Signs of Safety (SOS) meetings and Team Around the Family (TAF)
meetings, which result in good action planning and clear decisions about who is
to do what and by when.
West Berkshire has a strong commitment to providing early intervention
through a good range of support services to families experiencing abusive
situations. Notifications of domestic abuse are showing an increasing pattern,
with 1,068 notifications from the police to childrens social care over the course
of the last ten months.
the partnership. Children facing risks associated with domestic abuse are
protected through a coordinated approach. The DART team provides a rapid
response and, where risk is heightened, cases are escalated through the CAAS
to MARAC. Key partners, including the domestic violence co-ordinator and
Independent Domestic Violence Adviser (IDVA), all attend MARAC meetings.
Information sharing across the partnership is embedded in practice, and
attendance at MARAC by key partner agencies ensures that children living in
and witnessing domestic abuse are protected. Signs of safety plans record the
actions and interventions agreed to support children.
robust. Systems for reporting children missing from roll are well-established,
and procedures are known and implemented by schools and alternative
provision as required. The database is updated daily and procedures
implemented swiftly and effectively when concerns are raised about the
absence of a child. At the time of inspection, 25 children were known to have
been missing education for a period of time. All had been located and were
attending education or awaiting allocation to a school. The team works closely
with schools and the missing children coordinator, as well as other local
authorities, especially those bordering West Berkshire, to share information
about those children who are looked after out of the authority and to track
those families, such as from the traveller community, who are more transient.
be receiving elective home education (EHE). Data are robust. At the time of
inspection, 71 children were known to be home educated. This includes
children from all key stages as well as reception age. Officers work closely with
the education welfare service and the children missing education team. Parents
are encouraged to engage positively with the local authority, and visits to
homes are made more frequently if there are concerns about the quality of
education. When children are not seen at visits, officers raise alerts
appropriately and these are closely monitored. Referrals to CAAS are made if
there are safeguarding concerns.


outstanding features. Monitoring and tracking processes are robust. All children
receive personalised and bespoke programmes to ensure that they keep on
track and are re-integrated to mainstream education when possible. Currently
six children who are educated at home have involvement with social care
services, and seven children from the traveller community are being supported
jointly with the Ethnic Minority and Travellers Achievement Service (EMTAS).


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
Decisions to look after children are not always made early enough. This contributes
to delay in achieving permanent families for some children who need them.
Children and young people experience too many changes of social worker and this
affects their ability to develop consistent and meaningful relationships with them.
Children enjoy stable foster placements and most children looked after live with
foster carers with whom they have good relationships.
At the time of the inspection, the local authority reported improvements in the
timeliness of health assessments for children looked. Children are not readily able to
access support from CAMHS when they need it. This means that the individual health
needs of some children are not responded to quickly enough.
Care plans are inconsistent in quality and not updated following significant changes
in the lives of children and young people.
Reviews of care plans are timely, but the impact of the role of the independent
reviewing officer in reducing drift or challenging delay is insufficient. The number of
children attending their reviews is low, and not all receive a written record of the
outcomes from reviews.
Education outcomes for looked after children have improved for 11-year-olds in
reading and mathematics and are better than the national average for this group.
The small cohort of 16-year-olds eligible to take GCSEs do less well, with too few
achieving 5 A*-Cs. The gap between this group and their peers is too wide.
West Berkshire performance on the adoption scorecard measures is good across all
of the timescale indicators. However, the proportion of children leave care through
adoption is small.
Later life letters and life story work for children is not completed in a timely way.
The range and availability of accommodation options for care leavers is limited, and
too many are living in unsuitable accommodation. The quality of pathway plans is too
variable, and more work is necessary to ensure that all care leavers are aware of
their medical histories and their entitlements.


are at risk of becoming looked after, providing coping techniques and building
on families own strengths through the use of outcome stars. This service
currently provides support to 27 children and their families. The use of family
group conferences (FGC) is increasing, with 34 held in 201213 and 72 in
children to remain in their families. However, in a minority of cases, the family
could have been brought together in this way at an earlier stage. For these
children, opportunities to improve their outcomes and their family lives had
been missed.
demonstrate a clear rationale for each decision. Inspectors considered recently
looked after childrens files and found that it was appropriate for all of these
children to be in care. However, more effective assessment and intervention
with some of these families is likely to have resulted in an earlier decision for
them to come into care.
under section 20 of the Children Act 1989, where parents have requested that
the local authority provides care for their children. This figure has risen steadily
over recent years and is now much higher than their comparators average,
which is 32%, and the England average of 28%. There is a link between the
high proportion of these arrangements, weaknesses in care planning and delays
in securing permanence for children. In some cases, legal proceedings should
have been instigated earlier to support the achievement of a care plan which
met the childs needs. A strong contributing factor is high staff turnover, leading
to frequent changes in allocated social workers. This has led to a loss of
momentum in care planning for too many children.
for permanence has not consistently been prioritised. Scrutiny by IROs has not
effectively challenged these practice deficits for individual children or across the
looked after childrens service as a whole. Practice that is more recent is
beginning to demonstrate timely use of pre-proceedings agreements under the
Public Law Outline (PLO), and this has been supported by the introduction of a
regular legal tracking meeting and tracking spreadsheet. This tracking tool,
which includes all children who are subject to proceedings and pre-proceedings,
has highlighted considerable drift and delay in a significant number of cases. In
February 2015, 35 cases were subject to pre-proceedings (PLO), and in 18 of
these the local authority had already decided that a section 31 (interim care
order) application was necessary, but there had been delay in social workers
completing the necessary paperwork to the court.
becoming looked after, but do not routinely include an analysis of the child's
needs or the views of parents. Care plans are not always updated following
significant events, for example a placement move.


a clear assessment and analysis of risk. In cases seen by inspectors,
appropriate support and monitoring to prevent re-admission to care support
were in place. However, eight (26.6%) out of 30 young people who went home
under a care plan in the last year have returned to the care of the local
authority.
Plans for children to achieve permanence are not given sufficient consideration
at their second review. IROs do routinely meet with children and young people
before their review. However, 12 young people spoken to by inspectors said
that this was a cursory meeting with limited purpose. Young people are
encouraged to chair their own review, and 14 have done so in the last year.
This helps them to feel more engaged in planning and decision making about
their lives. Attendance of looked after children at their review is low at 51%.
While all children share their feelings and wishes at their review, only 70% of
looked after young people received a written record of the outcome of their
review in good time. This is particularly important for those children and young
people who were not present and were unable to hear what was discussed and
decided about them.
safe and meaningful contact with family members. However, foster carers and
young people spoken to by inspectors said the frequent changes of social
workers contribute to a lack of consistent oversight and planning to facilitate
contact. This is creating anxiety and disruption for some children.
moves, which means they are able to settle and develop attachments with their
carers. Short-term stability of placements is strong, with just 6% of children
experiencing three moves or more in a 12-month period in 201314. West
Berkshire ranked first nationally for the three-year average of this measure.
Long term placement stability is also good, at 73%, compared with the national
average at 67%.
cannot be met in a family environment. Currently 82% live in foster families.
The number of looked after children placed within 20 miles of their home is low
at 58% and is below the national average of 77%. In the majority of cases
where children live some distance from their home, their welfare is well
monitored and access to education and health services is timely. Children are
matched with suitable carers. Children and young people spoken to by
inspectors say they feel safe in their placements, are encouraged to live healthy
lifestyles and to participate in a range of social and recreational activities.
(LAs own data) and seven new households recruited since April 2014. Foster
carer files demonstrate regular and purposeful supervision with carers. Issues


relating to individual children are explored well. Foster carers receive an annual
review and their individual training records are comprehensive and up-to-date.
Carers receive intensive and creative support to care for challenging children.
This contributes to the stability of placements. Assessment processes and panel
arrangements to approve foster carers are robust and the quality of foster carer
assessments is good.
to attend. However, only 37% (at 31 March 2014) of carers meet DfE Training,
Support and Development Standards. The Family Placement Team is reinforcing
this as a requirement of approval but the impact of this work is limited.
after children. This is because some care plans are generic, combining plans for
brothers and sisters in one document. In some cases sampled by inspectors,
specific information was copied from one childs file to the next. This means
that individual childrens records are not focused solely on them. There is a
danger of the specific and particular needs of some children being lost within
these records. Life story work is not begun early enough nor given sufficient
priority. The quality of this work is poor in the majority of cases. This means
that children and their carers do not have important information to help them
understand their past.
inspectors were timely, comprehensive and supported by a clear rationale for
decisions made. At the time of the inspection, 13 children were living with
family and friends foster carers. In the majority of cases, respite care
arrangements are appropriate, well planned, and meet the needs of the child.
Special Guardianship Order (SGO) arrangements are effective, with clear
assessments and creative support packages. During 201314, ten children
became subject to an SGO.
care are mostly robust. Young people who do go missing routinely receive a
timely return interview, where the reasons for them going missing and what
they did while they were away are explored well. Information from this process
is used to prevent future missing episodes. Seventeen looked after children
have gone missing from care in the last year. At the time of the inspection
there were no missing looked after children. There is a small number of looked
after children identified as being at risk of child sexual exploitation. Whilst these
young people are identified well in the majority of cases, the child sexual
exploitation screening tool is not consistently used to identify and understand
the level and nature of risk.
has been used by 42 looked after children over the last six months and 16
children and young people have been supported by an independent visitor.
Children and young people spoken to as part of the inspection did not know


how to make a complaint, but felt they had someone they could raise concerns
with. However, inspectors saw timely responses to complaints from young
people and evidence of direct contact between the head of service and looked
after children in order to explore the issues and apologise where appropriate.
improved, from a low base of 68% in 201314 to 81% reported to inspectors
by the local authority during the inspection. Take-up of dental assessments
remains poor at 69%. While looked after children do not routinely receive a
prioritised service from the child and adolescent mental health service
(CAMHS), an initial assessment of their needs is prioritised. However, there are
significant waiting times for CAMHS. In some cases, the local authority
purchases therapeutic help such as play therapy for children, so that they do
not have to wait for a CAMHS service. CAMHS is currently working with 15
looked after young people and primary mental health workers are working with
an additional four young people.
contributed to the revision of The Pledge. Children and young people regularly
attend the corporate parenting panel and share the issues that are important to
them. However, none of the children or young people spoken to as part of the
inspection knew about R:vue.
mathematics for children aged 11. The gap between this group and their peers
is closing. However, progress between 11 years and 16 years is below expected
levels, and for young people aged 16 years the percentage achieving five good
GCSEs including English and mathematics is below national results for looked
after pupils. The cohort is very small and a disproportionately high percentage
of pupils have special educational needs. Of the nine pupils who sat public
examinations, all achieved at or above their expected levels. Work to narrow
the achievement gap is prioritised by the Virtual Head Teacher and this is
reflected well in the Personal Education Plans (PEPs) and in the management of
the pupil premium funding.
four (2014) is high, and those PEPs reviewed were of a consistently good or
very good standard. The virtual head teacher monitors the use of pupil
premium plus funding to ensure that it is used to improve the educational
achievement and attainment of looked after children.
good or better schools. Attendance for looked after children is good for the
large majority of children and is well monitored both within West Berkshire and
elsewhere. In 2012/13, 76% attended for at least 95% of the time. There have
been no permanent exclusions of looked after children since the academic year
exclusions from West Berkshire schools involving children who were looked


after at the time of exclusion. This is a rise of two exclusions from the previous
academic year (2012/13). Five looked after children had alternative education
programmes or were on reduced timetables. The education of these children is
closely and effectively monitored by the virtual head and Looked after Children
Education Service (LACES) consultants. The Alternative Curriculum Service has
very recently received an Ofsted inspection and was judged to be good.
the ethnic minority and travellers achievement service (EMTAS) to support
unaccompanied asylum seeking children and those from Gypsy Roma
communities in schools and further education settings.
Children and young peoples successes are formally celebrated at an annual
event for all looked after children hosted by the Corporate Parenting Board.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
shows that the three-year average time between a child entering care and
moving in with its adoptive family is 506 days. This performance compares very
favourably with the national threshold of 547 days. Despite this positive
performance indicator, some cases sampled by inspectors showed delay in the
progression of childrens plans for adoption.
been adopted. The local authoritys own more recent data show that of the 75
children and young people who left care in West Berkshire in the 12 months
prior to this inspection, 7% did so through adoption, which is a slight fall from
the previous three-year period. This performance is also well below the 2013
period 201113. The local authoritys own data show that six children were
adopted in 201314 and a further seven were matched with adopters. West
Berkshire has successfully increased its use of Special Guardianship Orders by
identify a match once court authority has been given, is 108 days in West
Berkshire. This compares very favourably with the national threshold of 152
days and the England average of 217 days. However, more recent data
provided by the local authority shows that this has increased to 149 days. In
cases seen by inspectors, family finding had not always started quickly enough
nor been pursued with enough vigour. Two of three adopters spoken to by
inspectors who had children placed with them during the last 12 months said


that they had experienced frustration and distress because of avoidable delay in
progress made in the adoption process.
with their adoptive family, including those placed but without an adoption
order, took less than 18 months for 61% of adopted children in 201114. This
is better than the national average of 51%.
arrangements, which is a collaborative, shared practice between four local
authorities. The service provides recruitment, preparation, training, assessment
and supervision of adopters. Whilst this is a relatively new service (January
family finding. This means that children who have been waiting are now
matched to prospective adopters. This includes a brother and sister group and
an older child with high level needs. Adopt Berkshire is working closely with a
local social enterprise company run by adopters. This has a target to recruit 40
new adoptive families across Berkshire in the next 12 months, 20 of whom will
be for older children. This pilot is a positive feature but it is too early to
measure any impact or positive outcomes for children.
who are waiting to be matched with adopters and seven adopters who have
been approved. In the past six months the authority has received 20 adoption
applications, of which ten have progressed to stage two with dates booked for
panel hearings. Five of the applicants have completed stage one in a timely way
and the remainder are on hold awaiting further health assessments or
references. The average time between prospective adopters making an
application to adopt and approval is 47.8 weeks. In the 12 months preceding
this inspection 11 new adopters were approved.
groups. Adopters are satisfied with the preparation and assessment process,
but those spoken to by inspectors felt less prepared and supported during the
period of waiting for matching to be approved, which some found particularly
difficult.
the needs of children and clearly explained the goals for children in relation to
securing permanency. Inspectors saw examples of sensitive matching, such as
a child who uses a hearing aid matched with a family where one of the parents
wore a hearing aid, and a child with speech and communication difficulties
matched with an experienced special needs teacher. There have been no
adoption breakdowns in the past three years.
process. Eight foster to adopt families are available across Berkshire. This


provides children with continuity of care. Inspectors saw a positive example of
a young baby in a fostering to adopt placement during the inspection.
Social workers provide detailed, clear information about children, which enables
the panel to make good decisions for them. The adoption panel is shared with
the other authorities in the Adopt Berkshire partnership and meets twice a
month, which means there is no delay putting cases before panel. The Agency
Decision Maker, while new in post, is an experienced head of service who
knows the role and responsibilities involved. Records sampled by inspectors
demonstrated effective scrutiny of matching reports to endorse decisions to
match children with their adoptive family.
had sufficient priority, which means that children do not have details of their
case history and details of their birth family history. Adopters told inspectors
they were unhappy that this important work had not been available to their
children when required.
All resulted in appropriate support packages or signposting to relevant services.
A range of services is on offer to families, including bespoke support packages.
There are currently six active post-adoption support packages. The local
authority is funding 19 adoption allowances. The LACE service supports
adopted children and their families where appropriate. Two families are being
helped pre-adoption order to strengthen the placement and encourage
attachment behaviour. In addition, the team is providing post-order support to
three families who have secured SGOs, and it funds SGO allowances in respect
of 34 individual children.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement

leaving care team supports them. Young people spoken to by inspectors were
resilient and ambitious, and were positive about their relationships with their
personal advisors (PAs) and their social workers. This is evident through the
persistent efforts made by personal advisors to maintain contact with young
people who do not wish to engage.
social workers. West Berkshire is in touch with the vast majority (54 out of 58)
of its care leavers. Despite persistent efforts made, one young person does not
wish to engage with the service, and three young people are unaccompanied


asylum seekers (over 18 years) who have had their appeals rights exhausted
and despite the efforts of staff, have been unable to be located.
the age of 18. A total of nine young people who were in foster care turned 18
in 201314. Four of these remained in their foster placement beyond their 18th
birthday. At 44%, this is lower than the national average of 52%. One young
person (aged 1921) also remained with foster carers during the year. The
three-year average (201214) for the proportion of looked after children aged
which is broadly in line with the national 3 year average of 67%.
authority does not rule out the use of bed and breakfast accommodation as an
emergency short-term measure, but has not used it in the last 12 months. A
accommodation while an assessment is undertaken. Of seven care leavers
spoken to by inspectors, three had been unhappy at times with their
accommodation. The local authority had taken appropriate action to address
these concerns and two young people were being moved to new placements
imminently.
housing is not effective, and there is no quota of tenancies available to care
leavers. A young persons housing panel is now in place but has only a limited
range of options open for use.
information about young peoples entitlements. Young people spoken to did not
appear aware of their entitlements, though they knew that they could contact
their worker if they wished to complain and said staff are open to challenge.
Health needs are not sufficiently recorded, and young people are not involved
enough in drawing up their plans. There is often delay in updating assessments
and plans when young people transfer into the Leaving Care team at aged 16.
This means that opportunities are lost to recognise their achievements and to
make timely plans.
Team where young people are in contact with the criminal justice system. Two
young people over the age of 18 and open to the Leaving Care Team are
currently in custody. Risks associated with drug or alcohol misuse and going
missing are well managed and reduced.
person having received this important information. Not all care leavers were


aware of their entitlement to their health information. Young people and
workers also report difficulty in accessing mental health services.
appropriate. There is sensitive and purposeful work to help young people
maximise their potential. Personal advisors recognise and respond to the
importance of diversity factors. Translation services are readily available for
young people who need them. Unaccompanied asylum seekers are supported
to join English language classes and to connect with appropriate cultural
groups. Young people spoke of being well prepared for independence, and
were positive about the independent living course. Care leavers who are
parents are well supported by the Family Nurse Partnership and, where
appropriate, the poppy midwife service.
educational needs. There is good collaboration between LACES, the Leaving
Care team, schools and colleges to plan and support transition for young people
pre- and post-16 who are preparing to leave care. PEP meetings have been
introduced for 1618 year-old care leavers and unaccompanied asylum seekers
aged 1621. Work to embed the PEP into pathway plans to support all post-16
care leavers in education and training, is in progress.
academic year. They receive appropriate study and financial support to achieve
positive outcomes. Numbers are small and have dropped over time from 11 in
education through the student grant scheme, the 1619 student bursary
scheme and other funding sources.
were not in education, employment or training (NEET). Three of this cohort are
aged between 16-18 years and are being closely supported by the LACEs team
and the Connexions intensive support service. Six are parents or are pregnant
and three are UASC with appeal rights exhausted status. The remaining seven
are receiving careers advice and guidance from an independent provider but it
is not clear what this entails. A range of suitable training provision and further
education options in the county is available, but data do not currently show
where care leavers are employed or engaged in training or whether they are in
provision that is appropriate for their level of ability and likely to help them
achieve independence. There is only one West Berkshire Council-sponsored
apprenticeship placement, which is ring-fenced for care leavers, but this is
unfilled.
personal advisors, who understand their needs and are committed to
supporting them. There is a celebration of achievement event held each year,
attended by senior council leaders. However, the voice of young people in
planning services is weak.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
West Berkshires early help services are strong, with effective strategic and
operational partnerships. Lines of communication between political, strategic and
operational leaders work well. This contributes to a clear corporate understanding
about the weaknesses in the effectiveness of support for those children who are
most vulnerable to harm. Strengthening services for vulnerable children is a key
priority and appropriate action is being taken to address weaknesses.
The key social work teams have experienced high vacancy and agency staff rates.
This has had a significant impact on the consistency and quality of practice. In
response to this staffing crisis, the local authority has invested in an ambitious and
creative recruitment and retention strategy and has restructured the front door of
childrens social care. This has begun to make a difference.
Over the past six months, actions to address poor performance have been
sharpened. Operational, strategic and political leaders are aware of practice
weaknesses and are committed to improvement. The cycle of improvement has also
recently been strengthened through collating and tracking learning and actions from
a variety of sources. This is leading to practice improvements in some key areas,
although there is still much work to be done.
Staff supervision is regular but task-focused, and does not pay enough attention to
the analysis of childrens experiences or the next steps social workers should take.
Management oversight at all levels is not consistently driving practice improvements.
A good range of management information and data is available and is increasingly
relied on by managers to inform them about performance. Not all managers have
used this consistently or effectively, and this has hindered the improvement journey.
Some strategic documents are strong and evidence clear partnerships and plans. In
key areas the local authority has thought creatively about how it can respond to local
need in a way that achieves both quality and good value for money, for example the
Adopt Berkshire collaboration and tripartite training arrangement. However, other
key documents, such as the looked after children strategy, do not clearly reflect the
local authoritys thinking about current and future need. This is likely to reduce their
ability to plan effectively for the future.
The Principal Social Worker has a highly valued and increasingly effective role in
improving the experiences of children, young people and families.


particularly over the past 12 months. Staff turnover is high at 29%, and within
childrens social care, 50% of social workers and managers in the core social
work teams are agency staff. The local authority has responded appropriately
to this challenge by investing in an ambitious and creative recruitment and
retention strategy, implemented in September 2014. A key component of this
strategy is the creation of a social work academy, a positive development that
is enabling newly qualified social workers to spend six months in a protected
learning environment before moving into one of the core social work teams. To
date, four social workers and a team manager have been appointed. This
significant financial investment demonstrates that leaders and politicians have
understood the impact of their recruitment difficulties on frontline services and
have taken decisive action to address these problems.
with a sharper focus on poor performance, is beginning to have an impact with
five permanent social work appointments recently being made. Start dates are
imminent in some cases. However, this is yet to make a tangible difference to
the experiences of children, young people and families.
workers are positive about working for West Berkshire. They describe an
environment where managers are visible, supportive and enabling, and social
workers value the direct involvement and interest of the DCS. Inspectors met a
number of social workers and managers who have remained committed to West
Berkshire through this difficult period, and who demonstrate warmth and
genuine care for the children they are helping.
local authorities, is comprehensive. The local authority has continued to
prioritise the training and development of permanent and agency staff
throughout this extended period of turbulence. Social workers caseloads are on
average 20 children. Managers use a caseload-weighting scheme to gain a clear
view about the volume and complexity of work allocated to frontline staff, and
this is identifying that the caseloads of some social workers, including NQSWs,
are too high. Staff supervision files reflect that this issue is regularly considered
and addressed. Sickness rates are relatively low.
instrumental in highlighting practice deficits and strengths, as well as raising
standards in key areas such as court work. Direct links to senior managers are
ensuring a better understanding of what is happening on the frontline.
practice more robustly, helped by clearer information about performance and
driven by a sharper focus on the ability of social workers and managers to
deliver a safe and effective service.


political leaders, such as monthly briefings between the Chief Executive, Lead
Member, DCS and Head of Service. The Lead Member and the Chief Executive
have a clear understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of childrens
services, and this enables the DCS to seek the support of political leaders when
required. These lines of communication have facilitated the sharing of concerns
about the delivery of frontline social work services, and this is supporting the
change process. The DCS is actively involved in the LSCB and there are regular
meetings between the Chief Executive, LSCB Chair and DCS. Although the role
of overview and scrutiny has demonstrated some appropriate challenge when
considering matters relating to children, a specific focus on childrens services
would further strengthen the scrutiny provided.
managers, although the records of these discussions lack attention to personal
and professional development. Regular case supervision is evident, but it is
task-focused with little reflection or analysis, for example about childrens need
for permanence and how this will be achieved. A key feature of cases seen by
inspectors where children have waited too long to be assessed, helped or to
have their permanence secured, is an absence of management oversight and
grip. Although inspectors saw many examples where operational managers had
identified poor practice or delay, actions were not followed up rigorously or
consistently to ensure that the required changes were made.
auditing, dip sampling and direct observation of practice, with themes and
issues brought together in the quality assurance board, chaired by the DCS. A
well-established audit cycle has accurately identified similar strengths and
inadequacies in practice as those highlighted during this inspection. The ability
of managers to address the practice issues identified is hampered by the churn
in social work staff, and the improvement journey has been described as
swimming against the tide, with some re-audited cases continuing to be
inadequate. Appropriate steps are being taken to address poor performance,
and tracking tools and processes are being used to identify drift and delay.
However, the overall response to practice deficits highlighted through audit
activity lacks drive and rigour. This means that opportunities to improve
childrens experiences and outcomes have been missed. In the majority (80%)
of cases, the findings from audits undertaken by the local authority for this
inspection concurred with those of inspectors. However, some audits were
overly positive and lacked sufficient detail, challenge and analysis of the impact
of practice on childrens outcomes.
managers and strategic leaders within childrens social care. This has been a
particular issue in the CAAS, where managers did not use live data relating to
key areas of practice and performance until October 2014. Staff and managers
in other social work teams report that they, too, have only recently begun to
use data to monitor important activity such as social work visits. Since the


introduction of the Data Zone in April 2014, the quality of management
information available to staff and managers at all levels has steadily improved.
Where this is being used well, it is enabling managers to focus more keenly on
poor performance. The usefulness of this information would be strengthened by
the inclusion of narrative and comparative data.
caseloads (74 to 92 children), which include both looked after children and
children subject to child protection. This service is an important component of
the quality assurance process, and the IRO service is not effectively fulfilling its
function to identify and escalate practice issues relating to individual children.
As a result, wider learning opportunities have been lost. The IRO service has
introduced a process for formally recording issues that have been escalated,
along with the outcome and learning. However, this is a very recent
development and there is limited evidence yet that it is making a difference to
individual children or improving wider practice.
evidence of the direct involvement of senior managers and sensitive personal
contact with young people. However, the cycle of learning from complaints and
representations is significantly underdeveloped, and there is no formal record
where practice improvements and changes can be recorded and tracked.
children in West Berkshire. Looked after children attend the Board and share
what is important to them. The Board has secured leisure passes, work
experience and has heard first-hand about the worries that looked after
children have about the number of changes of social worker they experience.
The Board receives appropriate quantitative and qualitative performance
information about looked after children, and this is used to challenge
performance. Current priorities of the Board are improving the timeliness of
health and dental assessments as well as securing consistent social workers for
looked after children. There is limited evidence that the engagement of children
and young people with the Board has led to tangible changes, and the Board
has not been proactive in championing access to better housing for care
leavers, or the need for looked after children and care leavers to have swifter
access to CAMHS.
looked after children in family placements is high. The importance of ensuring
that there are sufficient local placements for children with more complex needs
is recognised, and a retained foster carer scheme has been launched,
championed by the Lead Member for childrens services. Although recruitment
has begun, the local authority has yet to appoint any foster carers to the
scheme.
thinking while inspectors were on site. Although it demonstrates an


understanding of how the local authority plans to respond to changes in
demand and capacity, this thinking is not clearly articulated by managers. For
example, there is no clear plan to reduce the proportion of looked after children
who live more than 20 miles from West Berkshire.
educational achievement of looked after children. Strategic and political leaders
share the ambition and passion of the virtual head teacher and the LACES
service. The achievements of looked after children and care leavers are
recognised by an annual awards ceremony. However, the Chief Executive has
not used the opportunities available to him to have direct contact with looked
after children so that he can hear first-hand the issues that they are most
worried about, and the achievements they are most proud of. The local
authority has not been sufficiently proactive in securing apprenticeships nor a
sufficient range of suitable accommodation for its care leavers.
strong strategic documents, for example the West Berkshire Domestic Abuse
Strategy and Strategic Intent 20152016. However, it has been slow to
underpin other work with clear strategic plans. The child sexual exploitation
strategy is more of a helpful working guide for practitioners than a strategy,
and this means that although partnerships are working well in this area there is
no written multi-agency arrangement to plan and develop this important work
for the future. The looked after children strategy 201415 is not sufficiently
detailed. It does not effectively identify some key issues, such as the high
number who are looked after under Section 20 of the Children Act 1989.
Response Team, Help for Families and the Family Resource Service all evidence
effective partnership arrangements, child and family centred practice and
improving outcomes for those families who receive help at this level. Strategic
and political leaders and their partners have recognised that early help services
are crucial in preventing difficulties within families from escalating, and in
supporting families who no longer need the help of childrens social care. The
early help offer is supported by strong commissioning arrangements and a
shared vision. This work is underpinned by a thresholds document that is well
understood, and this is helping practitioners to make decisions about the level
of need within families, and where help and support should be sought from.
This is in direct contrast to the services received by children who have complex
needs and require statutory or specialist services from childrens social care.
Ongoing assessment, planning and management oversight of work with
children in need and those subject to child protection plans is inconsistent and
not sufficiently robust across all of the core social work teams. This has led to
drift and delay for some children and not all of their needs being consistently
assessed or met. Management action to address these shortfalls has not yet
been sufficiently effective.


advocacy and family group conferencing meeting demand and contributing to
improved outcomes for children. The local authority also purchases creative
bespoke packages for individual children and families. However, there is no
overarching commissioning strategy for childrens services, which means that
the local authoritys thinking about future need is not informed by a plan based
on emerging or predicted need.
years. One of these resulted in the LSCB commissioning a serious case review,
Child G, which was published in May 2014. The remaining two incidents have
been appropriately considered by the LSCB case review sub-group where
decisions were made not to undertake serious case reviews. The local authority
was in the process of submitting two further two serious incident notifications
to Ofsted during this inspection.
Strategic Needs Analysis (JSNA), for example highlighting the need for timely
health assessments for looked after children. The key priorities of the health
and wellbeing strategy include promoting the emotional wellbeing of children
and improving the health and educational outcomes of looked after children,
but there is little evidence that safeguarding is a key focus for the Health and
Wellbeing Board (HWB). The Lead Member for childrens services, DCS, Chair of
the LSCB and Chief Executive are engaged in the West Berkshire HWB, where
the health and educational outcomes of looked after children are one of its hot
focuses. Berkshire East & Berkshire West Clinical Commissioning Groups are
taking appropriate steps to address the significant capacity issues within
CAMHS, and to provide more creative emotional and mental health support to
children and young people.
both childrens and adults services) through self-assessment and peer review has
led to the appointment of an additional service unit head, there has been no
externally commissioned test of assurance. This means the local authority
cannot be sure that the DCS has sufficient capacity to effectively lead and
manage the range of services for which she has responsibility has not been
tested beyond that required by the statutory guidance.
Judiciary and Cafcass are positive about social work reports and the
improvement of the quality of evidence, but have also highlighted delays within
pre-proceedings work.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.

Summary of findings
The LSCB is requires improvement because:
Scrutiny, Awareness and Challenge
 The LSCBs self-evaluation in 2014 recognised a number of shortfalls and it has
taken action to address them. A new, highly experienced chair has quickly
brought a culture of challenge, openness and transparency to the LSCB. While
there are promising signs of early improvement in the Boards scrutiny and
challenge of partner agencies, it is too soon for there to have been a big impact
on its effectiveness in carrying out its objectives.
 Historically, the Board has not had sufficient sight on practice at the frontline and
has not had access to comprehensive, accurate performance data.
 Its work and scrutiny has not been sufficiently informed by the views of service
users and staff.
 The Boards 201314 annual report lacks analysis and is not sufficiently
challenging.
 Until recently, the Board lacked clear and appropriate priorities for improvement.
 The LSCB has overseen improvements in service responses for children at risk of
child sexual exploitation, but work in this area lacks a clear strategic plan.
 The Board is now becoming better sighted on the quality of frontline practice. It
has received reports from four thematic multi-agency audits, although these vary
in quality and rigour
 The Board has a well-understood published threshold framework. This is ensuring
that children and young people receive early help at the right time.

Business Costs
 The Board is under-funded when compared with LSCBs in comparable areas. Not
all member agencies contribute enough to meet the costs of the Boards
activities. This limits the Boards effectiveness to undertake the full range of
business.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Performance information
childrens social care and partner agencies, and where necessary raise
challenge to the agencies concerned.
to be sighted on partner performance.
findings are addressed through robust action planning.

Child Sexual Exploitation
from child sexual exploitation to ensure coordinated CSE planning.
Areas for improvement

Feedback from staff and service users
engagement and consultation.
quality of services in order to inform services.

Annual report
the report provides a robust and transparent analysis of current service
effectiveness.
Business Operation
effective running of the LSCB.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
function of monitoring the effectiveness of local services and providing
challenge to partners to improve services where required. The Boards own selfevaluation identified this in 2014 and it has taken appropriately urgent action to
improve its functioning. This included the appointment in August 2014 of a
new, highly experienced independent Chair, who commenced her duties in


October 2014. These changes have generated a step change in the operation of
the Board, which now has a much clearer and more appropriate set of
priorities, focused on those areas where services are most in need of
improvement.
and this is starting to take effect. Partners report that her leadership is enabling
the Board to provide robust scrutiny of frontline work. The Section 11 Panel has
just completed its three-year cycle of work, with agencies section 11 audits
showing increased rigour. It has also challenged and overcome some resistance
to agencies undertaking these audits.
proportionate to the work of the Board, which is underfunded when compared
with statistical neighbours. The Board is appropriately staffed, though the Board
Manager is new in post.
and is not supported by appropriate performance management information. It
does not identify weaknesses in practice nor does it sufficiently challenge
partners to improve. The improvements undertaken by the Board since this
report position it better to produce a much stronger annual report for 201415.
The Board has published a new Business Plan, which is clear and sets out
appropriate priorities.
the Board regularly attends the Health and Wellbeing Board, where the Joint
Strategic Needs Assessment is discussed, and meets regularly with the Chief
Executive and the DCS. These relationships are open and positive, with the
Chair able and encouraged to provide robust challenge. There are appropriate
links with the Safer Communities Partnership and the Safer Adults Partnership
Board. The LSCB has set in place a clear set of five priorities (early help; the
voice and journey of children and young people; child sexual exploitation and
missing children; domestic abuse and vulnerable groups; effectiveness of the
LSCB) and these are forming the drivers for change and the forward planning
agenda. The draft Business Plan for 201516 reflects this.
basis (Policy & Procedures, Child Death Overview Panel and the Section 11
Panel) or a West of Berkshire basis (Learning & Development and Case Review
sub-group). It runs its own Quality and Performance and Child Sexual
Exploitation sub-groups. The performance element has recently been brought
back in-house to strengthen its specific focus on West Berkshire. A range of
senior professionals chairs these groups across Berkshire. Two lay members are
engaged in the Boards work and bring valuable community links.
out its functions effectively. It reports regularly to the Board, and its most


recent report sets out appropriate priorities for prevention work, which were
endorsed by the Board.
and revision. The multi-agency thresholds document, reviewed in May 2014, is
clear and concise. There is evidence that this is appropriately understood by
referring agencies. Work to protect young people from CSE is developing.
Although there is no overarching strategy, a framework enables professionals to
work together supported by an information-sharing protocol and riskassessment tool. The CSE action plan contains relevant actions linked to
prevention, identification and support, and prosecution. Training is available for
professionals. E-learning on CSE has been made available but has had limited
impact, with only 57 professionals completing the programme. This shortfall is
recognised and addressed in the CSE action plan. Regular operational meetings
are held to coordinate work on missing children. The CSE sub-group is well
attended and effectively monitors partner activity. Awareness raising in schools
and the community has taken place. A co-ordinated programme of
performances and workshops using Chelseas Choice has been delivered to
local secondary schools. Return interviews of missing children are appropriately
undertaken. Thames Valley Police have undertaken several local operations to
disrupt perpetrator activity. The LSCB has undertaken a thematic audit of work
to protect children from sexual exploitation, which produced some good
learning.
staff or service users and does not include learning from audits or the impact of
training. The case review sub-group appropriately considers multi-agency
information about serious incidents that have been formally notified to Ofsted.
This process led the LSCB to commission a serious case review in one case,
Child G. The report was published in May 2014. The impact of the review
would have been strengthened by clearer findings about practice and where
this required improvement. The LSCB has followed through its
recommendations and delivered learning events for staff, which it evaluated.
and is now a priority. Annual reports on private fostering and on the Local
Authority Designated Officer service have been received and scrutinised by the
Board.
management information. This has improved recently, but performance
information does not currently include comparative data, which would assist the
Board to benchmark the performance of local services. A move to a more
comprehensive dashboard approach is strengthening its ability to recognise
issues as they emerge.
frontline practice than previously. It has received reports from four thematic


multi-agency audits (children in need, child protection plans, CSE and
safeguarding in schools) and receives the conclusions of audits undertaken
within the local authority. Overall, these audits lacked rigour, but the one on
CSE in particular is starting to help improve multi-agency practice. There is a
stronger culture of mutual challenge developing within the Board. For example,
it recently challenged partners on the completion of health assessments for
looked after children. A paper came to the Board in March 2015 reporting that
improved arrangements are being put in place and the completion rate has
risen from 68% to 81%. The provision of reports by GPs for child protection
conferences has risen to 50%, following challenge. This is evidence that
increased scrutiny is enabling the Board to exert greater influence.
coordination of services for children. She is raising the profile of childrens
safeguarding at the Health and Wellbeing Board and with the Chief Executive of
the local authority. Partners are beginning to respond to the culture of
constructive challenge, which has, for example, recently led to increased health
visitor capacity provided in childrens centres. The Risk/Concern log that the
Board now maintains ensures that it understands the wide range of
improvements needed across services for children, including the capacity and
effectiveness of childrens social care staffing and access to CAMHS.
the Berkshire West group that reports into three local Boards. All LSCB partners
support attendance at multi-agency training, which staff report to be of high
quality. The LSCB is beginning to evaluate its impact further by follow-up with
staff after learning events. An annual Safeguarding Conference in partnership
with the Safer Adults Partnership Board is held, with one planned for later this
year.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Linda Steele HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Stephanie Murray HMI
Team inspectors: Helen Cawston HMI, Emmy Tomsett HMI, Susan Myers HMI,
Andrew Wyatt SHMI, Stella Butler HMI
Quality assurance manager: Nick McMullen SHMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


