Wirral Metropolitan Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 4 July 201628 July 2016
Report published: 20 September 2016

Childrens services in Wirral are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Inadequate

Leadership, management and governance

Inadequate


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
There are widespread and serious failures in the services provided to children who
need help and protection in Wirral. Services for care leavers are inadequate, because
the local authority does not know where many of its care leavers are living or what
they are doing, and some of the most vulnerable have not received a service that
adequately recognises risk. Services for children looked after and children in need of
adoption require improvement. This demonstrates a significant deterioration in the
quality of all services that children and young people receive since Wirral was last
inspected in 2011 and 2012.
Inconsistent and sometimes poor application of thresholds by both the local authority
and partner agencies is evident at every point that children and young people come
into contact with childrens social care. This leads to drift and delay for children who
need help and protection, with insufficient recognition that action taken has failed to
reduce risk in too many cases. At the other end of the spectrum, some children who
are looked after remain subject to statutory orders for too long.
Almost all of the deficits identified in this inspection were known by senior leaders.
However, a corporate failure to recruit and retain a permanent head of service has
severely impaired the capacity of the director of childrens services and the senior
leadership team to address them. Plans to restructure services to respond better to
childrens needs were delayed for a year due to competing council priorities. While a
new structure was completed following the appointment of a permanent chief
executive 15 months ago, this has not yet resulted in the anticipated improvements.
Despite significant investment in training for frontline and middle managers and
independent reviewing officers (IROs), managers do not clearly communicate good
practice standards to social workers through managerial oversight of case records
and workers supervision files. IRO challenge, while increasingly present, is
ineffective and does not lead to positive change for children. As a result, a culture of
over-optimism often goes unchallenged.
Case recording is sometimes so poor that it is not possible to tell how decisions have
been reached or even what has happened as a result of intervention in childrens
lives. Assessments and plans are often insufficiently focused on what will make the
most difference for children and young people within a timescale that is right for
them.
While most social workers caseloads are not excessive, they are often complex. The
local authority has high levels of staff changes for a variety of reasons, including
sickness absence and staff turnover. As a result, children and young people
experience too many changes of worker, making it difficult for them to form
enduring, positive relationships with staff.
Performance management data is widely scrutinised by managers and elected


members, but is not yet leading to improvement and is not always focused on the
right things. Accuracy of data collected is sometimes compromised by absent or
faulty recording on the local authoritys electronic system. This was most prevalent in
relation to care leavers, where the local authority gave conflicting basic information
to inspectors throughout the inspection. The local authority undertakes a wide range
of quality assurance activities, including a well-established programme of internal
audit that identified many of the issues seen in this inspection. However, learning
from this activity is not used well to inform action planning, nor shared with staff
through learning and development programmes. As a result, practice has not
improved.
Childrens services undertake no quality assurance of the work of the out-of-hours
service, despite the responses to childrens needs constituting a significant proportion
of their work. This means that the local authority cannot be sure that children are
responded to appropriately at times when they are at their most vulnerable.
Strategy discussions are often delayed for a number of reasons, including in some
cases non-availability of the police. While the local authority has challenged the
police, these challenges have been ineffective. When children are subject to
allegations of abuse by professionals or in their homes, investigations are not always
compliant with statutory guidance. The local authority designated officer is
sometimes informed retrospectively, after a strategy discussion about an allegation
against a professional has taken place.
Children who live in private fostering arrangements do not receive an adequate
service that ensures that they are identified early, that the suitability of their living
arrangements is fully assessed and that help is offered, if needed.
The majority of children who are looked after benefit from stable, good-quality
placements with carers who know them well. Recent significant improvement in the
numbers of young people who leave care through special guardianship orders,
combined with improving timeliness of adoption, means that more children are
achieving permanence. However, the recruitment of adopters is not sufficiently
targeted to the needs of the children waiting, and some children and adopters still
wait too long to find a family.
Advocacy services for children, while of good quality when used, are not routinely
offered to children in need of help and protection, and the take-up by children looked
after is low. The independent visitor service does not have sufficient capacity to
provide a visitor for each young person who is waiting.
The Children in Care Council is active and influential, and is well supported by an
effective inclusion team. The contribution that children and young people make to
strategic planning is a strength.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home. It was judged to be
outstanding at its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
March 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
March 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services was acting in the post from June 2012 and was
permanently recruited in April 2013.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since June 2013 and also chairs the
adults safeguarding board in Wirral. He announced his intention to step down
following the end of his tenure shortly before the inspection was announced and
recruitment to the post is underway.

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data, where this was available.


Children living in this area
 Approximately 67,600 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Wirral. This is 21.1% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 23.8% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 17.7% (the national proportion is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 14.7% (the national proportion is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 5.0% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 No single minority ethnic group is larger than any other.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 3.4% (the national proportion is 19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 2.7% (the national proportion is 15.0%).
Child protection in this area
 At 4 July 2016, 2712 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from 2,882 at
 At 4 July 2016, 393 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 233 at 31 March 2015.
 At 4 July 2016, two children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from seven at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, six serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and two (one completed, one ongoing) serious case reviews have been
completed or are ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 4 July 2016, 705 children were being looked after by the local authority (a rate
of 104 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 675 (100 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015.
 Of this number, 113 (or 16%) live outside the local authority area
authority area


authority area
area
 one child is an unaccompanied asylum seeker.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 30 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
 no children or young people ceased to be looked after and are now living
in houses in multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Recommendations

Urgently progress plans to recruit a permanent head of service for childrens
social care to provide consistent and effective operational leadership of services
for vulnerable children.


Ensure that thresholds are consistently understood and applied by the local
authority and partner agencies, so that all children receive appropriate
responses to risk and intervention at the right level when they need it.


Ensure that all performance management information is based on accurate
data, and that managers, leaders and elected members use it effectively to
measure and inform service improvements.


Ensure that recommendations from local authority audits of social work with
children, themes from complaints and other quality assurance activities are fully
reflected in subsequent learning and development programmes, and that the
impact is demonstrated in regular management supervision of social workers.


Ensure that the underlying causes for changes of social workers are quickly and
purposefully addressed to reduce the use of temporary social workers and the
disruption that this causes for children


Provide regular supervision to social workers that demonstrates reflective
analysis of challenging and complex issues arising in their work with children
and families.


Ensure that strategy meetings are timely and include information from key
professionals to inform identification of risks to children, when assessing the
need for child protection intervention.


Improve the quality of assessments and plans to ensure that all risks to
children, young people and care leavers are identified, including their family
history and diverse needs. Ensure that plans are specific and realistic to achieve
change, and are informed by children and young peoples views, balanced
against an holistic assessment of risk.


Ensure that all case records fully and accurately reflect childrens and young
peoples experience so that there is sufficient information available to inform
decision making, including out of hours, and so that young people have a clear
account of actions taken, should they choose to access their records.

regularly quality assured and analysed, and that its performance is included in
wider performance management reporting to senior leaders and elected
members.


regular efforts are made in all cases to re-establish this contact and engage
young people in services.
assessed and visited within statutory timescales.
followed by staff to provide a consistent, timely and effective response to
allegations against professionals.
from childrens social care and housing, so that assessments identify their
vulnerabilities early and ensure that they are offered and receive appropriate
services and accommodation.
fulfil all of their responsibilities towards children in need of help and protection
and children looked after, and that, when IRO challenges to poor practice are
unsuccessful, escalation processes are used to achieve positive change for
children.
reviewed to make sure that there is no delay in planning for them.
the completion of strengths and difficulties questionnaires, in accordance with
statutory guidance, and that their emotional health needs are met through
provision of timely, effective support.
match the identified needs of children and young people, and include progress
against targets.
independent visitor have the opportunity to do so.


Summary for children and young people
 Since Ofsted last inspected Wirral, services have got worse for children and
young people. Children who need help and protection do not always get the right
levels of support to keep them safe. The local authority does not know where too
many of their care leavers are, where they are living or what they are doing. This
means that it cannot offer them the help and support that they may need.
 Families who need early help with their problems usually get it quickly, but
sometimes there are waiting lists for important services, for example to help with
parenting and domestic abuse.
 Managers do not always make sure that social workers receive the right support
and guidance to do their best work. Sometimes, they do not recognise soon
enough that the help that children are receiving is not working and that
something different needs to be done to improve childrens lives.
 Children have too many changes of social worker, and too many families and
children do not have the chance to get to know their social worker very well.
Social workers do not always know as much as they should about the lives of
children because of these changes. Sometimes, they do not listen closely enough
to what children and young people are telling them, not just by what they say but
by what they do. They do not always plan and work well with others to make
childrens lives better.
 Most children who are looked after by the local authority either live in Wirral or
nearby with carers who look after them well. This means that they are close to
the people who are important to them. They usually do well at primary school,
but not as well at secondary school.
 Children who are looked after do not get help to understand their life history
quickly enough. When children are adopted, they get good help with any
problems, which means that they settle in well.
 Young people aged 16 and 17 who are homeless do not receive a good enough
assessment of their needs to make sure that they receive the best services and
accommodation to help them.
 Many young people leaving care live in good places and many stay with their
foster families. However, some care leavers who need extra help with housing or
to stay in good health do not get as much support as they need.
 The Children in Care Council is helping to improve services for children, and
leaders and managers listen carefully to what it has to say.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Inadequate

Summary
Services to children in need of help and protection in Wirral are inadequate. Many
children experience unacceptable drift and delay at every stage of their journey,
with increasing and progressive risks to them going unrecognised. Thresholds are
not understood or consistently applied, so children often do not receive help early
enough or at the time when they need it. When children do receive help, cases are
stepped down too soon from children in need and child protection plans without
evidence of sustainable change and reduced risk, leaving children at potential risk
of harm.
Frequent changes in social workers do not support effective engagement with
children and families, who can lose confidence in the service and support available.
Childrens views are not always clearly evident in assessments and plans. In a
small number of cases, the expressed views of older children, that they are not at
risk, are given too much weight despite clear evidence to the contrary. This
includes homeless 16- and 17-year-olds with additional vulnerabilities who are not
encouraged to become looked after early enough. Nor are child protection
processes considered for some of those who refuse.
The quality of assessments and plans is too variable. Although some are good, too
many repeatedly fail to consider childrens histories to ensure that all risks to
children are identified. Plans are often based on an unrealistic optimism about
parents capacity to change or their ability to protect their children, particularly for
those children who experience domestic abuse and chronic neglect.
Strategy meetings are frequently delayed and do not always include information
from key professionals to help to inform risks to children so that appropriate action
can be taken. This does not give social workers sufficient information on risks to
children when initiating child protection enquiries.
The identification of, and response to, those children in private fostering
arrangements and the management of allegations against professionals are
inconsistent, so the local authority cannot be fully confident that children are
safeguarded quickly and effectively.
Early help for families is improving. Partner agencies support the early help
strategy and action plan with a shared understanding to ensure that families
receive appropriate early help and intervention. The local authority has identified
the improvements required to develop effective multi-agency working within the
multi-agency safeguarding hub, although changes to practice are not yet evident.
Children who are identified as being in need of urgent action receive an
appropriate immediate response to risk.


Inspection findings
identify and respond to children in need of help and protection are inadequate.
The lack of understanding of thresholds by partners and staff, linked with
insufficient scrutiny of performance within the multi-agency safeguarding hub
(MASH), leads to inconsistent responses to protect children. Children
experience drift and delay in receiving the right help at every stage of their
journey across services, and risk is not recognised soon enough.
(Recommendation)
during this inspection, in too many cases children experience unacceptable
levels of risk that is gradual and increases over time, particularly those living in
neglectful and domestic abuse situations.
recorded when contacts and referrals come into the MASH, so families are not
appropriately involved in decision making. In some cases, management
decisions and the rationale to overrule consent are not recorded. The local
authority completed a MASH diagnostic assessment in April 2016 and, while it
recognised the changes required to deliver an effective and timely multi-agency
response to protect and help children, the plan for improvement is too recent to
have had any immediate impact.
referrals to the MASH is high. In three months prior to inspection, 539 children
had two or more contacts made to the MASH who did not receive a service and
could be even higher. The local authority had not analysed patterns or themes
that contribute towards children being repeatedly referred or experiencing
multiple step up and down processes. It did not know, for example, that the
vast majority of children with five or more contacts were children placed with
Wirral by other local authorities until informed by inspectors. High levels of
repeat contacts and referrals lead to delay in childrens needs being identified
early, and ultimately delays in children being seen, and this was also evident on
many sampled cases of children who had finally begun to receive a service.
children who witness and experience domestic abuse incidents. Delays seen
ranged from three days to four weeks. Although the local authority commenced
assessment of risk swiftly on receipt of notification of these cases, the delay
between the incident and commencement of the assessment meant that
children had been left in situations of unassessed risk. This delay also has
significant negative impact on the understanding of the seriousness of the
incident for families and encourages minimisation. The use of various risk
assessment tools and ratings, particularly in the domestic abuse triage process


between police and childrens social care, does not efficiently identify levels of
risk to children. However, when children need an immediate and urgent
response, prompt decision making is effective, and communication with police
and health partners is stronger.
records show significant delays of up to four weeks following concerns being
identified for children. While immediate action is taken by the local authority to
commence assessments or enquiries to safeguard children in these cases, it is
done without the benefit of full information.
sharing from police and the health professionals based in the MASH. Some
meetings do not have information available from other key professionals,
including education, so decisions on risk and initiating section 47 enquiries are
made without a full picture of the childs life experience and, in particular, their
family history. In the six months leading up to the inspection, 48% of the 615
section 47 enquiries concluded that children were not at risk of significant
harm. Inspectors found a small number of enquiries that should have led to a
child protection conference had not, with insufficient or no action taken to
reduce risk for those children.
emergency duty service, so it cannot be confident that the response to children
who need help outside of normal working hours is always timely, effective or
safe. Capacity within the emergency duty service is limited and, while in cases
seen decisions were mostly appropriate, a small number of young people did
not receive a service that was timely or in line with statutory guidelines.
(Recommendation)
analysis of risk. The local authority has a comprehensive single assessment
policy and provides social workers with tools to analyse risk effectively. These
are not consistently used or evident in operational practice. Most assessments
lack reference to, or detailed analysis of, previous interventions and repeatedly
lack the inclusion of family history. This important deficit means that
assessments of parents capacity to change are often over-optimistic and based
on a limited understanding of the childs lived experience. Some assessments
seen do not explicitly explore the emotional impact on children of repeated
domestic abuse incidents. (Recommendation)
with some families receiving direct payments supported in children in need and
child protection teams, which is not appropriate to their needs and does not
provide the level of expertise and knowledge required to support them.
Although assessments, provision of support services and the voice of children
are stronger in the specialist children with disabilities service, planning for
education, health and care does not always follow statutory guidance. This


means that some children who have an education, health and care plan may
also have a child in need plan when it is not required. This is ineffective and
unhelpful for both families and professionals.
inconsistent. Stronger assessments recognise the impact and importance of
identity to children and young people, and are central to planning for them.
Weaker assessments lack detailed exploration and understanding of the impact
of religion and culture in families, and this does not help in identifying the right
services for children. (Recommendation)
children and families who are reluctant to engage with them. When children see
social workers, they do not always have the opportunity to see them alone.
Children are often unable to build trusting and positive relationships with social
workers, particularly in teams with frequent changes of staff. Unrecognised
disguised compliance means that too much emphasis is placed upon families
ability to improve outcomes for children, without evidence of sustainable
change.
child protection plans, from 233 to 392 at the time of the inspection. Children
do not have sufficient advocacy support to attend child protection meetings and
families do not always receive information in a timely way so that they can
prepare and contribute meaningfully to decisions. (Recommendation)
including timescales for expected change, so families have no sense of urgency
in working towards what needs to be done to improve their childs experience.
Many plans seen during inspection do not receive updates following core group
meetings and have unrealistic expectations of parents ability to protect
children, particularly those who are victims of domestic abuse. Significantly,
professionals involved in planning do not receive a copy of the child protection
plan, reducing their ability to monitor childrens welfare effectively or to be clear
about what actions they need to take. (Recommendation)
witness domestic abuse and become subject to a child protection plan are
wrongly categorised as being at risk of physical abuse rather than of emotional
harm. As a result, the overall plan is ineffective because it does not address
known risks to children. Some progress is being made, with an increase in the
percentage of children who are recognised as being at risk of emotional abuse
from 9% to 25%. However, this is not happening quickly enough for some
children, and in one conference observed by an inspector, although the
category had changed, the outline child protection plan did not refer to the risk
of emotional harm.


cases seen, the majority of these children were removed prematurely, before
risk was reduced, with no positive change sustained. In some cases, actions
remain outstanding and unmonitored. The number of children subject to repeat
child protection plans at the time of the inspection was 22%, which equates to
more than one in five children, and has not changed since the most recently
reported figures for 201415, when Wirral was above comparators and the
England average by five percentage points. This demonstrates a longstanding
failure to address delays in securing sustained safety and stability for children.
and, when challenges are made, they do not result in a swift management
response. Many children in need of help and protection experience delays in
achieving change. They are stepped down to children in need or Team around
the Family (TAF) plans inappropriately, or remain on plans with no progress in
improving their outcomes. The process for lead professionals to escalate
concerns back to social care is unclear, leading to further delays and increased
risks to children.
partnership working between childrens centre staff and locality social workers.
The number of common assessment frameworks (CAFs) completed has
improved significantly and referrals to early help are appropriate, but the
quality of many CAFs is not good enough. Too many are incomplete, lack clear
and detailed action plans, or do not always include childrens views. Central
recording of CAFs from all agencies is in the early stages, so the total number
of CAFs is not clear to the local authority or partner agencies.
well to meeting the needs of many families and young children in Wirral. They
provide a good range of relevant services to those families in need of support
that engage with the centres. Staff in childrens centres offer parents advice
and guidance about accessing education, training or employment and, when
required, direct them to other services offered by partner organisations.
checks with effective information sharing in the MASH between police and
childrens social care. A commissioned service makes good efforts to locate
young people to undertake effective return home interviews, the majority of
which are evidenced in childrens records. The information gathered from
children is not collated or used well to evaluate the reasons why they go
missing or to inform their care planning. As a result, children do not always
receive the help that they need, and the risk does not reduce.
make appropriate referrals to the multi-agency child sexual exploitation
(MACSE) meeting, which has a consistently high rate of partner attendance and


engagement. The experiences of children that are discussed at the panel
provide a clear source of intelligence. As with children missing from home,
there remain missed opportunities for maximising the benefit that this meeting
offers. Minutes do not provide specific or timely actions to improve planning for
individual children.
children who are at risk of child sexual exploitation. There is over-optimism
about the home circumstances and parental ability to protect children from
future risk. For example, in cases seen, five of six children included in the
MACSE cohort had a significant history of neglect that was not adequately
considered as part of plans to reduce their sexual exploitation.
people who are missing from education, and has appropriate, well-established
processes to find them, including effective coordination with the police and
health services. Of the 91 young people, 78 have been found and work is
continuing to locate the remainder.
the local authority has appropriate procedures to check on the welfare and
education of children. When concerns for childrens welfare are identified, they
are quickly escalated to the right agencies for appropriate further action. In the
most recent academic year, as a result of these efforts, seven children were
identified as children in need and one child was placed on a child protection
plan.
expertise and professional knowledge of the implications for children of adult
mental health, substance and alcohol misuse, and domestic abuse. This
understanding is often not evident in frontline social work practice or records.
MARAC arrangements are strong, in part due to the commitment and oversight
of the family safety unit (FSU) and its effective contribution to meetings. The
local authority has recognised a need for more appropriate childrens social care
representation at MARAC meetings, but this has not yet been achieved.
and the perpetrators of domestic abuse. However, professionals report a
reduction in support services for those families that do not meet the high
threshold for MARAC intervention and a 17% increase in referrals this year to
the FSU, placing increasing demands on resources. All services have waiting
lists even for those families that do meet the threshold, and some cases are
inappropriately closed or stepped down before support has been provided,
based on the assumption that a lack of reporting of further incidents must
mean that none have occurred.
joint response from social care and housing services before being placed in


temporary accommodation as children in need. As a result, the potential for
them to become looked after is not explored early enough. Social work
assessments undertaken for those children referred by housing services do not
often lead to young people becoming looked after, even when they have
identified additional needs or vulnerabilities. In half of the cases seen during
the inspection, young peoples needs would have been better met via section
(Recommendation)
partners. When children are living with private foster carers, the local authority
does not discharge its statutory responsibilities effectively. Despite systems for
an independent reviewing officer (IRO) to review and oversee private fostering
arrangements, quality assurance of practice with these children lacks effective
scrutiny. Children are not visited in line with requirements, and assessments
seen are unsatisfactory. They do not include an analysis of suitability of living
arrangements for children, so the local authority cannot be sure that privately
fostered children are adequately cared for. (Recommendation)
effective and investigations are sometimes delayed. This is largely due to a lack
of compliance with procedures. The designated officer does not receive reports
of concerns about professionals quickly enough and the quality of information,
when it is provided, is poor. Many referrals are made after the strategy meeting
has taken place, without the designated officer present. Communication and
feedback to the designated officer from other agencies are poor, with large
numbers of investigations remaining open for long periods while police
investigations are ongoing. (Recommendation)
seen during this inspection. Staff report positively on awareness-raising training
events and the local authority has appropriate procedures for staff to follow.
risk of radicalisation that have been effectively communicated to staff through
awareness-raising activities. As a result, agencies are appropriately alert.
During the inspection, the local authority, with partners, took swift authoritative
action to assess the risk of radicalisation within a family, and this ensured that
the children were appropriately safeguarded.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
The poor service that many children experienced before they became looked after
is mitigated by the care that they receive. Almost all children looked after live
within Wirral itself or nearby. Most benefit from good, stable placements with
carers who know them well. The vast majority of primary schoolchildren attend
good or better schools, as do most secondary age young people. Children make
good progress between early years and key stage 2. However, this declines when
they move to secondary school. Plans to support young people at key stage 4 to
achieve their full potential are not sufficiently ambitious.
Recent decisions for children to become looked after are, in the main, timely. Edge
of care arrangements, while fragmented, help some children to remain with their
families and some to return home successfully. The vast majority of children
become looked after through court proceedings. Decision making within court is
timely, reducing delays for children. However, a few older children remain in the
pre-proceedings phase of the Public Law Outline for too long.
Although the timeliness of looked after childrens reviews is good, independent
reviewing officers are not effective enough in challenging poor practice and do not
escalate their concerns soon enough to senior managers when improvements have
not been made.
The responses to children missing and who are at risk of sexual exploitation are
mostly timely and effective. Good attention is paid to childrens physical health,
with clear health plans being devised from health assessments. However, there is
inconsistency in the level and quality of emotional health support that children
receive.
Adoption performance is improving, and children and families receive appropriate
support post-adoption. Delays in completing life-story work and books mean that
adopters and children do not always have the full information that they need to
help the children to understand their history. A concerted focus on permanence
has led to high numbers of children leaving care under special guardianship orders.
While many of these children had been waiting a long time, this represents a
significant improvement in achieving permanence for children and young people.
The local authority fails to keep accurate data on care leavers. It has lost touch
with too many care leavers and has made little or no effort to contact most of
them. This is a serious failure and means that these young people are
disadvantaged, as they are not able to benefit from the advice and support of their
corporate parents. While most care leavers receive good support, some of the
most vulnerable have not received a service that adequately recognises risk.


Inspection findings
Numbers of children looked after have remained relatively stable over the last
two years. Many children who are currently looked after have experienced
historic drift and delay before coming into care, due to deficits within the child
protection system. However, very recent decision making is timelier and, in
these cases, thresholds and management decisions to look after children had
been applied appropriately in almost all cases. However, a very small minority
of children and young people had remained in situations where risks had
escalated and had waited too long before the local authority took action to look
after them.
edge of care to prevent family breakdown. Current arrangements are
fragmented, and the reduction in service provision, combined with staffing
vacancies, means that the local authoritys capacity to support children to
remain at home or, if looked after, to be safely rehabilitated home, is reduced.
Nevertheless, in the six months prior to the inspection, 11 children returned
home from care. In cases seen, despite the challenges within the edge of care
service, these children and young people were offered appropriate support,
which was helping them to remain with their families successfully. Numbers of
children who return home who then become looked after again are small. The
local authority has applied for Department for Education innovation funding to
develop an evidence-based edge of care service which, it anticipates, will
increase capacity to reduce the comparatively large number of children looked
after, although the funding had not been agreed at the time of the inspection.
the Public Law Outline (PLO), are not reviewed regularly enough. Although
letters before action are clear, this lack of review means that progress is not
formally considered and actions updated. As a result, some children spend long
periods at this stage. The local authority has recognised the need to track these
childrens experiences more closely. However, it has not yet introduced a more
effective system. At the time of the inspection, 67 children (39 families) were
subject to pre-proceedings. A very small minority of these children had not had
a review of their circumstances for over 24 weeks. Delays at the preproceedings stage mean that children and their families are unclear for too long
about what the local authoritys plan is for their future care. (Recommendation)
reduced from 30 weeks, in Q3 201516, to 27 weeks, which is very close to the
national target of 26 weeks. The Children and Family Court Advisory and
Support Service (Cafcass) and the judiciary both report that this is due, in part,
to an improvement in the quality and timeliness of assessments placed before
the court reducing the need for further assessment or use of expert witnesses.
The majority of children looked after in Wirral are under legal orders, with their


permanence plans determined through court processes. Very few children are
looked after by voluntary agreement (8%).
placed within their extended families, when it is safe to do so. At the time of
the inspection, 186 children had been matched long term with connected
carers. The numbers of children who cease to be looked after due to being
placed within their extended families is very high. In the six-month period prior
to the inspection, out of the 93 children who ceased to be looked after, 41
(44%) went under a special guardianship order. In cases seen, this had been
the plan for those children for lengthy periods, sometimes years. Nevertheless,
this represents significant progress in achieving permanence for children.
However, for a very small minority of older children, there has been delay in
approval of their permanence plans.
full care order. In cases sampled by inspectors, no children were at home
inappropriately. The local authority has identified those children who no longer
require this level of intervention and is taking steps to ensure that applications
for discharge are prioritised. However, at the time of the inspection, some
children remain subject to unnecessary statutory intervention into their lives.
over 80% of children looked after having attended just one or two schools. This
helps to contribute to consistency of education provision for children. The
majority of children attend good or outstanding schools, at primary level 92%
and at secondary level 72%. The quality of personal education plans (PEPs),
although mixed, requires improvement overall. Too many PEPs include actions
that are not specific, measurable or match the identified needs of children and
young people. Progress against targets is rarely measured. The links between
pupil premium spending and pupil progress are not clear. (Recommendation)
stage 2 is good, and 89.4% of children in early years and 81.7% of children in
key stages 1 and 2 make the expected level of progress. However, at key
stages 3 and 4, too few make the expected progress (59.2%), which is in line
with low national rates. Attendance of children looked after at primary school is
good, at 98%, though this drops to 92% at secondary level. In the most recent
reported data, the virtual school head reports that this has increased to 93%
due to action taken, which, while still not good, represents an upward
trajectory. Positively, there have been no permanent exclusions in 201516.
attend alternative provision. In 201516, of 11 such children, six attended for
reasons for such provision, PEPs do not sufficiently monitor the progress of
these children. The local authority has recently employed a seconded
headteacher with a view to improving arrangements for alternative provision.


Overall, the virtual school has not been effective enough in ensuring a
concerted focus on the needs of children looked after within schools. For
example, no training has been offered to teachers in the last 12 months to
improve the quality of PEPs, and there are no networking events for designated
teachers where issues can be raised and good practice shared.
information on changes in childrens circumstances. The quality of the care
plans is inconsistent. Many do not demonstrate a rigorous analysis and they
lack sufficient focus, detail and clarity about desired outcomes. This means that
neither involved professionals nor children and their families are always clear
that actions are being taken and that progress is being made.
(Recommendation)
conferences. They have high caseloads, split between children looked after
(60%) and child protection work (40%). On average, combined caseloads are
between 90 and 110, limiting their capacity to track and monitor cases between
reviews and to provide effective quality assurance. IROs have appropriately
raised 260 escalations on behalf of children since 1 July 2015. However, these
rarely progress beyond team manager level if improvements are not made, and
IROs reported delays in some of their concerns being addressed. The local
authority has recognised the need to strengthen the escalation policy.
(Recommendation)
June 2016, this was almost at 100%. Children are encouraged to attend and
participate in their reviews. Advocacy services for children are available through
a commissioned service. The quality of advocacy support is good, which means
that children are helped to have their concerns addressed and to take part
effectively in their looked after reviews. However, the number of children
receiving support from advocacy services is low, with only 20 children looked
after receiving this support. The independent visiting service currently supports
to do more to ensure that young people who do not have contact with families
and friends receive this valuable service quickly. (Recommendation)
children in care are aware of the complaints process. Childrens complaints are
managed well on an individual basis. All of the 35 complaints in 201516 were
resolved for children with the help of an advocate and in a timely manner. An
outcome meeting is offered to all children with the team manager of the
relevant social work team, supported by an advocate. Themes from these
meetings have not been analysed or disseminated to staff, and this is a missed
opportunity to learn from childrens experiences.
are not consistently timely, at 83.9%. Current performance in relation to initial


health assessments, at 78%, also requires improvement to ensure that all
childrens initial health needs are responded to and met at the point at which
they become looked after. More positively, all out-of-area health assessments
are quality assured by the specialist nurses for children looked after to ensure
that the health needs of children placed out of Wirral are addressed. Take-up of
dental assessments is 91%, as of June 2016, which is good.
frequency that meets their needs. However, childrens diversity needs are less
well considered, with no clear plans to identify how they will be met. This is
particularly the case when broader issues of identity, such as the emotional
impact of past life events, have lacked sufficient attention or consideration.
in a family environment. The Wirral access to resource panel (WARP) ensures
consistent decision making for children regarding placements. The vast majority
of children looked after do not experience placement moves. Short-term
stability of placements is strong; just 6.6% of children experienced three or
more moves during 201516. This is lower than most recent published data for
Long-term placement stability is also good, at 75.2%. Children are carefully
matched with suitable carers, together with their brothers and sisters where
this is appropriate and in their best interests, which means that they are able to
settle and develop attachments with their carers. Good support arrangements
contribute to the stability of placements.
good initial training and ongoing training on specific themes, including an
intensive therapeutic parenting course. Well-established groups for carers and
their families support them in their caring role. Children looked after have good
access to a range of leisure activities. Foster carers exercise delegated authority
on an individual basis, making day-to-day decisions for children in their care,
which helps to normalise childrens experiences
effective. Targets for recruiting local foster carers are consistently achieved.
More children looked after, compared with the large majority of other English
local authorities, live within the local authority boundary, with only a small
minority (7%) living more than 20 miles from their home. Plans are underway
to increase the number of foster carers who could offer placements to children
with additional needs to increase the number of children placed in Wirral still
further. When children cannot be looked after within Wirrals own resources,
initial placements are only considered from services that are judged good or
better. If judgements decline, the service is reviewed and decisions to continue
the placement are risk assessed and considered in the best interests of the
young person.


cases, risks relating to young people going missing were managed
appropriately. In the six months prior to the inspection, 227 missing episodes
were recorded that involved 44 children looked after. All children are offered a
return home interview conducted by an independent provider. Inspectors saw
examples of sustained input from these workers to encourage young people to
engage in return home interviews. When completed, the vast majority of
interviews contained significant information relating to childrens circumstances
when they had been missing, with some analysis of the level of risk that they
faced. However, in a minority of cases, the information gathered from these
interviews had not been referenced in childrens care plans. As a result,
important information is not always available to all professionals involved.
referred to the MACSE panel. Links between young people who are absent from
care and potential child sexual exploitation are appropriately considered. At the
time of the inspection, a commissioned child sexual exploitation service which is
well regarded by young people was undertaking risk-reduction work with 23
young people. This service works as far out as a 30 mile radius of Wirral, so the
small number of young people who are placed outside the borough can benefit
from the service. A multi-agency audit of all children in out-of-authority foster
or residential placements who were assessed to be at risk of child sexual
exploitation has been carried out. The audit found that the majority (80%) of
children also had a history of missing episodes and that a small number of
children had not been referred to MACSE who should have been. In cases seen,
the risk of sexual exploitation to children had reduced as a result of them
becoming looked after.
appropriate, at least within minimum timescales. However, the quality of
records of these visits is variable. In some, there is clear detail relating to the
purpose of the visit, with childrens views well recorded and information about
what work is being done. In others, there is a lack of clarity about the purpose
of the visit, with childrens voices less well evidenced. A high turnover among
social workers and managers has, for a small minority of children, resulted in
inconsistency in quality of practice, management oversight and the progression
of their care plans.
team ensures that children at risk of offending are identified early and receive a
timely, focused intervention. The needs of children at risk of or engaging in
substance misuse are met well through a commissioned service.
enough. Children have identified this themselves through a recent consultation
exercise. Strengths and difficulties questionnaires are not always timely, and
are completed by a health professional and not by a carer who knows the child
well. Each child whose score indicates a concern is referred to the child and


adolescent mental health service (CAMHS) for assessment. A lack of qualitative
and substantive data relating to the service offered means that the local
authority cannot be reassured as to the effectiveness of this provision.
(Recommendation)
the quality of service that children receive. Examples include: the recent
completion of a DVD which will be used in foster carer training and recruitment;
involvement in social work interview panels; and refreshing Wirrals promise to
young people and care leavers. It has recently formed an additional group for
older young people, in recognition that the issues that affect them can be
different. Currently, there is no group for children under 13, although their
views are captured in other ways. The Children in Care Council is well
supported by experienced, sensitive workers.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
meeting government timescales, too many children and too many adopters still
wait too long to find a family.
between entering care and moving in with an adoptive family was 640 days,
which is 153 days over the government threshold of 487. The time between
receiving court authority to place a child and deciding on a match with an
adoptive family, at 225 days, is significantly longer than the government target
of 126 days. More positively, during 201215, 43% of children waited less than
This is better than the national average of 47%.
performance in relation to the overall threshold set by the Department for
Education for the average length of time between children becoming looked
after and moving in with adopters is now broadly in line with national targets.
Wirrals performance on the national scorecard for 201316 was 431 days,
which is just over the target of 426 days. Data provided by the local authority
for 201516 shows that, of the 31 children, a small number had additional
needs which meant that securing a match took much longer for appropriate
reasons. This demonstrates tenacious commitment to achieving permanence for
those children, resulting in good outcomes for them.
performance and focus on any problems or issues affecting the timeliness and
quality of the work are overly dependent on paper-based systems and the
individual expertise of the managers concerned. While adoption managers
demonstrate an impressive understanding of the progress of individual children,


there is no easily accessible overview, either for senior managers to quality
assure the work or to assist managers to identify themes.
experience of adoption. The level of debate, questioning and decision making
from the panel is appropriate, with well-considered matching. The panel has
appropriately identified areas for improvement in relation to the quality of
reports, but this has not yet achieved consistently high standards. Issues
highlighted by the panel in its quality assurance report of October 2015 to
March 2016 were also seen at this inspection.
most require improvement. The reports are not consistently updated, reflecting
changes in the childs development and/or circumstances to ensure that all of
the childs experiences are captured. In a small number of cases, the quality of
the CPR reports resulted in panel decisions being deferred and contributed to
delays for children. The adoption team is undertaking training with the district
childcare teams to improve the quality of reports.
their brothers and sisters are of good quality. They reflect the needs of each
child, with sound analysis of their attachments to each other. Where
recommendations are made to separate children, there is a very clear rationale.
Permanency decisions seen by inspectors were made in the best interests of
each child.
reports contain good analysis of how prospective adopters experiences will
enable them to parent a child placed with them, assisting the panel to make
timely recommendations to the agency decision maker (ADM). However, a
small minority of reports are repetitive and analysis is weak.
generally good, but there have been delays in this work being completed for
some children. The local authority had recognised this as an area for
improvement prior to this inspection. As a result, it has recently appointed
additional staff to support social workers to improve the quality and timeliness
of life-story work and the completion of life-story books. The impact of this
initiative is too early to evaluate. However, letters for children in their later life
are timelier and provide clear, age-appropriate information about the childs
family, circumstances and experience in a child-centred way. The letters
sensitively outline why and how decisions were made for children and they
mitigate, to a degree, the delays in completion of life-story work.
there have been four ADMs in the last 12 months. As a result, meetings
between the adoption panel chair and the ADM have not been regular, and this


lack of consistency has hampered the local authoritys effectiveness in ensuring
that the service delivered meets the needs of children who require permanency.
diversity of the population. However, targets are not aspirational, and are
based on what has previously been achieved rather than projected future need.
While all routes of permanence are discussed, the numbers of carers willing to
consider fostering to adopt and concurrent planning are low. In the past 12
months, two fostering to adopt assessments have been completed. This limits
the opportunity to reduce the number of changes in placement that children
experience. The service is currently undertaking training and awareness raising
with staff and foster carers to increase the potential pool of carers for fostering
to adopt placements. However, it is too early to evaluate the impact of this
initiative.
register when there is no suitable match available in Wirral. On average, it
takes 188 days for referral. This is twice as long as the government-set
timescale. This means that adopters are not considered at the earliest
opportunity for children for whom they could provide a home. At the time of
the inspection, there were 21 approved adopters waiting to be matched. Eight
couples have been waiting for over 12 months. In a number of these cases,
adopters have very narrow criteria, and this is contributing to the difficulties in
matching.
At the time of the inspection, there are 30 children with a decision for adoption,
the family-finding stage. Of this cohort, there are six sets of brother and sister
groups. There was one recent disruption, and the child returned to their
previous foster carer. Although a disruption meeting had been held at the time
of the inspection, minutes had not yet been distributed and the dissemination
of learning had not yet taken place.
reversed. No analysis of the cases has been undertaken. This is a lost
opportunity for the local authority to identify themes and any implications for
practice improvement.
workers, who are available and supportive. Post-permanence support is a
significant strength. Support plans are timely and appropriately identify support
for families, including birth families. Effective use is made of the adoption
support fund to access a range of support for carers and children, including
therapeutic services and training courses. Examples seen include support in
accessing parenting courses, which has enabled carers to meet the changing
needs of the children, preventing family breakdown, and emotional resilience
therapy provided to children to support their understanding of being adopted.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is inadequate
effectively. As a result, managers and senior managers do not have a realistic
understanding of the progress of these young people, the risks that they face
and the services that they need. Managers are unable, for example, to provide
accurate information about the accommodation of care leavers or the
educational or employment activity in which they are engaged.
care leavers. In 16 of these cases, staff have made insufficient efforts to reestablish contact or have not taken any action at all. As a result, the authority
does not have any information about the welfare of these young people and is
unable to support them effectively. This includes some care leavers known to
be vulnerable prior to losing contact, such as single parents who had had
contact with the local authority regarding the welfare of their own children.
time, one of whom senior managers were unaware of until informed by
inspectors. In this case, it was not clear how the local authority had supported
them initially. In some cases, workers had failed to maintain adequate contact
with the young person and, as a result, did not understand or address the risks
that they faced. For example, some care leavers living in temporary
arrangements did not feel safe. Management oversight and monitoring of these
cases was insufficient. It failed to identify potential indicators of exploitation or
take appropriate action to ensure care leavers safety and welfare. Initial
responses by middle managers to inspectors concerns were dismissive and ill
considered.
poor quality. There is no external scrutiny or review of these plans, and
management oversight has not led to improvements. Too often, they are
updated by personal advisers and then given to care leavers without any formal
meeting or discussion. This is a missed opportunity to offer independent
challenge both to young people and the multi-agency team that surrounds
them.
timescales or not updated at appropriate intervals. In a few cases, they have
not been completed at all. Where staff have completed plans, they contain a
thorough assessment of the young persons requirements, and workers
demonstrate a detailed understanding of the young persons needs and
aspirations. However, in most cases, the action plans derived from these
assessments lack relevance, are insufficiently specific and do not have clear
timescales for completion. Care leavers themselves have mixed views about the


efficacy of these plans, with approximately half of those spoken to by
inspectors finding the process helpful in keeping them focused on their goals
and the remainder finding it of limited or no use.
those who do not meet the very high threshold for intervention by adult
services. No health services for care leavers are provided over and above those
for all young people. Care leavers do not have access to their full health history,
and this means that there are many who do not have important information
about their own health and that of their birth families. Care leavers confirm that
they do receive the other documents that they are likely to need in their
transition to adulthood, including their birth certificate, passport and national
insurance number.
entitlements, particularly in relation to financial support. Although personal
advisers provide information when they identify the need for it, care leavers do
not know independently what support is available to them. For example, one
care leaver was unaware that they could access funding for driving lessons, and
another experienced some confusion over whether they would be supported to
continue their education. Although the local authority has a website that
provides basic information in this regard, it is not specific to local care leavers.
A leaflet has also been produced, but those care leavers spoken with were
unaware of it.
make the transition to adulthood. Their personal adviser works with them to
identify the skills that they need to live independently and provides support for
such things as managing a budget. When young people live with former foster
carers or in supported accommodation, carers and support workers help them
to develop their domestic skills, such as how to cook, through one-to-one
support activities and, for those living in supported accommodation, through
workshops and structured learning activities. In the last 12 months, structured,
formal training has been offered for young people in a range of life skills.
However, because this was located at a relatively inaccessible centre, the takeup was low.
adult services is tailored to meet their diverse needs with effective, staged
handovers and joint working between children and adult services. For most, this
planning does not start until a care leaver is at least 16 years old. Transition
workers are now starting to work with some care leavers, particularly those
with high levels of disability, as early as Year 9. Transition services for children
looked after with mental health issues that do not meet this threshold or
substance misuse issues are less good. While the local authority reports
transfer on a case-by-case basis for those at risk of or already involved in
sexual exploitation, this was not demonstrated in some cases seen.


advisers who visit them frequently. They feel that these professionals are
genuinely interested in them and how well they are progressing, and almost all
report a high level of satisfaction with the support that they receive. Among
those care leavers who do engage with the local authority, there are a number
of examples of good work by social workers and personal advisers that has
gradually strengthened relationships with young people and helped vulnerable
care leavers to re-engage with services such as health education and training.
However, this is too dependent on the individual knowledge and expertise of
the workers involved.
of care leavers who participate in education, employment and training. If the
most recent data supplied can be relied upon, it shows that the proportion of
education and training has risen to 56%, and this is higher than the lastpublished national rate. The local authority has implemented a set of wellconsidered actions to support participation. It provides individual coaching from
Year 10 for young people at risk of not progressing from school to further
education, training or employment and a similar service for older care leavers
who have dropped out. It also offers an employability programme, Get real
that helps to re-engage young people in learning and work.
medium-sized enterprises to take on care leavers as apprentices, and four care
leavers have benefited from this service in the past 12 months. The local
authority itself employs few apprentices, and only a small number of care
leavers have secured such roles. A recently introduced supported employment
scheme has allowed eight care leavers to gain full-time, paid employment for
future is bright. The local authority celebrate their achievements. The local
authority has recently established a separate Children in Care Council
specifically for care leavers, with a view to strengthening this aspect of its work.
care leavers, including emergency accommodation, semi-independent flats and
houses, and supported lodgings. It has access to specialist accommodation for
vulnerable young women and young parents. As a result, 84% of young people
with whom the local authority is in touch are in suitable accommodation. No
young people are accommodated in bed and breakfast, houses in multiple
occupancy or foyers. The local authority works well with providers of
accommodation to ensure that, when there are risks of tenancy breakdown,
these are mitigated or alternative plans put in place. Currently, 16 of 57
(28.1%) 18-year-olds have taken advantage of staying put arrangements to
remain with their former foster carers.


accommodation that is suitable for their needs and are provided with
appropriate support to help them with any particular difficulties that they face.
Social workers and staff from supported accommodation schemes assess the
needs of young people and ensure that they are provided with appropriate
support for issues such as drug and alcohol misuse through referrals to external
agencies. However, there is a small number of cases where the safety or wellbeing of a young person has been compromised. Examples include threats of
violence and theft of possessions not being followed up on behalf of care
leavers.


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
Senior managers and political leaders have not provided effective, stable leadership
of services for children and young people over the past three years. The absence of
a stable, experienced head of service for childrens social care has not provided the
director of childrens services (DCS) with the capacity to improve services for
vulnerable children through a measured and continuous focus.
Service provision has deteriorated since earlier Ofsted inspections in 2011 and 2012,
particularly for children and young people requiring help and protection, and for
young people leaving care. Senior managers understand most, but not all, of the
weaknesses in the service and have formed detailed operational and strategic plans
to improve the quality of safeguarding and outcomes for children and young people,
but these had not commenced at the time of the inspection.
Performance management, quality assurance, scrutiny and oversight by managers
and politicians do not lead to timely practice improvements. This is primarily due to a
lack of engagement, analysis and ownership of performance by middle and frontline
managers. The quality of management supervision of social workers is inconsistent
and is not developing more effective social work responses to help and protect
children and young people.
The local authority has attempted, with the Local Safeguarding Children Board, to
increase partner agency understanding of thresholds for social care intervention, but
this has not reduced the number of repeat contacts and referrals, in part because
the local authority has not fully recognised or addressed the widespread application
of inappropriate thresholds within childrens services. While the DCS has challenged
the police about delays in strategy meetings due to resource issues in the police,
these challenges have been ineffective. Challenge was taken up by the chief
executive during the inspection, but this should have been escalated to him earlier
and has not yet resulted in improvements in attendance.
Strategic plans to develop joint commissioned services are at an advanced stage, but
joint commissioning across the spectrum of childrens services is not yet apparent,
indicating slow progress by the local authority and clinical commissioning group.
Cross-party political commitment to strengthening services is demonstrated through
recent substantial additional funding to recruit more social workers and to attract a
high-calibre permanent head of service.


Inspection findings
care leavers, have declined significantly since earlier Ofsted inspections. A
series of short-term interim and permanent appointments to the critical head of
service position in childrens social care over the last three years continued at
the point of the inspection. A further interim had recently commenced,
replacing a predecessor who had been in the role for six months. Two out of
three senior operational management posts, positioned below the head of
service, are also occupied by interim staff. (Recommendation)
impeded the director of childrens services (DCSs) understanding of the quality
and capability of some operational services for vulnerable children and families,
and her capacity to deliver prioritised, timely improvements. This has clouded
her line of sight of the performance of frontline services. A carefully prioritised
urgent improvement plan is being implemented by the current interim head of
service, quickly addressing improved management oversight and decision
making in the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH).
performance in their services and implementing corrective actions. There are
established and frequent arrangements for senior leaders, the lead member
and the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) chair to meet and review
service performance. There is a clear, determined intent to scrutinise
performance, illustrated through regular, formal meetings at appropriate
intervals involving the Chief Executive, strategic director, DCS, Chair of the
Wirral Safeguarding Board and the lead member for childrens services.
However, despite a common recognition within the local authority that
improvements are urgently required, recommendations for service improvement
do not subsequently result in demonstrable, widespread practice improvements.
This indicates a fragile, ineffectual link between leadership, governance and the
management of childrens services. (Recommendation)
Audit findings inform managers and leaders of serious shortcomings in social
work practice, including, for example, poor care and child protection plans,
weak compliance with child protection conference recommendations, and
delays in implementing legal advice for children when their circumstances are
not improving. A thread of weak middle and frontline management compliance
is also revealed in the failure of managers to complete the number of audits
requested, diluting the volume of evidence produced.
between the audit evaluations of middle and frontline managers and senior
management moderators in recent months, and improving compliance. This


trend is further exemplified by inspectors, who agreed with the findings of the
moderated local authority audits provided during the inspection.
reports are regularly examined by the lead member for childrens services and
at two scrutiny sub-committees. One sub-committee has undertaken wideranging reviews of the quality of social work support for children requiring
safeguarding and children looked after. The impact of recommendations is not
yet leading to timely and substantial practice improvements. Challenge was
taken up by the chief executive during the inspection, but concerns should have
been escalated to him earlier and has not yet resulted in improvements in
attendance. A clear response from a senior police officer to poor police
attendance at child protection strategy meetings, a feature that inspectors also
found in case tracking and sampling, was triggered by the chief executives
intervention during the inspection, not by the local authoritys earlier efforts,
and has not yet led to improvements in practice.
key functions, to underpin the commitment to joint commissioning between the
local authority and its partners to deliver the new strategic plan for children,
young people and families through the childrens joint commissioning group.
This will include a review of the governance arrangements between the
Childrens Trust, the Health and Well-being Board and the Local Safeguarding
Childrens Board.
reflecting many of the inspection findings, was launched shortly prior to the
inspection being announced. This further illustrates the local authoritys clear
intent to implement reforms, for example in the MASH, to hold timely and wellattended strategy meetings, but an ingrained pattern of poor middle and
frontline management engagement has yet to be determinedly overcome.
blend of experienced and more recently qualified social workers. The salary
range was regraded upwards in 2015 to match that of local authorities nearby.
Vacancy levels are relatively low, with 17 unfilled social work and four team
manager posts. Agency use is high for a number of reasons, including
vacancies, sickness and maternity cover and temporary posts, raising the
number of locum social workers employed to approximately 27% of the total
staff establishment. The majority of agency social workers are in the child
protection and child in need teams. This results in frequent changes of social
workers for children, causing disruption that impedes building trusting
relationships and progressing their plans.
with a rigorous project plan. The numbers of children allocated to social
workers are not unduly excessive in the majority of teams, but there are
significant pockets of higher workloads in some child protection and children in


need teams, and much of the work is complex. Sickness rates in childrens
social work teams are higher than elsewhere in childrens services, particularly
in child in need and child protection teams. Averages of 30, 27 or 20 days sick
leave per annum are not uncommon. The average outside of these teams is 12
days. These differences in workload and high sickness levels indicate that
management deployment of social worker resources has not been effective.
Senior managers and political leaders have recently tackled this issue, providing
significant additional financial resource through an invest to save model. Ten
permanent peripatetic social workers are being recruited to cover the majority
of unplanned vacancies, reducing the reliance on agency social workers.
(Recommendation)
in effective arrangements with local universities and neighbouring local
authorities that provide comprehensive social work learning and development
programmes based on the professional capabilities framework. Importantly,
workforce development is not solely targeted at newly qualified social workers,
but includes experienced social workers and programmes for frontline and
middle managers, and independent reviewing officers. However, this learning
has yet to assist managers to drive up standards in frontline practice. A
minority of newly qualified social workers in their first year of assessed practice
hold too many complex cases, reflecting the workload pressures in some teams.
There is limited evidence of reflective supervision in accordance with the local
authoritys supervision policy. Supervision is predominantly task focused and
does not rigorously address delays in implementing recommendations and
plans. A recent local authority audit judged the quality of supervision as
ineffective in nearly 40% of cases, and this broadly reflects the findings of
inspectors. (Recommendation)
LSCB and the Childrens Trust, a review of governance arrangements at the
time of the inspection indicates that the local authority recognises that some
strategic partnerships require refocusing. The influence of the LSCB within the
Childrens Trust, in calling it to account for the quality of multi-agency
safeguarding, is not strongly apparent and the trust has not closely examined
the boards limitations in influencing improvements in safeguarding
arrangements across partnership agencies. The inclusion of childrens data in
the Health and Well-being Board is too limited to standard public health
datasets.
attended by relevant agencies and has a substantive action plan. However,
while the board reviews a comprehensive range of outcome indicators for
children who are looked after, its impact in challenging weaker outcomes
requires strengthening. The board recognises that it would benefit from clearer
performance data on which to base prioritised actions, including improving the


quality of personal education plans, permanency planning, emotional and
mental health support services and increasing the limited number of council
apprenticeships for care leavers.
strong, consistent representation of children and young peoples feedback and
views on service provision. Inclusion of childrens views in reviewing and
planning services is highly developed in this local authority. Their impact is
demonstrated in shaping the specialist service structure implemented in June
complaints are quickly resolved at informal stages and a very small number are
escalated to formal stages. While this is positive, there is little evidence of
focused management efforts to inform subsequent service provision, including a
lack of analysis of a notably higher volume of complaints at one district office.
account of local needs. There are clear plans to evolve it further to inform
outcome-led, evidence-based joint commissioning plans for the most vulnerable
children over the next four years, although evidence of existing jointly
commissioned services is limited. A considerable range of existing single local
authority commissioned services deliver a spectrum of services which are well
monitored through an outcome-based contract framework and regular
compliance visits to providers.
direction through effective cooperation and coordination of senior leaders
across local authority partnerships and with other Merseyside local authorities.
At an operational level, work with young people affected by child sexual
exploitation requires a greater focus on the underlying causes that increase
their vulnerability.
board and the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service. Social
workers attend the training provided to improve the quality of evidence
preparation, and local authority managers contribute constructively to family
justice board meetings and court user groups.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is inadequate
Executive summary
Wirral Safeguarding Children Board (WSCB) is judged to be inadequate, as it is not
discharging all of its statutory functions. Its governance arrangements do not ensure
that it is independent of influence, as required by statutory guidance.
While the WSCB consults appropriately with the serious case review national panel,
in one case there was a delay of three months in making a recommendation. It does
not always notify Ofsted of serious incidents within the required timescales. Two
incidents notified to Ofsted during the inspection were significantly late and one did
not reflect accurately the childs involvement with the local authority. This means
that, when a child has been harmed, a full external scrutiny of incidents is delayed
and is not always based on complete information.
Statutory partners are not contributing to the financial resourcing of the board, and
this results in it being overly dependent on the finances of the local authority. The
board has not challenged partners sufficiently in some key areas of safeguarding
practice, and board members have not been influential in progressing shared
priorities and improvements within their own organisations.
WSCB has not focused sufficiently on core child protection business to determine the
effectiveness and outcomes of childrens experiences at all key points. The most
recent published annual report (201415) does not provide an analysis of patterns
and trends to form an accurate assessment of the effectiveness of safeguarding
children.
The quality of performance data received by the board is not sufficiently accurate,
and the board has neither consistently and explicitly challenged this nor recognised
where data is not correct or current.
WSCB has a regular programme of audits undertaken by the performance subcommittee. These produce some important key findings in priority areas such as
countering child sexual exploitation. The quality of the auditing requires
improvement to focus on outcomes for children, the quality of practice and its
impact, and to include the perspective of managers and practitioners.
The WSCB now oversees an effective strategy for responding to child sexual
exploitation, following initial slow progress. The supporting action plan is updated
regularly and kept under timely review. The board is creative in seeking ways to
engage children and young people, and all partners are committed to strengthening
childrens participation further.


Recommendations
ensure that the board is independent of influence, as required by statutory
guidance, and that it has the capacity and shared resourcing to meet business
needs.
and that statutory partners are held to account for influencing WSCB priorities
within their agencies.
and that there is a mechanism for effectively tracking progress and resolutions.
living in the area who were placed by other local authorities and of children
who are privately fostered are being met in Wirral.
out in statutory guidance.
safeguarding of children, and publishes an annual report with an informed
assessment of the effectiveness of child safeguarding and the performance of
local services.
children and families, form clear actions from findings, and include managers
and practitioners to develop the workforce and share learning.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
not discharging all of its statutory functions as set out in Working together to
safeguard children 2015, the Children Act 2004 and the LSCB regulations 2006.
sufficiently independent of the local authority. The executive board, which is
chaired by the director of children services, is held prior to WSCB board
meetings. The executive board receives all the progress reports and updates
from the work of the boards sub-committees and critical work such as the
action plans from serious case reviews. The executive board then makes
decisions about WSCB board business and sets the agenda for WSCB meetings.
This compromises the independence of the board, its priorities, focus and
planning. These compromising arrangements, which impact on the
independence of the board, have not been recognised through the formal
governance arrangements of WSCB, and are confirmed by the terms of
reference document for the executive board.


filtering the WSCB business agenda, means that WSCB is not always
consistently tracking progress across all work streams. For example, the
executive board reviews the work of sub-groups and decides what needs to go
to WSCB. This means that WSCB does not have a consistent overview.
Although the lack of capacity to meet volume has been recognised by the board
and the number of board meetings has recently been increased, this is not yet
having a notable impact.
partners do make a contribution, the board is significantly subsidised by the
local authority. This is, for the right intentions, to keep the board functioning
and operational, yet has the potential to compromise further the independence
of the board. Statutory partners contribute some additional funding to individual
pieces of work such as the virtual college but are not meeting and sharing the
responsibility for finances to maintain an agreed annual budget despite a
projected overspend. The financial position of the board is precarious and,
without an agreed budget, forward planning in the medium and longer term is
compromised. (Recommendation)
the end of his tenure, and recruitment to the post is underway. The board is
well attended by local agencies, although there has not been a consistent
representative for special schools. There is only one lay member, and this
reduces the benefits of having two independent perspectives.
tracking of the business plan, but has not recognised some of the compromises
of WSCBs independence. From the findings of this inspection, the chair has
neither maintained sufficient influence or challenge nor ensured the
independence of the board. (Recommendation)
on some core child protection activity to determine the effectiveness and
outcomes of childrens experiences at all key points. The last annual report
produced by the board for 201415 did not include analysis of patterns and
trends to measure fully the effectiveness of child protection. For example, there
has been no analysis of the increasing referrals during 2014, which spiked in
September to November 2014, or the significant reduction in children subject to
child protection plans in this period. More recent performance data shows a
high rate of 40% of children having a child protection plan for less than three
months. The board has not undertaken activity to understand what this means
for the understanding and application of thresholds across the partnership.
accurate to measure the effectiveness of services. The analysis of data to
understand performance is completed manually and requires improvement.
Despite recognising this, the board has not proactively challenged the quality of


performance data. Importantly, the board has not recognised when the data
that it is using is not accurate. For example, the data on referrals quoted for
referrals was not correct in being lower than that of its neighbours and national
comparisons. The referrals for Wirral were substantially higher than
comparators in 201415. This important picture was therefore not understood
by the board.
key priorities, three recently formed groups for oversight of the performance of
the multi-agency safeguarding hub and the quality of registered childrens
homes in the area, and a frontline practitioner group. There is a project group
for supporting families and enhancing futures. This is in line with the shared
priority across the partnership to improve early help for children and families
and to implement a recognised, tailored model and approach for working with
children and families in Wirral.
which the independent chair of WSCB also chairs. There is also a newly
launched website, also shared with the adult safeguarding board, which is
clear, accessible and a good resource. There is a joint strategy for domestic
abuse and, under the learning and development strategy, for joint training. A
wide range of theatre performances targeted at young people to raise
awareness of domestic abuse is a positive step in early prevention. Some
groups have achieved better attendance and consistency than others, mainly
due to changes in post holders and changes at senior level in the childrens
services. This has very recently improved.
transition planning for children with disabilities, poor attendance at training
events, and poor attendance of key partner agencies at some sub group
meetings there has been insufficient challenge in a number of key areas. These
include:


The quality and accuracy of performance data submitted to WSCB.



Maintaining oversight of young carers, children living in Wirral from other
areas and exploring the reasons why the numbers of children privately
fostered has reduced in the last year, despite activity to raise awareness.



Ensuring timely progress with action plans from learning reviews; for
example, a significant delay in ensuring planning for transition for children
with disabilities.



Ensuring that the local authority designated officer annual report is of
sufficient quality to analyse the effectiveness of safeguarding responses
for children.




Ensuring that any challenges from the board are explicitly recorded,
effectively logged and tracked for timely progress.



The slow response to tackle poor attendance at training events and the
lack of representation by childrens social care on sub-committees.



All board members actively influencing and progressing priorities within
their respective organisations and demonstrating this; for example, using
the graded care profile to assess neglect.



Ensuring a commitment from organisations to resource the multi-agency
training pool.

safeguarding. During 201516, 65 events were held with varied attendance
rates, namely poor attendance from children services and no attendance from
domestic abuse specialist services in 12 months. The board introduced a
charging policy from April 2016 for staff who registered for courses yet failed to
attend, but it is too early to evaluate what impact this has had.
services have been trained in safeguarding during the past two years and 600
have had training to counter child sexual exploitation. The core training
programme is appropriately tailored to the relevant key priorities for the board.
The events for 201617 focus on thresholds, and countering radicalisation and
female genital mutilation, in line with forward priorities. Free and ongoing
training on homophobic, bi-phobic and transphobic bullying is provided and is
very well accepted by schools.
learning or revisit the impact on practice with participants at later stages. This
is slow progress, as the strategy to implement this was launched in April 2015.
occasions in the last 12 months, training was cancelled at the last minute.
WSCB is yet to gain commitment from partner agencies to release professionals
to deliver the multi-agency training programme and to ensure sufficient
resources. (Recommendation)
child sexual exploitation in the last two business plans. Progress has
accelerated in the last nine months, following the outcomes of a safeguarding
scrutiny review which identified a number of areas for improvement. A
subsequent activity for all agencies to assess their readiness to address and
respond to child sexual exploitation is complete. The partnership-wide findings
are currently being reviewed to inform a refreshed multi-agency action plan. It
is too early to assess the impact of the plan and this is under regular review by
the board. WSCB is coordinating relevant activities to support the refresh
launch and the revised practice materials.


performances by the youth theatre on child sexual exploitation, in addition to
short films and performances, reaching 2,000 children and 400 professionals in
schools on the signs and risks relating to child sexual exploitation. These events
have had some direct impact, with some children making disclosures to
supporting professionals attending events and a noted rise in referrals from
professionals after events.
a shared and important focus across the partnership. Children and young
people have been widely consulted on the WSCB priorities and the 20/20
pledge. The new website has informative, relevant and accessible areas tailored
to children and young people. A recent appointment of a youth engagement
officer further supports the commitment to a meaningful link between WSCB
and children. The board has good links with the Children in Care Council, which
shares its views with the board, for example, on the impact of changes in social
workers.
the relevant sub-committee. There are effective arrangements for reviewing the
practice guidance, policies and procedures from the learning from activities,
case reviews and auditing activity. These are timely and are tracked effectively
until completed.
produces some important key findings in priority areas, such as countering child
sexual exploitation, which are taken forward for action. The quality of auditing
activity overall requires improvement to maintain the focus on children, families
and outcomes, and not on processes and systems. Currently, opportunities are
missed to test out key areas such as thresholds and the quality of practice in
auditing activity. Some audits identified good learning points for practice which
did not follow through into actions. Practitioners and managers are not involved
in auditing, which misses this connection with frontline practice and the
opportunity to strengthen learning. (Recommendation)
no serious case review published since 2012, although one is currently being
commissioned. Positively, the national panel has agreed with all the
recommendations that WSCB has put forward. A number of late notifications
were made to Ofsted in 2015 and action was taken to ensure that the board
understood the criteria for notifying incidents. This is not yet resolved, as
during this inspection two further incidents were notified to Ofsted which were
significantly overdue. One notification did not give an accurate picture of the
local authoritys involvement with the family, and there had been a delay of
three months in reviewing the information and making a recommendation to
the national panel. Learning from reviews is disseminated through the website,
posters, briefings, training and weekly updates. (Recommendation)


significant backlog of cases that were reported to WSCB at the end of 2015.
The panel has a new interim chair, and the work is now timely and completed
to a good standard. WSCB is fully complying with CDOP procedures and has
dedicated posts to ensure that compliance is timely. The themes and learning
identified by CDOP are delivered through Merseyside community learning
programmes, supported by guidance and posters. CDOP reviewed 115 deaths
in the last business year, of which 31 related to Wirral children. There were
modifiable factors in five of the deaths which did not raise any specific learning.
The panel has appropriate links with the case review group, and reporting
arrangements to WSCB are sound.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 6 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted
and four additional inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Shirley Bailey HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Nick Stacey HMI
Team inspectors: Julie Knight HMI, Andy Whippey HMI, Shabana Abasi, Russ Henry
HMI, Fiona Parker, Paula Thomson-Jones HMI, Julia Toller and Kath Townsley
Senior data analyst: Dr Donna Neill
Quality assurance manager: Paul Armitage


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


