Worcestershire County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 24 October 2016 to 17 November 2016
Report published: 24 January 2017

Childrens services in Worcestershire are inadequate

Inadequate

permanence

Inadequate


Requires improvement


Inadequate


Inadequate

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
There are widespread and serious failures in the services provided to children in
Worcestershire who need help and protection and children looked after. Services for
care leavers are inadequate, because young people leaving care do not consistently
receive the necessary support to make a successful transition to adulthood. Services
for children in need of adoption require improvement. Elected members and senior
leaders have not taken sufficient action to ensure the protection of vulnerable
children. This corporate failure leaves children in Worcestershire at continued risk of
significant harm.
Following a local government association peer review, the chief executive established
a safeguarding improvement board. This board has not provided sufficient focus to
tackle poor practice, and there has continued to be a lack of management oversight
of childrens services. Senior leaders were unaware of the critical issues that were
identified by inspectors during the inspection.
Inconsistent leadership and an insufficient number of staff at all levels have
contributed to a fundamental weakness in practice. The challenge to recruit goodquality, permanent social workers and managers across the service has adversely
affected the ability to drive improvements and embed good practice. In recent
months, a new senior leadership team, including the lead member, director of
childrens services (DCS), independent chair of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board (LSCB) and assistant directors for safeguarding and provider services, has
taken up post. These leaders are starting to provide the much-needed focus and
drive, and partner agencies and staff express confidence in the ambitious leadership
team.
Thresholds across the service and at every point of the childs journey are being
applied inconsistently. This is a critical area of concern. Management oversight at
every level, including that of independent reviewing officers (IROs) and child
protection chairs, lacks rigour and does not lead to practice improvement. Caseloads
of social workers, IROs, child protection chairs and personal advisers, although
decreasing, remain too large. This is a significant contributory factor to the poorquality service that some children receive.
Too many children have been left in situations of escalating risk without becoming
looked after. Many child protection strategy meetings do not involve all relevant
agencies, to allow a thorough discussion of the risks to children. As a result, children
who require protection from harm and who need urgent improvement in their lives
are left in situations of actual and escalating risk of significant harm. Children are,
however, well supported by the out-of-hours service, where assessments, return
home interviews and overall decisions are effective.
Not enough children are seen alone by their social workers. Childrens views are not
fully considered, taken into account or acted on. Too few children are supported to
participate fully in their child protection conferences.
The quality of assessments and planning for all children is a significant weakness.


Plans are not outcome focused and do not set out how the childs needs should be
met. Pre-birth assessments are undertaken too late. Permanence is not consistently
progressed for children who cannot return home. The local authority has yet to
review the arrangements for all children who are looked after under a voluntary
arrangement, to be certain that all arrangements are appropriate and necessary.
Many children, including those who have complex needs, are successfully adopted.
The tenacity of the adoption service, which identifies children early and secures
adopters, is making a positive difference to children who have a plan for adoption.
Fostering for adoption is not routinely used or considered, and not all children looked
after are supported to understand their identity through effective life-story work.
Too many care leavers are living in accommodation that is not appropriate for their
needs. Almost half of care leavers are not in employment, education or training
(NEET), and pathway planning is poor. The local authority cannot be sure that care
leavers have sufficient awareness of their rights and entitlements. At the time of the
inspection, the local authority had not signed up to the charter for care leavers. More
needs to be done to ensure that the health needs of children looked after and care
leavers are fully understood and met. Furthermore, young people need to
understand their health history as they leave care.
Pathways to early help services are unclear, and the local authority does not
understand the quality and impact of early help assessments and plans undertaken
by partner agencies. Performance data is not reliable, and learning from audits and
complaints is not effective in identifying and addressing training needs. The
corporate parenting board is yet to demonstrate an impact on improving outcomes
for children. Strategic oversight of children at risk of sexual exploitation is not
sufficiently robust. Recently, the local authority has improved its response to missing
children. This work, while positive, has not yet resulted in improved outcomes for
children at risk of exploitation. Ineffective management and operational
arrangements result in a poor service for children living in private fostering
arrangements and for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
During the inspection and following its findings, strong political support was
demonstrated for change, with a determined commitment to provide the required
additional resources. The pace of change has recently been accelerated, with the
reconfiguration of services at the family front door, children being offered return
home interviews following episodes of missing, the implementation of the
connecting families programme and the setting up of a strategic workforce board.
These changes have led to some very early improvements in the services that
children receive. However, services remain fragile, and it is too early to see any
sustained impact on outcomes for children.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates 10 childrens homes. All were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the
protection of children was in March 2012. The local authority was judged to
be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for safeguarding and
children looked after was in October 2010. The local authority was judged to
be inadequate.
Local leadership
 The DCS has been in post since June 2016.
 The DCS is also responsible for community services.
 The nominated elected member has been responsible for childrens services
since May 2016.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since April 2016.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 115,250 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Worcestershire. This is 20% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 14.5% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 12.3% (the national average is 15.2%)
 in secondary schools is 10.7% (the national average is 14.1%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 8% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are Pakistani and White other.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 8.2% (the national average is 20.1%)
 in secondary schools is 5.5% (the national average is 15.7%).


Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2016, 3,767 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction
from 3,942 at 31 March 2015.
 At 23 October 2016, 354 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is a decrease from 473 at 31 March 2016.
 At 1 October 2016, 24 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from nine at 31 March 2016.
 Since the last inspection, three serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted and three serious case reviews (SCRs) have been
completed. None was underway at the time of the inspection. The local
authority is contributing to four SCRs in other local authorities.
Children looked after in this area
 At 23 October 2016, 710 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 62 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 694 (60
per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016. Of this number:







authority area










Recommendations

Ensure that elected members and senior leaders meet their statutory
responsibilities and duties to the children of Worcestershire by improving all
childrens services.


Implement the workforce strategy as swiftly as possible to improve workforce
stability and capacity.


Ensure that childrens services staff and the wider partnership understand and
consistently apply the level of needs at every stage of the childs journey,
including in the early help pathway.


Strengthen childrens voices by ensuring that children are seen, and seen alone,
that their views are fully considered and taken into account, that they are
supported to contribute to their plans and that their wishes are acted on, when
appropriate.


Ensure that the management oversight and performance information relating to
children who are at risk or vulnerable to child sexual exploitation and missing
are accurate, and lead to improved safeguarding practice.


Complete a thorough review of all children subject to section 20
accommodation, to ensure that their arrangements are appropriate in all cases.


The local authority should assure itself that decisions made to close the cases
of the cohort of children in need that were recently reviewed are both
appropriate and in the childrens best interests.


Improve the quality of assessments and plans for all children, including
permanence plans. Ensure that children progress through robust reviews and
effective oversight.


Ensure that strategy discussions include all relevant agencies and robust
contingency arrangements, so that children are safeguarded while child
protection enquiries are undertaken.

ensure that their needs are fully understood and met.
responsibilities to unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
of carers are completed and agreed, and that children are visited within
required timescales.


of support and services available to all care leavers.
improvements and consistency in the quality of practice, including findings from
complaints and training.


Summary for children and young people
 At the time of the inspection, senior leaders and managers in Worcestershire did
not know about all the things that they needed to do to make sure that children
were safe and helped properly.
 Managers have started to make some changes, but, as there is still plenty to do,
Ofsted has judged the services to children as not being good enough, and the
services need to improve as soon as possible.
 Social workers are taking too much time to find out about what it is that children
and their families need help with. Senior managers know this and are now trying
to make sure that, in future, children, young people and families receive the right
help sooner.
 Some children and young people who need support from social workers are not
made safe or helped quickly enough. Sometimes, what should happen for
children is decided before children are able to say what they want to happen.
Managers need to make sure that they make the right decisions quickly, to keep
children and young people safe.
 When children and young people come into care, it can take too long to work out
where they should live in the future. This means that some children and young
people who should live with a new family do not become part of such a family
quickly enough.
 Children and young people looked after do not always perform as well as they
could at school. Teachers and social workers need to talk to each other more
effectively to make sure that children do as well as they can. People who work
with children and young people usually ask them how they are and listen to their
views. They also need to make sure that these views lead to things changing for
the better. Managers also need to make sure that the views of children and
young people help to improve services.
 Young people who leave care when they are old enough do not always receive
the help that they need to live on their own. Some do not have a safe place to
live, and many are not helped enough to ensure that they can go to college,
engage in training or find a job.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Inadequate

Summary
Services to children in need of help and protection in Worcestershire are inadequate.
Children wait too long for their needs and risks to be recognised. Consequently,
children who require protection from harm and need urgent improvements in their
lives are left in situations of actual and escalating risk of significant harm.
Pathways to early help services are unclear. The local authority does not have
sufficient oversight of the overall early help offer to all children.
The thresholds of need are not understood by social workers or partners. Childrens
services are receiving a continuing high volume of inappropriate referrals to the
family front door. Repeat referrals are too high. Too many children experience a
continuous cycle of assessments, and some assessments are unnecessary. Not all
assessments result in the right outcome for children.
Too many assessments lack important information, such as parental background and
childrens views. Social workers do not always consider the impact of previous
assessments or interventions. As a result, too many children are exposed to a start
again pattern of social work. A thread of weak management oversight and direction
across childrens services results in a lack of robust challenge or support to social
workers.
Chronic drift and delay are present for too many children at every level of need,
including children who need statutory assessments, child protection enquiries, initial
child protection conferences, children in need and children subject to protection
plans. This leaves children exposed to unacceptable levels of risk without the
necessary protection and with their basic needs unmet for too long.
The response to child sexual exploitation is not thorough enough. Social workers are
not always using the risk assessment tools, and children identified as being at a
higher risk of exploitation are not diligently tracked by managers and partners to
assess the effectiveness of their work. Following a recent management focus, more
children are now interviewed following missing episodes, providing more children
with the opportunity to express their views.
Social workers are not assessing the arrangements for privately fostered children
quickly enough to establish their suitability and safety.


Inspection findings
families. Consequently, the family front door is receiving a high volume of
inappropriate referrals. Leaders and managers are unable to demonstrate the
prevalence and impact of any early help provided to children through partner
agencies that are the lead professionals. This is a significant shortfall in the
local authoritys understanding of the entire range and effectiveness of early
help services. (Recommendation)
county, benefits families by tackling complex needs quickly and reducing the
need for statutory intervention. This approach, which joins early help services
up more cohesively, is being introduced incrementally across the county and is
attracting wide strategic support from partner agencies. Its broader, long-term
impact remains to be demonstrated.
services. These offer effective targeted interventions. Families report
improvements in outcomes, with very few families being re-referred at six
months after the conclusion of the work. A comprehensive performance
dashboard captures the impact of this work, including the involvement of the
Troubled families programme, which is closely aligned.
concerns by forming a new, single front door to manage all contacts and
referrals. However, the initial screening and contact officers, who are not
qualified social workers, are making the majority of decisions about contacts.
Social worker and management oversight of these important decisions about
contacts and referrals is inadequate. Inspectors identified some poor decisions,
one of which had left a child at continuing risk of serious harm. In this matter,
the local authority had to take urgent legal action to protect this child.
(Recommendation)
The intention is to clarify thresholds, and this practice is not yet embedded.
Referring agencies do not routinely use the recently reissued levels of need
guide to inform their referrals. Consent to share information from parents and
carers is rarely recorded, and written management decisions overriding
consent, when necessary, are not evident.
children. This is too great and has a negative impact on the quality of social
work practice. Community social workers, who were previously based in
schools, complete brief assessments to address the high volume of work and
workflow. This practice has resulted in confusion for social workers and
managers. Inspectors saw assessments that often did not address concerns,
lacked analysis and did not result in purposeful interventions. The local


authority has acknowledged that high numbers of children have been subject to
repeat brief assessments through this practice, and has assured inspectors that
this poor practice has ceased.
held in the multi-agency family front door. These meetings make sure that the
majority of incoming notifications and referrals receive an immediate multiagency response. However, thresholds are not always applied consistently. No
central record is made of decisions and actions. This weakens accountability
and the measurement of the impact of subsequent risk-reduction activities.
inform a thorough live discussion of the presenting risks to children who are
identified as at risk of significant harm. Actions arising from the meetings are
commonly not specific enough. The local authoritys own data shows that 25%
of children are not seen promptly during child protection enquiries. This means
that the local authority cannot assure itself that all children are safe at this
time. Enquiries take too long, and joint police and social work activity is not
always well coordinated. In some cases, the police hold evidential interviews
with children without a social workers involvement. Accounts of these
interviews are not held on childrens social work records. This means that
important evidence is not always recorded on the childs history. Thus, the
necessary protective action is not always taken. (Recommendation)
protection enquiries is inadequate. Too many initial child protection conferences
are delayed. During the period between the enquiries and the initial child
protection conference, children are left at significant risk for too long without
rigorous interim safety plans. There is also an unrealistic and disproportionate
emphasis on written agreements with family members, to protect children from
further contact with dangerous adults. These are serious shortcomings in the
frontline safeguarding service. (Recommendation)
established team manager and experienced social workers. Handovers and
information sharing with daytime social workers are prompt and well recorded.
Responses to children who go missing and child protection episodes arising
overnight or at weekends are timely, thorough and clearly documented.
attention to parental histories. This lack of attention means that the
vulnerabilities of parents and their effect on parenting capacity are poorly
understood. Extended families are mentioned in some assessments, but these
family members are not involved early enough when they might be able to
provide important information about their family members or offer them
support. Parents who are not living at the family home are not always
adequately consulted, and their involvement and impact on childrens lives are
unexplored. Pre-birth assessments are completed too late during pregnancies,


when there are known concerns and potential risks to unborn children. In some
instances, the delay is caused by late notifications. However, a sense of
urgency and timeliness is lacking when notifications are received. Key-event
chronologies are not regularly used to help social workers to develop a longterm overview of successive assessments, plans and interventions, some of
which often fail to achieve sustained changes and improvements for children.
(Recommendation)
alone and seeing them in accordance with the timescales agreed in their plans.
Subsequently, records of childrens views are limited, and case records do not
effectively capture the childs lived experience. Some social workers carry out
valuable and effective direct work with children, but this is not widespread.
of work with children on statutory plans are not always clear. Some recently
closed plans featured carefully defined objectives and well-coordinated multiagency work, achieving demonstrable improvements in parenting skills. Happier
children, enjoying time at home and school, are highlighted as positive
outcomes in these cases. However, this more positive practice was not widely
prevalent and many plans drifted for too long. Core group meetings do not
consistently develop outline child protection plans into detailed, specific plans,
and they are not systematically measuring progress against plan
recommendations. Professional relationships between team managers and child
protection conference chairs are not constructive, weakening quality assurance
and practice improvement. (Recommendation)
number of children who are on child protection plans are not analysed or
understood. (Recommendation)
protection conferences. The local authority has a very limited number of
advocates to assist children to engage fully in their meetings.
(Recommendation)
risk of exploitation, are not carefully and regularly reviewed at multi-agency
meetings, to evaluate the impact of risk-reduction work. Management oversight
of social workers assessments and ongoing work with children who are
exposed to sexual exploitation are not rigorous. This is partially due to the poor
implementation and application of risk assessment tools. The local authority has
recently reviewed its response to children who go missing from home. An
increased number of children are now provided with an interview. This is
starting to support an increased understanding of the risks and vulnerabilities of
these children, although this has not yet resulted in children receiving additional
support. However, too many interviews are completed long after children have
returned home, and there is no uniform threshold understanding on which


missing children should be prioritised for return home interviews. Consequently,
not all children at risk are spoken to, despite recent focused senior
management attention. (Recommendation)
agency to engage with up to 40 young people over a 12-month period, carry
out direct work with children. The longer-term status of this service is
uncertain, as there is no commissioning plan to secure the continuance of the
project after March 2017. Effective mapping and disruption activity, including
prosecutions and harbouring and abduction notices, have interrupted and
prevented the further sexual exploitation of some children. The local authority
and partners have undertaken some countywide awareness raising and
targeted work with priority groups, including taxi drivers and hotels.
operational arrangements effectively identify children who are exposed to
serious, continuing domestic abuse. Responses to children who are living in
households affected by medium and higher levels of exposure to domestic
abuse are well planned and thorough. Social workers prepare well for MARAC
meetings, and the follow up of agency actions is rigorous and comprehensive.
Childrens services are also consistently represented at multi-agency public
protection panel arrangements meetings. Careful early safety planning and
multi-agency monitoring of high-risk offenders occur for adults who are due for
release from custody or subject to licence.
the most common risk when they are living in families also affected by parental
substance misuse and mental health difficulties, known as the toxic trio.
Despite this, repeat referrals, assessments and plans frequently feature
continuing domestic abuse. (Recommendation)
and offer advice concerning families affected by female genital mutilation. One
of two recent referrals of suspected female genital mutilation was managed less
effectively, indicating that revised policies and procedures, reflecting statutory
guidance, have not yet resulted in consistently strong operational responses.
employees or volunteers working with children are rigorous and effective. High
levels of engagement are apparent across the professional network. Records of
meetings and clarity of actions and recommendations are of a consistently high
standard. Considerable training and awareness raising have been undertaken
by the designated officer, alongside the Worcestershire Safeguarding Childrens
Board training officer.
assessments of the suitability of adult carers, nor initial or subsequent visits to
children, are completed within required timescales. (Recommendation)


housing assessments of 16- and 17-year-old young people when there is a risk
of a family breakdown. Tenacious and effective interventions, supported by
clear management oversight and direction, secure appropriate solutions. These
include a carefully brokered reunification home, when achievable, which affords
continuing support to prevent further episodes of homelessness.
communities board, enable the local authority to meet its statutory
requirements concerning Prevent and Channel panel duties. An increased
number of referrals from a broad spectrum of agencies are considered by a
well-attended monthly Channel panel. This indicates a growing awareness
across the local authority partnerships of the potential threat to young people
from radical and extremist influences. However, there has been a delay in
ensuring that all social workers receive awareness training. This is recognised
by leaders, and appropriate programmes are underway to address this shortfall.
intervene quickly for children who are missing education and not receiving
suitable educational provision. Immediate action is taken, including appropriate
escalation to childrens social care services, when safeguarding concerns arise.
Good procedures and practices ensure that children who are home educated
are visited and offered further support through a range of resources that are
signposted by the local authority to enhance further the learning experiences of
this group of children.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Inadequate

Summary
There are serious and widespread concerns for children looked after, because
children have been left in situations of escalating risk for too long before decisive
action has been taken to secure their welfare. Drift and delay are evident throughout
services to children looked after. These delays are widespread, including in initiating
the Public Law Outline (PLO), the completion of assessments and applications to
court, and there is untimely care and permanence planning.
Children who have a plan of adoption receive an improved service, and they are
matched and placed with their adopters swiftly and with the necessary support. Too
many 16- and 17-year-old children looked after are not being provided with the level
of support and stability that they need to reduce their risks.
Care planning is a significant weakness. Care plans are neither outcome focused nor
seek to meet the full range of a childs needs. IROs and managers oversight of care
planning is poor. Permanence is not consistently progressed for children who cannot
return home.
Increasingly, children are being looked after by foster carers within the local
authority area, as a result of a successful marketing campaign. Gaps remain in the
provision of sufficient placements for children over 12 years and large family groups.
The local authority is making use of a range of purchased placements to reduce this
gap.
Children looked after do not achieve well in education, and their attainment gaps are
still too wide compared with all other children in the county.
Many children, including those who have complex needs, are successfully adopted.
Fostering for adoption is not embedded. Delays in health assessments are, in some
cases, leading to late adoption medicals and delays in gaining placement orders, for
a small number of children. There are delays in accessing post-adoption support,
although many families are benefiting from the adoption support fund.
Care leavers do not consistently receive the support that they need to make a
successful transition to adulthood, and the support to some is very poor. Too many
care leavers are living in accommodation that is not appropriate to their needs,
including bed and breakfast. Almost half of care leavers are NEET. Pathway planning
is poor.


Inspection findings
becoming looked after. For a number of children, this has resulted in their
experiencing further harm.
drift and delay for children. The PLO tracker is not fit for purpose and does not
enable managers to maintain a clear oversight of work with children and their
families. Very recent improvements in the understanding and application of preproceedings work is starting to lead to more timely action, to respond to risks
for children and progress key actions.
in the majority of cases, sufficient to enable courts to reach appropriate
decisions for children. However, the quality of parenting assessments is very
poor and, in some cases, has led to delays in court proceedings, due to the
courts and the childrens guardians, the Children and Family Court Advisory and
Support Service (Cafcass), requesting further work. The local authority has
detailed plans in place to address these weaknesses. The timeliness of court
proceedings at the start of 201617 was 33 weeks. Effective joint working
between the local authority, Cafcass and the courts has led to a reduction in
the timescales of care proceedings. Quarter 2 performance now stands at 27
weeks, which is below the national average of 29 weeks.
work, and childrens views are consistently sought. However, their views are
not routinely used to inform plans, and social workers do not always
understand the lived experiences of children looked after. The local authority
cannot be confident that children know about their rights and entitlements.
Children who spoke with inspectors, including those from the Children in Care
Council (CiCC), were not aware of the local authoritys responsibilities to
children looked after, and they were unable to explain how they could
complain.
visitor service. However, this resource is insufficient for the numbers of children
who are looked after.
misusing drugs, of sexual exploitation and of going missing is not sufficiently
timely or effective for a large number of children. Consequently, risk
management planning is not well evidenced in most cases, and there is some
delay in taking action to respond to risk. Not all missing episodes are followed


up with an offer of a return home interview and, when one is offered, it is often
not undertaken within 72 hours. (Recommendation)
completing health assessments for children looked after. These delays include
the completion of adoption medicals, which, for some children, has resulted in
delays in securing permanence. Managers are fully aware of this issue. They
have not been successful in tackling this gap in provision. (Recommendation)
and mental health needs, including the provision of advice and support when
they are misusing alcohol or substances. Children and adolescent mental health
services (CAMHS) have developed a specific pathway to ensure that children
looked after receive timely consideration of their needs. The integrated service
for children looked after and adopted childrens health and well-being service
(ISL) carers have an improved understanding of the attachment needs of
children. This work includes the positive Green fingers project, which
successfully improves the health and well-being of children and their carers
through outdoor activities.
between children looked after and all other children in the county is widening.
In 201415, children at key stage 1 did not perform well, and there was a
decline in performance from the previous year and a widening attainment gap.
At key stage 2, there was some improvement in mathematics and a reduction
in the achievement gap. Unvalidated data for 201516 is not showing
improvement on these outcomes. However, of the 50 children looked after who
were eligible to take GCSEs in 2015, 16% achieved five GCSEs at A* to C
including English and mathematics, which was better than the performance of
statistical neighbours and the national average of 14%. Recruitment of the new
virtual school headteacher in February 2016 has ensured that significant
progress is being made in refocusing the priorities of the virtual school.
more detailed information about childrens previous and current levels of
attainment, progression data and details of where improvements are required.
As a result, target setting is too generic. By contrast, the stronger plans that
have been more recently completed ensure that clear target setting is present,
with an identification of barriers to learning and strategies to improve
outcomes. Personal education plans completed by social workers for children
living out of the local authority area are subject to considerable delays, and are
generally of poorer quality than those completed by virtual school staff.
provision, which is registered and contracted by the virtual school to deliver
good-quality education placements. Ten of these children were on full-time
programmes, and the remainder were following bespoke programmes to
encourage and support increased participation and improved engagement.


Appropriate arrangements are in place to identify and track those children who
are missing education and not receiving suitable education. When important
safeguarding intelligence is identified, immediate action is taken and cases are
referred for a childrens social care service.
and sisters, when this in their best interests. However, together or apart
assessments for brothers and sisters are not sufficiently detailed in the focus on
attachment. As a result, it is difficult to understand how these significant
decisions have been reached. The majority of children have regular contact
with their families, when this is in their best interests. Children looked after are
supported by their carers and childrens home staff to engage in activities.
Relevant delegated authority is agreed with carers.
education and health services to meet their needs. This is, in part, due to
education and health colleagues not being party to key decisions regarding
childrens placements. The ISL health and well-being service does negotiate
appropriate health services with host authorities once children are living in their
areas. The virtual school and fostering service do not actively monitor these
placements, and this limits effective oversight for children living out of area.
carers includes increased fees and better training. The local authority does not
yet have sufficient foster homes for children aged over 12 years and larger
family groups, and is now targeting recruitment for these groups. The impact of
this gap in provision is minimised for the large majority of children, as the local
authority makes good use of independent fostering agencies and residential
placements.
programme is provided, and all carers are supported well to complete their
training. Foster carer assessments are of a sound quality, and these
assessments enable the fostering panel and the agency decision-maker to reach
clear decisions. The agency decision-maker and fostering panel provide strong
quality assurance. Carers appreciate the support that they receive through the
ISL health and well-being service.
profiles and introduction visits help to prepare children for their moves.
However, the needs of 16- and 17-year-old children looked after are not being
sufficiently well understood or met to reduce their risks. Although the large
majority of children are encouraged to remain looked after until they are 18
years old, too many 16- and 17-year-old children looked after are living in
settings that do not afford them the level of support and stability that they
need.


involved in childrens lives do not contribute to their care plans. Childrens
assessed needs, including their identity, ethnicity and diversity, do not inform
plans, and social workers do not routinely consider childrens friendship groups
or their ability to make friends, when assessing or planning to meet their needs.
Social workers, managers and IROs are not being vigilant in progressing plans
or providing sufficiently strong oversight to ensure that plans are moved
forwards within acceptable timescales for children. (Recommendation)
usually attended by the key professionals in the childs life, but are not seen as
the childs meeting, to which they could specifically choose who is to attend.
The lack of a detailed care plan means that professionals cannot be held
directly to account for actions between review meetings. The IROs caseloads
are too great, and this limits their ability to follow through consistently and
monitor the delivery of plans, or to track the progress of children between
reviews. The IRO service has been without dedicated management for some
time, and this has led to limited effectiveness of the dispute resolution process
and means that its work is not being quality assured. (Recommendation)
permanence planning. At the second children looked after review, permanence
plans are considered and agreed for children who are unable to go home.
Adoption is considered for all children, for whom this is appropriate. However,
the lack of effective tracking and follow through of agreements, particularly for
older children, results in delays. The quality of working relationships between
social workers, Cafcass and the courts is extremely variable, with some social
workers lacking the expertise to engage productively with colleagues to achieve
timely outcomes and permanence for children. Waiting to confirm long-term
fostering placements until a child has been living with carers for up to a year is
not supporting timely permanence. (Recommendation)
children when they first place them with family and friends carers. This means
that some children are living with families for a period of time, during which
risks have not been appropriately assessed, and it is not known whether their
needs can be met by the carers. Once placements are more established,
detailed fostering assessments consider effectively whether childrens needs are
being met and whether carers have the skills, both now and in the longer term,
to care for children and to promote their outcomes. (Recommendation)
the stability of placements has decreased over the past year, which is a
concern. In 201415, 68% of children looked after under 16 years had lived in
the same placement for at least two years. This decreased to 58% in 201516.
The local authority does not yet understand this deterioration in performance.


When life-story work is undertaken, the quality requires improvement, to
ensure that children are able to explore their pasts throughout their childhoods.
(Recommendation)
responsive to their needs. However, the disabled childrens and young adults
team and the care leavers services do not have strong links. Consequently,
planning is limited for children who have disabilities, as they transition to
adulthood.
responsibilities for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children, which means that
requirements for service provision and age assessments are not well
understood. A small number of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children have
experienced a very poor service, with a lack of individual contact with their
social workers. (Recommendation)
CiCC organises a range of activities, such as an annual celebration event and a
summer fun day. Children meet in one of three forums that are relevant to their
age and interests: Big voices for little kids (511 years), Who cares, we care
(1216 years) and Speak out (16+ years). Members of the two older groups
regularly attend the corporate parenting board. Communication with the wider
group of children looked after is underdeveloped.
outcomes for children looked after in Worcestershire. The board has been
invigorated in recent months by a change of both the lead member and the
DCS. Previously, it was described by children to inspectors as being a talking
shop that achieved very little, apart from meeting the requirement to have a
board. The board is now identifying a more structured work programme, and
the meetings adhere to an agreed agenda and address some key issues for
children looked after.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
interests. Increasingly, family finding is starting earlier, and social workers are
appropriately referring children for adoption. The proportion of children leaving
care through adoption in 2015 was 20%, which is better than the England
average of 17%.
it. A variety of children is successfully found adoptive homes, including those
who are older, those who have complex needs and larger family groups.


Tenacious family-finding efforts have resulted in an increase in the number of
children moving in with their adoptive families more quickly and, in the past
year, timeliness has improved. Some 52 children were adopted in April 2015
required urgency. The failure to progress adoption plans, as well as delays in
arranging adoption medicals, contributes to this. However, the impact for
children has been lessened by the extensive and persistent work of the
adoption team, which accelerates matching and moving children swiftly, and
within their own timescales, to their adoptive homes. (Recommendation)
determination for a number of children who have complex needs and who have
been looked after for too long. These children have now been adopted, but the
impact of their extended periods of care has affected the overall timescales for
achieving adoption. The published scorecard for adoption shows that, between
with their adoptive family was too long, at 649 days. This compares to the
national three-year average of 593 days.
improving for children being adopted in the past year. The local authority
continues to strive to find homes for children aged up to 10 years and has been
diligent in finding homes for brothers and sisters to live together. This has
inevitably slowed down their journey to adoption.
Notably, all but five children out of 17 with a placement order are linked with
potential families. These five children have more complex needs and a range of
health and developmental issues. They have been waiting for a relatively short
time of three months. The local authority is seeking more information about
their inherited health conditions, which is resulting in some delays for these
children.
childrens needs well and assist in matching. Successful matching of children
with their adoptive homes has led to very few disruptions, and only three have
occurred in the past two years.
placed largely with in-house adopters. In 201516, 50 adopters were approved,
and so far this year 21 have been recruited, in line with the local authoritys
sufficiency target. Word-of-mouth recommendations are attracting a diverse
range of adopters, increasing the matching options for children.
two children have benefited from being in a fostering to adopt placement.


Both these children had to experience foster care beforehand. The lack of
foster to adopt placements is a missed opportunity to focus on the needs of
children who could be placed with their adopters sooner. (Recommendation)
complex needs. As a result, over 30 adopters are currently waiting to be
matched. Many have been waiting in excess of a year, and a few in excess of
two years. All adopters have been forwarded to the adoption register and are
appropriately supported to access Link Maker, facilitating adopter-led adoptions.
The large volume of waiting adopters creates pressure for the local authority,
with some overdue reviews and difficulties in maintaining contact with
approved adopters.
timescales in 2015/16. A few assessments are appropriately extended, but
many have been delayed by insufficient medical adviser provision and,
occasionally, insufficient social work capacity. (Recommendation)
Adopters are positive about the assessment process and introduction
arrangements. The very low rate of adoption disruptions is evidence of the
successful preparation and support that adopters receive.
been affected by a lack of continuity, with changes to senior managers.
Learning from practice has not always been carried forward to support
improvements. For example, the minutes from disruption meetings have not
been scrutinised and shared with the adoption panel, and the gap in provision,
whereby adopters are offered time with the medical adviser to review the
medical histories of their children, has not been resolved. Thus, not all adopters
may fully understand childrens health conditions and their implications.
(Recommendation)
appropriately child centred or completed on time. The lack of appropriate
quality assurance means that most children do not benefit from work that
enhances their understanding of their experiences. (Recommendation)
assessment tools and the adoption support fund, from which 70 families
benefit. Over 100 families are receiving support, but there is a waiting list of
between four to eight weeks for an assessment. An integrated team of
specialists, jointly funded by the local authority and the Worcestershire Health
and Care NHS Trust, is being expanded to continue its innovative work to
provide training to parents and carers on therapeutic parenting. This means
that most families can access immediate support with parenting while waiting
for their assessment to be completed. Indirect contact arrangements are well


supported through the letterbox service, and there are 300 arrangements in
place.
The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is inadequate

successful move into adulthood, and the support provided to some is very poor.
A lack of sufficient, suitable post-18 accommodation means that some care
leavers are living in accommodation that is not appropriate to their needs.
Seven care leavers were placed in bed and breakfast accommodation in the six
months prior to the inspection. At the time of the inspection, a small number of
care leavers were living in bed and breakfast establishments, with no
immediate prospect of a move to more suitable accommodation. This is
unacceptable practice, which leaves some care leavers having to manage in
circumstances that leave them at risk of harm. (Recommendation)
managers. Caseloads in these teams are large, averaging 28 at the point of the
inspection. This limits the quality and extent of the support provided to care
leavers. Care leavers told inspectors that personal advisers are wellintentioned, but not always available when needed. They also told inspectors
that recent improvements in the stability of staffing mean that they are now
more likely to be able to form a working relationship with their personal
adviser, but were clear that support from the team had not progressed beyond
being functional.
after. In almost all cases, personal advisers are not becoming involved with
young people until just before the young peoples 18th birthdays. Only one of
the three teams that are working with children looked after is routinely ensuring
that young people have a pathway plan. No pathway plans seen by inspectors
were based on a clear assessment of need. Although 85% of care leavers
supported by the care leavers teams have pathway plans, most of these lack
analysis and clarity. Plans are reviewed in a timescale that reflects minimum
statutory expectations rather than the changing circumstances of care leavers
lives. This means that practice is generally reactive.
used as a tool to shape or measure improvement. One young person described
their plan as just a document. Although the local authority is aware of these
weaknesses, improvement planning is at a very early stage, and there is little
evidence of improving practice. A new pathway plan template has been
designed, but is not due to be implemented until April 2017. (Recommendation)


decline from the last nationally published data for Worcestershire of 41% at 31
March 2015, and worse than the 38% average achieved by similar local
authorities. A number of work placements have been made available through
the NEET prevention team, with some good work experience placements
achieved due to the tenacity of the participation workers, who work alongside
personal advisers. It is also positive that 28% of care leavers are in higher or
further education. However, this work is not well coordinated, and insufficient
attention has been given to older care leavers. Only nine care leavers are in
apprenticeships. (Recommendation)
Pensions to try to reduce or eliminate the delays that care leavers experience
when applying for benefits following their 18th birthdays. Training has been
delivered to staff, and single point of contact arrangements have been set up
at job centres in each of the six district council areas. Although this has led to
some improvement, a few care leavers are still experiencing delays in accessing
support for job readiness, job searching and benefits advice. Care leavers
spoken to by inspectors shared concerns that the benefits advice is not always
clear and that personal advisers do not always have a sufficient depth of
knowledge.
with 86% of its care leavers. This performance is better than the most up-todate average figure available for similar local authorities of 81% (31 March
also supporting an increasing number of young people to remain with their
foster carers after their 18th birthdays. At the time of the inspection, 21 care
leavers were taking advantage of staying put arrangements.
received information outlining their rights and entitlements. The information
available lacks detail, so the local authority cannot be sure that care leavers
continue to have sufficient awareness of their rights and entitlements. The care
leavers handbook has only very recently been updated, in consultation with
care leavers, to include an outline of what care leavers can expect. However,
plans to share information through other media, such as newsletters, emails
and social media, are either insufficient or yet to be implemented.
(Recommendation)
predominantly rural county, this limits care leavers access to advice and
support. This limitation was also seen at a leaving care fair held in October
part, it was only attended by 25, approximately 8% of care leavers.
(Recommendation)


looked after had an up-to-date health assessment. Until September 2016, when
the post was de-commissioned, the health needs of young people over 16 years
and care leavers were being coordinated by the health-funded 16+ transitions
nurse. For young people looked after who are coming up to 18, it is known that
building relationships and sticking with young people is crucial to involving
them in health assessments and making sure that they know about their health
histories. The lack of an alternative plan to ensure that the functions of this role
continue presents a risk to the health needs of care leavers being met
effectively.
specific additional needs, such as those arising from mental ill health and
offending or other risk-taking behaviour. However, outcomes for these care
leavers are not good, and work with probation and youth offending services is
not well joined up. Without an emotional health and well-being service that
continues to work with care leavers beyond the age of 18, or effective
transition arrangements with adult mental health services, care leavers do not
receive the support that they need. In circumstances in which care leavers have
higher levels of need or risk, the 24 hours a day, seven days a week availability
of support staff from the outreach team is a very positive addition to the range
of available services. The team provides flexible and responsive support to
some care leavers. (Recommendation)
care leavers involved. However, this group currently has active involvement by
only a small number of core members. Care leavers said that, although the
group has not previously been well consulted, this is beginning to change, and
they spoke positively of their engagement with the DCS and the lead member.
Care leavers have recently been consulted about updating the care leavers
handbook to include a pledge. Care leavers contrasted this recent engagement
with an earlier lack of meaningful consultation. In particular, care leavers said
that, while they were supported to attend the all-party parliamentary group for
children looked after and care leavers, the local authority has not subsequently
signed up to the care leavers charter, and financial support for care leavers
remains below the minimum recommended as good practice.
(Recommendation)


Leadership, management and
governance

Inadequate

Summary
The scale and gravity of the weaknesses identified in the services to children in
Worcestershire are significant. Ofsted inspections judged safeguarding services as
inadequate in 2010 and adequate in 2012. Since this time, services to children have
significantly deteriorated, and the majority of areas of this inspection are inadequate.
Despite knowing of the serious and widespread failures in the service, elected
members and senior leaders have not taken sufficient action to ensure the protection
of vulnerable children. This corporate failure leaves children in Worcestershire at
continued risk.
A safeguarding improvement board established, following the local government
association peer review in April 2015, has not given sufficient focus to addressing
poor practice, and there has been a lack of management oversight of childrens
services. Consequently, children in need of help and protection, children looked after
and care leavers do not consistently benefit from a range of services that meet their
needs.
The application of thresholds across the service at every level is inconsistent and a
critical area of concern. Management oversight at every level, including that of IROs
and child protection chairs, lacks rigour and does not consistently lead to practice
improvement. Social workers, IROs, child protection chairs and personal advisers
caseloads, while decreasing, remain too large. This is a significant underlying factor
in the poor-quality service that some children receive.
Strategic oversight of children at risk of sexual exploitation is not sufficiently
rigorous. Performance data is not reliable, and learning from audits and complaints is
not effective in identifying and addressing training needs. The corporate parenting
board is yet to evidence the impact on improving outcomes for children.
Following the inspection findings, there is strong political support for change and a
determined commitment to providing the required additional resources. The pace of
change has very recently accelerated, with the reconfiguration of services at the
family front door, children being offered return home interviews following episodes
of missing, the implementation of the Connecting families programme and the
setting up of a strategic workforce board. These changes have led to some very early
improvements in the services that children receive. However, services remain fragile
and it is too early to see any sustained impact on outcomes for children.


Inspection findings
to provide greater leadership of childrens services. This resulted in decisive
action to increase senior management capacity and the commissioning of a
local government association peer review. The peer review, in April 2015,
identified serious concerns about the quality of child protection and children
looked after arrangements. Although elected members and senior leaders have
taken some action to respond to these concerns, this action has not been
effective in tackling the systemic failures. As a result, some children are not
being protected effectively and remain at risk of harm.
chief executive, has met monthly and has oversight of developments. A
coherent, overarching, strategic improvement plan has not been in place to
drive the pace of change and much needed improvements. Board minutes lack
sufficient detail, and many actions are repeated without progress or
improvement. Consequently, progress has not been swift or focused enough to
secure improved outcomes for children. (Recommendation)
to be a serious issue for the local authority. A back to basics website launched
in 2015 to tackle these known deficits continues to be work in progress, with
many sections of the website lacking detail or information. Social workers and
managers report that they have stopped using it, due to information not being
available. (Recommendation)
permanent assistant director for safeguarding services (October 2016),
progress is now tangible, with some very early signs of improvement. The DCS
has brought a much-needed focus and has a clear understanding of the
significant challenges facing childrens services and the level of service
improvement required. She has a strong ambition to produce long-term service
improvements and better outcomes for children. Partner agencies and staff
express confidence in the new leadership team, and say that progress against
the improvement journey over the past four months is starting to take shape.
undermines the much-needed improvements through inconsistent and often
poor management oversight. The constant turnover of social workers and
managers has resulted in drift and delay at every stage of the childs journey,
including in the convening of strategy discussions and initial child protection
conferences, implementing legal advice and applying PLO processes. Critical
decisions regarding childrens futures take too long to be made.
(Recommendation)


not been able to ensure that the workforce is suitably experienced to deliver a
good-quality service for children.
the quality of support to children, and has made this a top priority. The
introduction of a strategic workforce board in October 2016, chaired by the
DCS, aims to address recruitment, training, development and staff
performance. Although this is a positive move in the right direction, the local
authority remains too reliant on agency workers, with 31% covering vacancies
at the time of the inspection compared to 23% in 2015. (Recommendation)
particularly when taking complexity and experience into account. Some staff,
including newly qualified social workers, have responsibility for more than 22
children. This is a contributory factor to the slow pace of improvement in the
quality of practice. The quality and frequency of supervision are too variable,
because managers do not consistently ensure that actions are completed, that
plans progress and that risks to children decrease.
inspection, for example the initial screening and contact officers making
decisions at the front door when they are not qualified to do so, the use of bed
and breakfast establishments for vulnerable care leavers and the unknown
whereabouts of four unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
they hold excessive caseloads. Professional relationships between frontline
social workers and IROs are not effective. As a result, constructive challenge in
driving good practice and improving outcomes for children is insufficient.
(Recommendation)
improvements in key areas of practice, is limited. Senior managers have
commissioned training, such as in preventing child sexual exploitation, in age
assessment and, more recently, in court skills. However, training such as in
permanence planning and assessment has been delayed due to competing
priorities. The evaluation of training is poor and is not supporting the local
authority to focus on the areas of greatest priority. (Recommendation)
framework. The local authority has yet to review all section 20 arrangements
and cannot be certain that all arrangements are appropriate and necessary.
Many of the shortfalls in practice identified in the local authoritys own audit
work were evident in the childrens files seen by inspectors. In the worst of
these cases, children were left unprotected and at risk of significant harm. In
three cases identified by inspectors, involving six children, the local authority
had to take legal action to ensure the protection of children. (Recommendation)


social care statutory services. The local authority acknowledges that the review
was fundamentally flawed, being based on inaccurate data and a lack of
management oversight. Subsequently, 15% of these children were re-referred
for statutory intervention, due to re-emerging or increased concerns following
closure. A recent local authority audit of a sample of 20 children closed through
this review identified that 75% were closed without sufficient evidence to
support the decision. Senior managers have begun to respond to this significant
weakness in decision-making. However, they have not yet taken rigorous action
to assure themselves that the decisions made for all of the children were
appropriate. (Recommendation)
lacks rigorous analytical commentary. Data is not sufficiently reliable, due to
delays and inaccurate recording by frontline staff. Adoption and care leaver
data is particularly poor, and placement stability is not considered. A weekly
back to basics performance report is available for managers to track
compliance. This has led to some improvements, particularly in the number of
children receiving return interviews following missing from home episodes.
However, performance relating to the timeliness of return home interviews,
initial child protection conferences and children seen and spoken to during
assessment is still not good enough. (Recommendation)
families. The learning from complaints is limited, with no analysis and little
evidence of focused management efforts to inform subsequent service
provision. Complaints take too long to investigate, with a number taking many
months. (Recommendation)
challenge to the local authority about the effectiveness of services provided to
vulnerable children. The safeguarding improvement plan has not been on the
panels agenda since March 2016.
the considerable investment of additional resources and a commitment to
improving corporate parenting and safeguarding arrangements, for example an
additional investment of 2 million into in-house residential placements. An
additional and recurring funding of 3 million has been made in response to the
peer review. However, sustained and systematic change is not yet evident, and
some children in Worcestershire remain at risk of harm. (Recommendation)
responsibilities for children looked after and care leavers. Induction training to
ensure that a wider group of elected members became aware of their
responsibilities had a very poor take-up, with only six of 57 new councillors
attending. The recently appointed lead member (May 2016) chairs the


corporate parenting board. There are early signs of improvement, with a vicechair appointed and terms of reference refreshed. The board receives little
performance information, and this limits its ability to provide scrutiny. The
board is in a development phase. Many work strands are required for the board
to become fully functioning, so that it can have effective oversight and
challenge services for children looked after and care leavers. The local authority
has not signed up to the care leavers charter, and financial support for care
leavers remains below the minimum recommended as good practice.
(Recommendation)
sexual exploitation have recently improved. Nevertheless, strategic oversight of
children at risk of sexual exploitation is not sufficiently rigorous. During the
inspection, the local authority struggled to supply the inspectors with the
number of children at risk of sexual exploitation who are in receipt of statutory
services. This is partly due to managers using a combination of different
methods to identify these vulnerable children. The local authority accepted this
and made changes to the recording system during the inspection.
(Recommendation)
recently, by a commissioned service working with licensed premises. There
have been some effective mapping and joined-up work as a result of
coordinated activity through the operational group to counter child sexual
exploitation. This mapping and coordinated activity have led to some successful
disruption activity. However, a recent case audit, by the local authority, of child
sexual exploitation identified poor risk management and a lack of
understanding of the difference between sexual abuse and exploitation, with a
number of cases requiring immediate action to ensure that children were safe.
(Recommendation)
whole, in the corporate plan. The children and young peoples plan (201417)
sets out the key priorities for children, is aligned with the joint strategic needs
assessment and health and well-being strategy and is overseen by the children
and families strategic group, a sub-group of the Health and Wellbeing Board
(HWB). However, the children and families strategic sub-group, which is
scheduled to meet twice a year, has not met since June 2015. Consequently,
there is a lack of strategic drive and reviewing mechanisms that ensure the
effective progress of partners individually and collectively, and make sure that
services for children and families are integrated and that outcomes for children
are improving.
However, more work is required to ensure the consistent application of
thresholds at every stage of the childs journey, and that partner agencies
understand the pathways for early help and statutory intervention.


Progress has been effective in reducing waiting times for children who require
emotional health and well-being services. Targeted commissioning is in place to
provide housing and floating support for vulnerable young people, as well as
support for young carers. Work has recently focused on improving NEET figures
for children looked after and care leavers. The youth council has been fully
involved in commissioning positive activities for young people. However,
significant gaps remain in the provision of critical services, and a number of
services have been decommissioned without full consideration of the impact on
children. For example, the cancellation by the local authority of its own
commissioned over-18 supported living provision, in 2015, further reduced the
stock of suitable accommodation available for care leavers.
transformational whole-system approach to improve the way in which agencies
work together to support vulnerable families. A successful pilot of the new
approach in one district demonstrates effective outcomes for some children.
This needs strategic ownership by partners to implement the model across the
county. However, through the redesign of commissioned services, to ensure a
focus on supporting the children and families who need it most, significant
reductions are planned across early help services, including childrens centres.
These planned reductions have led to anxiety across the partnership and a lack
of understanding regarding ownership of, and pathways to, early help.
with strong and positive relationships with senior managers. The local authority
is an active member in the local family justice board. However, some childrens
cases, particularly those that include chronic neglect, come too late to the
court.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement

Executive summary
The Worcestershire Safeguarding Children Board (WSCB) requires improvement to
be good. The board is meeting its statutory responsibilities, and governance
arrangements are clear. The independent chair brings appropriate and persistent
challenge across the partnership. The WSCB annual report provides an honest
appraisal of the quality of services available to children. The LSCB cannot be assured
that children in Worcestershire are effectively safeguarded.
The restructure of the WSCB and the appointment of the new chair in 2016 have
begun to strengthen engagement, following a period of inconsistent attendance by
some partners and gaps in sub-group chairs during 201516. The boards interface
with the family justice board and the local authority corporate parenting board still
needs to be formalised.
The board has detailed multi-agency performance information, supported by a
coherent structure, to monitor the effectiveness of frontline practice. Audit activity
provides rich information, but needs strengthening to reach clearer findings to
enhance the boards ability to evaluate practice, progress and impact. Further work is
required to ensure that the board has access to all information that it needs about
children at risk of sexual exploitation, to enable a coherent and informed approach.
The board has reviewed and reissued the levels of need guidance, circulating it
widely and providing training to over 400 partners. Early help pathways are not yet
clear enough, and there is anxiety across the partnership regarding the local
authoritys plan to reduce commissioned early help support.
The board takes a rigorous approach to monitoring the effectiveness of multi-agency
training, which is informed by needs analyses. There is a structured learning and
improvement framework, including learning from reviews, child deaths and serious
case reviews (SCRs). Findings are disseminated and inform the development of
multi-agency training. Case review action plans require more rigorous monitoring to
ensure full partnership compliance.
The board has undertaken a comprehensive evaluation of multi-agency training and
has assurance that programmes effectively target training needs. Staff value the
training provided. However, the board is less able to demonstrate that the work that
it does to disseminate learning or the training that it coordinates are yet resulting in
changes to practice or improved service delivery for children.


Recommendations
 The board should ensure that there is an agreed governance structure in
place for an effective interface with the family justice and the corporate
parenting boards.
 The board should strengthen its oversight of the response to child sexual
exploitation practice, by ensuring that the operational sub-group is
represented by all agencies that are able to offer a sufficient level of oversight
and analysis.
 The board should strengthen its case file audit programme so that findings
provide a clear baseline from which to evaluate practice and measure impact.
 The board should ensure rigorous monitoring of action plans, including singleagency action plans that arise from critical incident reviews.

Inspection findings
restructure of the LSCB and a refreshing of governance arrangements. Partners
consider that the new chair has brought renewed focus, including a more
streamlined approach, to board business. These changes are beginning to
strengthen partner engagement, with chairs and vice-chairs now identified for
all sub-groups.
plan for 201518. This plan is drawn from an analysis of performance
information and frontline practice, and is informed by learning from audits,
surveys and childrens views. The boards business plan sets clear actions to
deliver the priorities, including a wide range of methods to evaluate the
effectiveness of frontline practice. It focuses appropriately on the need to
ensure robust safeguarding practice, and is particularly focused on vulnerable
children, including those who have disability, those who are missing, and those
at risk of sexual exploitation.
childrens views informing the boards strategic priorities. Childrens
participation is becoming increasingly visible throughout the boards work. The
board commissions the youth advisory board to carry out development work,
including a childrens and young persons version of the boards annual report
and strategic plan. This is a solid foundation, and childrens views are beginning
to inform developments. For example, the delivery of the whole-schools
approach, recently implemented by the board to encourage a more consistent
approach to raising awareness of healthy relationships, is a priority that was
identified by children.


the Chair of the HWB separately, twice a year, to discuss strategic priorities and
crosscutting issues. There is also a protocol in place between the HWB, WSCB
and the Worcestershire Safeguarding Adults Board (WSAB), soon to include the
Safer Communities Board. The chair, by being a member of the local authority
improvement board and having regular meetings with the lead member, chief
executive and the DCS, provides a firm basis for effective governance and
accountability of the board.
scrutiny panel provides further assurance. There is an absence of structured
governance arrangements between the WSCB and the corporate parenting
board. This reduces the boards assurance of the effectiveness of practice to
safeguard children looked after. Neither is there a formal arrangement to
ensure an interface with the local family justice board. (Recommendation)
representation from all schools, although this does not yet include academies.
Local authority education services representation is lacking at a number of
critical sub-groups. This results in gaps in information, and these weaken the
boards understanding of the effectiveness of operational partnership working.
(Recommendation)
in 2015, driven by the strategic and operational sub-groups, to counter child
sexual exploitation. These sub-groups have experienced multiple changes and
inconsistency in membership, particularly on the part of the police and
childrens services, which have hampered the progression of the action plan. As
a result, delivery of some key actions has been too slow. More recently, the
sub-group has reinvigorated the action plan by making actions more realistic
and deliverable, although the board is not yet assured that practice has
improved.
of some effective work across the partnership, to identify, understand and
respond to children who are missing and at risk of sexual exploitation. The
operational group has a comprehensive multi-agency dataset. However, there is
an absence of consistent data on children who are open to ongoing statutory
service intervention. The board has been rigorous in seeking to have oversight
of frontline practice with missing children and children at risk of sexual
exploitation, highlighting deficits in the response to missing children effectively
through its audit activity. The change from the child sexual exploitation panel,
which was originally set up to review individual cases, to the operational child
sexual exploitation and missing group in 2015, means that the board does not
have consistent oversight of the effectiveness of multi-agency responses to
children who are receiving ongoing statutory intervention and who are at risk of
sexual exploitation. (Recommendation)


identifying this as one of its core priorities. As well as reviewing performance
information about the take-up of early help across the area, the board has
undertaken its own multi-agency case file audit (MACFA) to examine the
effectiveness of provision. The delivery of early help by the wider partnership is
not well understood. Partners have identified concerns regarding planned
reductions in early help under the local authoritys new 0 to 19 early help
strategy, and have identified a lack of coherent understanding about early help
pathways. The board has sought clarity regarding the governance
arrangements for early help under these new arrangements, meeting its
statutory responsibilities.
coincide with the implementation of the family front door. The improving
frontline practice sub-group has overseen the development of the revised
levels of need guidance, alongside other policies and procedures, managed
through a joint arrangement with three other LSCBs. The levels of need
guidance has been widely disseminated, and the board has facilitated
awareness raising events for over 400 professionals. The guidance does not
provide sufficient detail about early help pathways. The board is reviewing the
levels of need guidance, and the WSCB practitioner network is piloting a level of
need survey in preparation for an audit of thresholds planned for January 2017.
performance information and reports quarterly to the monitoring effectiveness
sub-group. A comprehensive multi-agency performance dashboard supports the
board to scrutinise the effectiveness of safeguarding services. This includes
oversight of children held in police custody overnight, performance information
on CAMHS assessment and treatment timescales, as well as a wide range of
other performance information. The dashboard would be strengthened by the
inclusion of designated officer investigation outcomes and investigation
timescales, although the board does receive the designated officer annual
report. Information about children missing education and those electively home
educated would provide further important data to strengthen the dashboard
further. The board has taken robust action to obtain this data, escalating its
concerns when the data was not initially forthcoming, and has very recently
received the required data and analysis.
challenge log. However, due to a delay in the local authority providing data on
private fostering, the board was unable to include information about private
fostering in its annual report. This data was subsequently received from the
local authority.
including children from other local authority areas and placed in Worcestershire,
for whom there are concerns regarding missing episodes or sexual
exploitation. The work stream for children who have disabilities has recently


mapped additional work to assure the board that this group of children is
effectively safeguarded. Despite this productive work, there has been no
analysis of performance information about the number of children who have
disabilities and who are on child protection plans. A recent mapping exercise
identified this shortfall, and work is underway to obtain this data.
safeguarding conversations and scrutiny of performance information. The board
has not sought assurance from partners regarding single-agency audit activity,
but has recently taken action to resolve this shortfall.
gathered from a range of activities. MACFAs provide rich information about
childrens experiences and have effectively highlighted critical issues, but only
consider a small cohort of cases. The quality assurance group has successfully
engaged general practitioners (GPs) in the audit process. Although there has
been consistency of engagement by the police, consistency of police personnel
attending the group has not yet been realised. However, MACFAs and other
audit activity do not always identify clear findings, instead focusing on broad
themes, having moved away from audit activity that historically made too many
recommendations. Although MACFAs provide a rich source of information, the
lack of conclusive findings and recommendations leaves the board without an
effective baseline from which to evaluate practice improvements or to measure
impact. (Recommendation)
enhance the boards line of sight of frontline practice. The board runs four
safeguarding conversations per year, each of which involves an in-depth review
of a childs situation with the allocated practitioners and provides the board
with first-hand evidence of the quality of practice across the partnership. The
learning from safeguarding conversations, MACFAs, SCRs and child deaths is
summarised into concise, informative, annual overview reports and learning and
improvement briefings. Although the board has appropriately sought assurance
from partners that learning briefings are disseminated across the childrens
workforce, it is not yet able to evidence that the learning leads to changes in
practice or improved services to children and families.
audits, to give assurance to the board regarding the effectiveness of
arrangements to safeguard children. At the time of the review, two agencies
returns were overdue. Follow-up action was already in hand to ensure
submission. Effective mechanisms for quality assurance of the section 11
process are in place, including work underway to dip sample a selection of
audits returned by partner agencies in 2016, to test compliance.
number of cases referred to the SCR sub-group over the past year did not meet
the SCR criteria. The sub-group has taken action to respond to this, introducing


guidance and protocols to ensure a more robust approach to referring cases for
consideration.
from multi-agency practice lead to appropriate reviews, and one such review is
currently in progress. The last SCR, published in 2015, was widely circulated to
staff across the partnership, and the learning informed the development of
multi-agency training. The board has sought assurance that learning has been
disseminated by agencies, but cannot demonstrate how learning has resulted in
practice improvements. The monitoring of single-agency action plans in respect
of this review has not been sufficiently rigorous. (Recommendation)
through learning and improvement briefings through the CDOP annual report
and through presentations to the WSCB and the HWB. The child death overview
sub-group has been instrumental in driving wider developments, including the
roll out of a West Mercia-wide Safer sleeping programme, initiated by the
WSCB and CDOP.
learning effectively. The multi-agency safeguarding training strategy 201417
and the learning and improvement framework support the board to monitor
and evaluate the effectiveness of multi-agency training. By the end of
September 2016, 740 participants had attended WSCB multi-agency training
events. An up-to-date training needs analysis informs training provision, and
the board monitors training take up.
training evaluation, reported in May 2016, identifies that attendees rate WSCB
multi-agency training highly, and that their knowledge and confidence improve
as a result. The board is less able to evidence how training impacts on practice
or outcomes for children and it recognises that there is further work needed to
strengthen evaluation in this respect. A training and workforce audit is in
progress, to enable the board to establish whether single-agency training is
effective, and a learning and challenge event is planned for November 2016 to
test agency compliance.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Jenny Turnross HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Linda Steele HMI
Team inspectors: Nick Stacey HMI, Jansy Kelly HMI, Caroline Walsh HMI, Dominic
Stevens HMI, Donna Marriott HMI, Stella Butler HMI, John Roughton HMI
Shadow inspectors: Rachel Griffiths
Senior data analyst: Clare Atkinson
Quality assurance manager: Chris Sands SHMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance, Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


