Royal Borough of Kensington and
Chelsea
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 January 2016 to 4 February 2016
Report published: 29 March 2016

Childrens services in the Royal Borough of Kensington and
Chelsea are outstanding

Good

permanence

Outstanding


Outstanding


Outstanding


Outstanding


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Services for children and young people in the Royal Borough of Kensington and
Chelsea (RBKC) are outstanding because they are resourced, planned and delivered
very well by an exceptional workforce, ably supported by the talented senior
leadership team and strong governance structure.
RBKC uses its well-developed Focus on Practice model of social work, which places a
high value on relationship building between children their social workers, to deliver
services that are consistently excellent. Exemplary application of this highly
innovative model is also supported by social workers very low caseloads, social
workers remaining with children throughout their journey across all stages of social
care intervention, clinicians embedded within social work teams, and the clear and
charismatic leadership of RBKCs Director of Family Services (DFS) and its talented
senior management team.
Exemplary tri-borough services, comprising RBKC, Hammersmith and Fulham, and
Westminster, augment RBKCs leadership and governance, and this is of an
extraordinarily high quality. Senior leaders and elected members are well connected,
well informed, and operate within a mature culture of respectful challenge. An
absence of complacency leads to a strong culture of continuous learning,
professional accountability and responsibility. The tri-borough Director of Childrens
Services (DCS) is a pivotal figure and manages this complex set of arrangements
extremely well. Highly robust governance ensures that RBKC provides childrens
services of both an exceptionally wide range and a very high quality.
Existing strong services have been improved further and enhanced significantly since
May 2012 when RBKCs services for safeguarding and children looked after were
both judged by Ofsted to be good.
Services to help and protect children are good because thresholds for accessing an
outstanding early-help offer and for receiving help from social workers are
understood and applied well by the multi-agency partnership. Good social work
flourishes in RBKC. Positive characteristics of the exceptionally wide range of services
available include consistently comprehensive and analytical assessments of need,
detailed plans of intervention to help families to achieve positive change, and
unfailing management scrutiny and oversight of all cases.
A particularly positive feature of the service offered is the routine way in which social
workers see children, see them alone and build robust relationships with them, so
that they know them extremely well. This forms the basis of highly effective social
work intervention to help protect children from risk of harm. However, the service
would benefit from reviewing its arrangements to protect children out of hours, its
approach to strategy meetings with partner agencies when there are concerns about
children that require investigation, and capturing the intelligence from return home
interviews for children who go missing.


A very high standard of care is offered to children looked after by RBKC, of whom a
high proportion are minors who arrive in this country unaccompanied by an adult.
Excellent relationships are evident between children looked after and their social
workers, who are tenacious and unstinting in their pursuit of the best possible
outcomes for these children from their journey through care. This exemplary level of
service could be further strengthened by better use of independent visitors.
Outstanding services for children looked after are characterised by robust
arrangements in place for reviewing care plans by a dedicated team of independent
reviewing officers (IROs), thorough assessment and monitoring of the health of
children looked after, particularly those placed out of borough, and exemplary
attention to the diverse cultural and identity needs of children looked after.
Highly effective planning for permanence is a major strength of the organisation.
Outstanding services are provided to children looked after for whom permanence is
to be achieved through adoption.
An exemplary service is delivered to young people leaving or about to leave care.
The Independence Support Team (IST) is in touch with almost all care leavers, most
of whom are in suitable accommodation and 75% of whom are in employment,
education or training. This is well above the national average.
Significant economies of scale, and shared services of the highest quality are
achieved by tri-borough arrangements with Westminster City and Hammersmith and
Fulham councils. Dedicated teams ensure that support and expertise of the highest
quality is available on functions such as workforce development and performance
management. A talented and highly capable commissioning team ensures that
considerable additional resources available in this affluent area are effectively
brokered to provide additionality to the wide range of existing services to children
and their families.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Children looked after in this area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two childrens homes. Both were judged to be
good in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding was in May
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked
after was in May 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The DCS has been in post since 2011.
 The DCS is the executive DCS for the tri-borough, which comprises RBKC,
Hammersmith and Fulham, and Westminster.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since April 2012.
 The LSCB is shared between the tri-orough of Hammersmith & Fulham,
Kensington & Chelsea and Westminster.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 27,769 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in RBKC. This is 17.8% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 24.8% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 26% (the national average is 16%)
 in secondary schools is 20% (the national average is 14%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 39% of
all children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a
whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are Mixed and Black and Black British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 in primary schools is 54% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 48% (the national average is 15%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 December 2015, 977 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a decrease
from 1,105 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 December 2015, 59 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is a reduction from 61 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 December 2015, four children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from one at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, two serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted. One serious case review has been completed and one
was ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 December 2015, 112 children are being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 42 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 105
(38 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2015. Of this number:
local authority area
 six live in residential special schools3, all of whom live out of the local
authority area
authority area
 five live with parents, of whom three (60%) live out of the local authority
area
 Since April 2015:
 there have been four adoptions
 two children became the subject of special guardianship orders
returned to be looked after


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


independent living
 two children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.

Recommendations

Review out-of-hours arrangements to ensure that children and young people
are offered a standard of practice consistent with daytime services (page 12,
paragraph 17).


Engage partner agencies in ensuring that strategy discussions where risk of
harm is suspected are always swift and take place on a multi-agency basis
(page 12, paragraph 18).


Collate information drawn from return home interviews of children who go
missing from home to identify patterns and trends and assist disruption activity
(page 16, paragraph 34).


Increase access to and take up of independent visitors so that young people
looked after who meet the criteria can benefit from additional support and
social interaction with suitable adults (page 23, paragraph 57).


Summary for children and young people
 Senior leaders in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea make sure that
children, young people and their families receive the right help at the right time
so that they are safe. If you are a child who needs help and protection or to be
looked after, this is one of the best places in the country to live.
 Children and young people are helped by social workers who do not give up on
them. Social workers are good at finding out what needs to be done to help
families to change. The whole family receives support, making sure that
everybody who needs help gets it.
 If a plan of support is needed, it is worked out with children and young people
fully involved. The same social worker supports families through the various
stages of childrens social care services to ensure that families do not have to tell
their story many times and start again with new social workers.
 Children and young people who are at risk of sexual exploitation and who go
missing from home or care are given the help needed to keep them safe. Senior
leaders ensure that everyone is working together to protect these children.
 Children looked after live with skilled carers who go the extra mile to make sure
that their needs are met. All professionals make sure that these childrens parents
are still a large part of their childs life. They are involved in decisions, planning
for the future and seeing their children as often as possible.
 When children need to be adopted, they are quickly found a suitable family, who
will care for them in the future. Children are given life story books and other
memorabilia to help them to remember their life journey.
 Young people leaving the care system are helped and supported by familiar social
workers or by specialist staff, to ensure a good start into adulthood. Care leavers
do well in education or training and all their health needs are met. Personal
advisers make sure that young people have somewhere safe and suitable to live.
 Senior managers are constantly looking at ways to help and protect children and
young people sooner rather than later. They have exciting ideas about how to do
this. Senior managers also make sure that all staff receive good training to ensure
that the support that they offer is excellent.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Children and young people identified as requiring help and protection receive a swift,
responsive and effective service that protects them from harm. Inspectors saw
evidence of consistently good, well-coordinated practice across all services. Focus on
Practice enables effective relationships between workers and families to flourish,
while managing risks.
Children benefit from committed, enthusiastic and well-trained social workers who
are well motivated to deliver creative and effective interventions that support
children and their families, while managing risk. Very low caseloads enable workers
to provide a solid, individualised whole-family approach. Advanced and specialist
practitioners and family therapists embedded in locality teams facilitate case
reflection. They mentor and guide social workers, and provide effective direct work in
helping families to focus on solutions to their problems.
Early-help services are a significant strength, providing comprehensive and farreaching services that enable children and families to access the right service at the
right time, thus avoiding the need for statutory services.
Comprehensive and analytical social work assessments effectively identify risks and
needs. Through the use of an evaluated national model, risks, strengths and
complicating factors are understood well, resulting in the provision of appropriate
help for children and families. Family histories are well documented and used well in
order to understand the experiences of children and young people. However,
strategy discussions are not always timely, nor do they involve all relevant partners.
Good-quality child in need and child protection plans robustly support successful
interventions that keep children as their central focus. Social work practice is patient,
tenacious and respectful. The quality of social work practice is consistently good or
outstanding, and demonstrates effective and thoughtful engagement with families.
Comprehensive additional consideration is given to children with specific needs, such
as those at risk of female genital mutilation , sexual exploitation and going missing.
Children benefit from swift identification of risk, and effective multi-agency
arrangements ensure that they are safe and that their needs are met.
Management oversight is a clear strength. Social workers receive regular, reflective
supervision providing clear direction and a shared ownership of risk from front line to
senior management.


Inspection findings

The Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea (RBKC) has significantly invested
in and prioritised early-help and prevention services to families, and these are
clearly making a positive difference to childrens lives. By adopting a systemic,
whole-family approach and working to a shared vision through the Focus on
Practice model, RBKC has achieved early support, early change and early
improvement in families lives. Confident, knowledgeable, well-trained and
supported practitioners deliver highly effective early-help services.


An extensive and far-reaching integrated early-help offer includes dedicated
early-help teams, childrens centres, Troubled Families, Families Forward and a
range of other impressive initiatives focusing on families that need targeted
help. An effective focus on achieving positive outcomes is rooted within earlyhelp services. For example, each family member is asked to complete an
outcome-based assessment of their needs. This informs an overall assessment
of their need for help, and enables practitioners and families to know when
intervention has been successful.


Thorough analysis of the services offered by children's centres resulted in the
development of the Best Start in Life programme. This multi-agency
programme meets the identified additional needs of parents accessing universal
services, such as nursery provision or stay and play. Children's centres also
offer targeted support to individual families. They use local intelligence and
data to identify vulnerable groups, such as families negatively affected by
housing benefit reforms. Volunteering, adult learning and Pathways to Work
programmes are further strengths of the provision offered by childrens centres.


A very large number of children are receiving help at the earliest opportunity,
reducing the risks of problems escalating at a later stage. Scrutiny of RBKCs
own figures demonstrates that referrals to early-help services have risen year
on year, with last years increase standing at 22%. Services are co-located with
social work teams, and this supports a shared understanding of thresholds and
promotes a culture of working together to meet families needs. Early-help
practitioners have a mixed skill set, caseloads are very low at an average of
eight families, and designated specialists provide families with effective support
to ensure that children fully benefit from the services offered.


Good-quality assessments and effective plans and interventions mean that
families identified needs for early help are well met. Workers in early-help
services are tenacious in their work with families. Their highly motivated and
flexible approach ensures that families receive effective services that provide
the right help at the right time. The need for escalation to social work services
is, therefore, effectively prevented in a large majority of cases. At the time of
the inspection, the step-up rate to social care was 15%, with a re-referral rate
of just 6%. This is very low and further evidence that families are getting the
right help at the earliest opportunity.


services. For example, childrens centres use multi-agency meetings to share
local intelligence and to target services to meet need. An exciting and ambitious
project, which is part of the Focus on Practice programme, is attempting to
predict, by analysing data from various sources, which young people are more
likely to be late entries into the care system. The offer of targeted support is
then given to children and families at the earliest opportunity.
care services directly and quickly through six locality-based, and one hospital
social care team. Managers report that workers know their locality and the
services within it very well, and this enables appropriate services to be swiftly
provided. Cases of children or young people requiring additional support
identified by the police are managed directly through the tri-borough MultiAgency Safeguarding Hub (MASH). All contacts with social care are regarded as
referrals, and are therefore considered by a qualified duty social worker.
Inspectors observed that decision making at the point of duty was undertaken
swiftly, and that some cases were appropriately referred to the MASH for
additional information gathering before a final decision was made. Depending
on the seriousness of the concern, the duty social worker rates referrals to the
MASH as blue, red, amber, or green (BRAG), and the BRAG rating indicates the
deadline for checks to be completed, which minimises the delay in meeting
childrens needs.
their additional needs through the MASH. The co-location of staff in the MASH
enables highly effective gathering of information, which social workers filter and
analyse to inform their recommendations for action. Strong management
oversight ensures that these MASH recommendations are safe, with appropriate
BRAG ratings indicating the level of response required by social care. However,
the service provided is akin to a multi-agency information-sharing centre rather
than a hub for decision making. In a small number of cases seen, this built in
delay. For example, in one case reviewed by inspectors the police referral was
slow to reach the MASH. The MASH checks then took longer than timescales
designated by the BRAG and this in turn led to a delay in the local authority
being able to act.
that all recommendations are responded to swiftly once they are received from
the MASH. Comprehensive managerial collaboration and senior management
oversight ensures that thresholds for child protection enquiries or step down to
early intervention services are correctly applied. This ensures that children and
young people receive the right help quickly. Social workers see children, young
people and their families promptly, and effectively identify a plan of work
suitable to their needs. In some cases, depending upon their complexity, more
detailed assessments are undertaken. Any decisions relating to assessments
and all assessment outcomes are subject to strict management oversight and
scrutiny.


commence child protection enquiries were appropriately made in all cases seen
by inspectors. This is a very high level of social work practice. However,
strategy discussions are not always timely, nor do they consistently involve
appropriate partners. In some cases observed by inspectors, social workers
used information that they received from partners through a telephone
discussion and agreed actions through a phone conversation with the police. In
others, strategy discussions solely involved a telephone discussion with the
police (Recommendation).
and families out of hours. However, a single social worker on duty at any one
time limits the level of service it is able to provide. The team responds to crises
and takes immediate action to keep children safe. However, inspectors saw
examples of children placed in care without b.eing seen by a social worker, with
carers receiving no written information to help them to care effectively for the
child. RBKC accepts this as an area for further development (Recommendation).
significant strength of RBKC. The locality teams structures enable all social
workers to undertake the full range of childrens social work for each individual
child, potentially from duty referral to adoption. Caseloads are by design very
low, averaging eight families per social worker This creates an environment in
which good social work can flourish. Consequently, children, young people and
their families benefit from long-term, stable and meaningful relationships with
their social worker. Advanced and specialist practitioners and family therapists
embedded within each team provide additional mentoring and guidance for
social workers, as well as effective direct work helping families to focus on
solutions to their problems.
routinely influences decision making. Children are customarily seen and seen
alone during assessments, and the way that this is consistently achieved is very
good social work practice. Social workers devise innovative and creative ways
of engaging children to obtain their views, including the use of puppets and
comics. Social workers are tenacious and persistent when building relationships
with children, young people and their wider families. They make numerous and
varied attempts to engage with absent fathers, and where they are successful,
fathers and wider family members are productively engaged with assessments
and the delivery of services. This is exceptionally strong social work practice.


effectively identify risks and needs in almost all cases that were seen. Based on
an evaluated national model, assessments meticulously identify risks, strengths
and areas of uncertainty. They consistently result in appropriate responses, and
the provision of appropriate services to manage the assessed level of risk.
Social workers undertaking assessments take into account previous social work
involvement and family history, making good use of chronologies to understand
the childs lived experience. The cumulative impact of harm by neglect is
recognised, and chronologies are kept up to date to provide historical context
that suitably informs decision making.
national guidance of 45 days to complete an assessment, and 15 days to initial
child protection conferences (ICPC). This was approved by the Secretary of
State for Education and means that RBKC is not bound by Working Together to
Safeguard Children 2015 in this respect. Perusal of RBKCs own figures indicates
that, in the last 12 months, 76% of assessments were completed within a 45day timescale. Therefore this dispensation is used for only a small minority of
cases. Inspectors saw strict management oversight and a clear rationale
recorded underpinning each decision.
independent oversight and to make decision making consistent, a family
support child protection adviser (FSCPA) reviews each childs circumstances
after the team manager has quality assured the assessment and made a
recommendation to proceed to an ICPC. Social workers immediately put in
place supportive services as risks and needs emerge, rather than waiting for
their assessment to be completed. A high number of child protection enquiries
under Section 47 of the Children Act 1989 therefore do not lead to a multiagency ICPC, with only 20% (20142015) progressing to conference.
According to RBKCs own figures, the multi-agency partnership has highly
successfully and in a carefully planned way reduced the rates of children
subject to a child protection plan from 35.8 per 10,000 (20132014) to 22.9
per 10,000 children (20142015).
protection plans robustly support good quality interventions in a large majority
of cases. Plans are suitably specific and timely. Outcomes and measurements of
success are clearly defined, enabling families to understand what is required of
them and to recognise success when it happens. Plans identify who is
responsible for delivering each part of the plan and encourage the family to
take ownership of actions to improve their childrens lives. Contingency
planning is evident in each case file, and social workers explain clearly to
families what the potential consequences may be if change is not achieved.
However, this was not crystallised as part of the written child protection plan in
a very small number of cases, and this could potentially leave some families
unclear about the consequences of a failure to change.


and participation. This ensures that they are effective fora in which to share
information, assess risk and need, and develop a coherent plan to protect
children. The use of plain language ensures that families understand what is of
concern and what needs to change. FSCPAs are effective in chairing
conferences and they engage well with parents. FSCPAs identify areas of good
practice and escalate practice concerns within relevant partner agencies.
However, this information is not routinely collated to inform and improve
practice standards, which is a missed opportunity. Children and young people
have access to an independent advocate so that they can attend conferences
and express their views. Although the take-up rate for this service is low, RBKC
is taking steps to improve communication between social workers and
advocates before conferences, to promote their use.
cases reviewed by inspectors, supervision is regular and decisive, providing
clear direction and preventing drift. Recommendations from previous
supervisions are reviewed, new information is shared and clear decisions are
made. Managers role in quality assuring assessments is evident from case files,
with supervision providing clear guidance on progressing the case. Social
workers told inspectors that they feel well supported by their line managers and
senior managers alike. They receive comprehensive monthly supervision from
line managers, and can seek further support and guidance from advanced and
specialist practitioners, and family therapists who provide additional case
reflection. The Focus on Practice model is highly valued by social workers as it
allows additional group reflection sessions. Inspectors saw examples of regular
and ongoing senior manager- and director-level oversight and planning in
complex cases. This makes social workers feel safe when managing risk, and
they describe an exemplary working culture where risk is shared with senior
managers.
in need and child protection plans, who benefit from collaborative
commissioning within the tri-borough as well as local interventions. Many
services are highly innovative, such as the tri-borough Action for Change
programme that is working successfully with an identified group of parents to
break the cycle of children being repeatedly removed from their care. This
project is highly valued by those parents, who stated that it gave them hope
and was helping us to be better parents. Similarly, the Families Forward Team
provides highly effective services to support children, young people and their
families on the edges of care.


management of significant issues of harm by adults are effectively considered
within formal settings, such as multi-agency risk assessment conferences
(MARAC) and multi-agency public protection arrangements (MAPPA) meetings.
These meetings are effective in sharing information, identifying risks and
developing appropriate responses to protect individuals. In cases seen by
inspectors, the use of MARAC had effectively engaged partners in managing
risk to adult victims of domestic abuse, while ensuring that the safety of their
children remains paramount.
where domestic abuse is an identified issue. Significant efforts are made to
engage perpetrators who are enabled to work with family therapists to help
establish safe and positive relationships with their children. The local authority
appropriately identified a gap in commissioned services, as existing services
only provide interventions to perpetrators who recognise that they need help.
Consequently, specialised domestic abuse workers are being embedded to
extend further the reach of locality teams.
risk of female genital mutilation, risk of accusations of spirit possession, risk of
honour-based violence and risk of radicalisation, with well-coordinated triborough arrangements ensuring an effective response from specialist staff. For
example, a creative pilot across the tri-borough embeds child protection
advisers within maternity clinics to raise awareness sensitively and to approach
women subjected to or at risk of female genital mutilation. When vulnerable
women have given birth to or are expecting a female child, this triggers an
appropriate MASH check and specialised social work assessment. This response
has been highly effective in identifying a number of children at risk, and
children are protected through subsequent child protection investigations where
these are assessed as necessary.
children and young people are engaging in risk-taking behaviour. These
meetings follow an evaluated national model by effectively bringing together
key partners to identify and plan strategies for reducing risk. On case files
sampled by inspectors, these meetings were successful in managing risk and,
where risk could not be managed this led to decisive action to protect the
young person. This is outstanding social work practice.


risk is clearly identified and a broad range of services is used to work with
young people to reduce risk. Senior managers have a clear and highly focused
line of sight of children at risk. They receive weekly reports from both the
missing childrens coordinator and from the child sexual exploitation lead
strategic officer. This officer oversees all cases of exploitation, provides social
workers with guidance and support and, where necessary, chairs multi-agency
meetings to manage risk. RBKC has recognised the need to analyse trends in
the source of referrals, identify any partners who are not systematically
reporting children who go missing from home, and appropriately target
awareness raising. For children at risk of child sexual exploitation, the monthly
multi-agency tri-borough missing and sexually exploited (MASE) meeting
effectively identifies, maps, and tracks vulnerable young people, then
intervenes to reduce risk. Inspectors saw impressive multi-agency analytical
work using technology to identify a dangerous perpetrator linked to a number
of vulnerable children. Such information informs police disruption activities and
the meeting effectively monitors impact.
Gangs Unit, located within the MASH, uses outreach gang workers and a sexual
exploitation specialist to work specifically with girls exposed to exploitation
through gangs, the most prevalent form of exploitation in the area. An
embedded analyst identifies trends and patterns, and enables prevention
activities to focus on hotspots, which assists proactive early intervention and
disruption. The level of gang-related violence has substantially reduced over a
four-year period, demonstrating the highly effective impact of the units work.
assessed and that appropriate interventions are put in place. The local authority
has focused its energy on ensuring that children receive a timely return home
interview. However, in a small minority of cases, these were not always evident
on childrens files. Where children and young people refuse to engage, it is
unclear how risks are identified and managed. To obtain good information from
the return home interview, RBKC asks children and young people to identify
who they would want to be interviewed by. RBKC recognises that they need to
make more use of the intelligence from return home interviews to aggregate
patterns and trends and identify hotspots (Recommendation).
of children missing from education. Children removed from the school roll,
whose destinations are not known or cannot be identified following reasonable
enquiries, are tracked by the attendance (statutory action), child employment
and children in entertainment, elective home education and children missing
education, including exclusion from school (ACE) team which carries out checks
including visits to last known addresses. Of the 51 such children referred during
the 2015/16 autumn term, 88% cases had been resolved and closed at the
time of the inspection.


appropriately made for children permanently excluded. These are managed well
by the ACE team and appropriate placements of 25 hours education per week
are secured promptly within six days of exclusion. Attendance of pupils in
alternative provision was good at 91% in 2014/15. Managed moves of pupils at
risk of exclusion are administered well by schools, and numbers of permanent
exclusions are therefore low and reducing. Fixed-term exclusions are lower than
the national average for all schools. TBAP also provides alternative provision on
a dual-registration basis, with schools appropriately ensuring that pupils receive
who opt for home education, and almost all accept a visit to ensure that
childrens work is of an appropriate standard. At the time of the inspection, 36
children were electively home educated, half of whom were previously
attending school. Only once in the last three years has recourse to attendance
proceedings been necessary.
across the tri-borough in identifying individuals who are at risk, assessing the
nature and extent of that risk, and developing support plans to divert people
away from terrorism and extremism. The Tri-borough Prevent Steering Group
provides local oversight with representatives from a range of shared council
services and external partner organisations. The Prevent team receives all
radicalisation concerns identified through childrens services, and coordinates a
response that may include a referral to channel panel if risks are established.
arrangements is delivered by a knowledgeable, dedicated worker who
undertakes all assessments and offers continuing support to children and
families. In cases sampled, RBKC meets its statutory requirements and
additional effective and innovative awareness raising takes place on a regular
basis, including targeted work with GPs, language schools, independent schools
and border authority links. This has led to an increase in enquiries and referrals
in relation to private fostering arrangements. Awareness raising campaigns are
responsive to language differences and diversity, and appropriately raise
awareness of potential links to female genital mutilation, sexual exploitation
and honour-based violence.


Social workers inform young people of their right to become looked after, and
suitable accommodation is found when they are unable to return home. The
local authority uses bed and breakfast accommodation as a last resort for short
periods of time, although inspectors saw an example of bed and breakfast used
for a period of two weeks and this is not appropriate. Although they are seen
regularly, no formal risk assessments are completed for this very vulnerable
group of young people. Potential risks are therefore unknown in respect of the
environment that they are living in or any additional steps needed to keep them
safe. RBKC acknowledges that it does not hold general data on the number of
authority to know what has been effective in reuniting families, as well as to
ensure that there is sufficient appropriate accommodation for this group of
young people.
allegations against adults in a position of trust have been revised and put firmly
in place since October 2014. The response to allegations is appropriate, and
enquiries are purposeful with good communication between the designated
officer and partner agencies.
is clearly, carefully and sensitively considered throughout services delivered to
children, young people and their families. Workers understand very well issues
of diversity, and this positively impacts on the work that they do with children.
Social workers promote positive cultural identities, and explore faith and
religious beliefs. Family therapists are used to excellent effect to understand
cultural tensions between children and their parents, and explore familyfocused solutions. Where necessary, the use of interpreters has facilitated
relationship building with the family. Social work allocation considers, and is
sensitive to, the gender needs of children lacking a male role model.
council wards in England. Where concerns are identified for children of powerful
and privileged parents, risks are managed very well. Social workers serving the
locality state that child protection is child protection no matter who the family
is. Social workers and managers demonstrate a clear understanding of the level
of sensitivity in these cases and potential barriers to engagement and
information sharing, for example from private health and education services
that are not LSCB partners, as well as from potential media interest. Social
workers are confident and well supported to protect children who live in
privileged circumstances and ensure that the child is at the centre of any
assessments undertaken and interventions made.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Outstanding

Summary
Children and young people looked after in RBKC receive an outstanding service.
Practice is consistently of a very high standard and this leads to positive outcomes
for all children looked after. Case records provide a clear history of each childs
journey through care. A well-embedded, whole-family approach underpins all
interventions with families. Social workers know their children extremely well and
develop close relationships with them. Highly effective risk management processes
and extensive support services enable children to remain safely at home with their
families. Timely decisions about when to bring children into care are always based on
very robust assessments. Social workers make significant efforts to identify
alternative carers within the extended family network, and the extensive use of
family group conferences supports this process.
The vast majority of children looked after live with carers who are tenacious in
offering consistent care. Children with complex emotional and behavioural needs
receive highly effective support from a variety of therapeutic options, and this
promotes stability. Health needs of children looked after are extraordinarily well met
by the dedicated looked after childrens nurse, who ensures that services are
provided by RBKCs health partners even when children are placed out of area. RBKC
has a large proportion of children looked after who are unaccompanied minors, and
the local authority has ensured that all of these children receive extremely effective
and coordinated help and support from a highly knowledgeable, specialist team.
All children looked after benefit from rigorous care planning processes. Plans are
progressed swiftly and appropriately and in the best interests of the child. In all
cases seen, IROs offer meticulous oversight via timely, regular reviews of the care
plan. Children looked after do not routinely benefit from access to independent
visitors and for some children, who have no contact with family, this would provide
an additional layer of support. Appropriate consideration of planning for permanence
is undertaken for the vast majority of children looked after at their second review.
Family finding undertaken for children placed for adoption is vigorous. Substantial
individual work with children facilitates effective matching with adoptive parents.
Although the numbers of children leaving care through adoption are low, they
constitute a high proportion of a small care population. Well-resourced services
provide excellent support to care leavers that prepares them effectively for
independence. Care and time is taken by social workers and personal advisers to
develop consistent, trusting relationships with young people. Almost all care leavers
are in appropriate accommodation and are prepared well for independence.


Inspection findings
services for children looked after are centralised and amalgamated as a result
of tri-borough arrangements. This achieves economies of scale, improvements
in the consistency and quality of practice, flexibility in the use of resources, and
an enhanced profile across the London region. Examples of excellence include
the tri-borough adoption and fostering service, a connected persons team, the
independent review service, legal services for children, the management and
scrutiny of permanence arrangements and use of the public law outline (PLO),
and placement commissioning for children looked after.
looked after in RBKC is supported by continuously effective early-help
interventions and edge of care support, together with a firmly established ethos
of risk assessment and management. As a result, the population of children
looked after has fallen from 140 in 20112012 to 105 in 20142015. The rate
of 38 per 10,000 population is now well below the England average (60 per
enables children to remain with their families, and extensive support services
make it safe for them to do so.
enables RBKC to understand fully any patterns and trends that have impacted
upon the current cohort. RBKCs own figures show almost one third of the
looked after population are unaccompanied minors, originating from a wide
range of countries. These children benefit from extremely effective and
coordinated help and support from a dedicated team, which swiftly ensures that
they have access to health services and legal advice. As a result, their life
opportunities are significantly enhanced. Identifying appropriate placements to
meet such a wide variety of cultural needs is a challenge, but inspectors saw
examples of carers and social workers tenaciously ensuring that they could
meet the diverse needs of almost all children.
prior to the decision to look after children. Assessments carefully evaluate risks
and work with the strengths of the family to identify potential alternatives to
care. This ensures that only those children who need to be are looked after.
Parallel planning is rigorously and systematically applied. Family group
conferences (FGCs) are used swiftly, both to inform care planning and to
identify extended family members who are willing to care for the child. Viability
assessments are clear and of a good quality, with appropriate management
oversight and sign off. Consistent management oversight is enabled by triborough arrangements where legal proceedings are required.


tri-borough care proceedings manager, ensuring timely placements for children
and effective reporting to the strategic tri-borough management team.
According to their own figures, timeliness in care proceedings in RBKC for the
current year stands at 26 weeks, and further improvement is anticipated as
longstanding cases are concluded. Independent scrutiny and analysis of delay is
provided by the University of East Anglia, and this enables further targeted
improvement in timeliness. Delays are extensively tracked, and most can be
reasonably attributed to complex or international cases.
Child and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) reports that the
tri-borough is leading the way in the region. Cafcass also state that in RBKC
the quality of pre-proceedings work is very high. Parents know their rights.
Letters sent before proceedings set out in plain language the concerns of the
professionals, and identify what actions the parents need to take. Continual
reinforcement in all meetings relating to the child means that parents know
clearly what is expected of them and the potential consequences if expectations
are not met.
process is the Multi-agency Family Assessment Service (MFAS), which provides
comprehensive and evaluative multi-disciplinary parenting assessments to
inform evidence-based future planning. Feedback from a parent about this
process was extremely positive, as she felt fully engaged and, more
importantly, did not feel prejudged.
available to them evidently benefit children looked after. All children looked
after see their social worker regularly and almost all are seen alone. They have
extensive opportunities to express their views and to contribute meaningfully to
their plans. This is an outstanding level of social work practice.
collaborative working between all agencies to progress childrens care plans,
and this is a significant strength of the organisation. Social workers and multidisciplinary professionals are tenacious in engaging with parents, and recognise
the vital importance of fully consulting with significant adults in the life of a
child looked after. In almost all cases, this leads to effective working
partnerships. For instance, persistent and continuous nurturing of a relationship
with a mother, in one case seen, led to the successful rehabilitation of two
children, despite an initial negative prognosis.


rationale, involvement of the IRO, ratified by senior managers, and in all cases
sampled reunification was the right decision. Extensive bespoke support
packages are used to meet the needs of the whole family, and to ensure the
success of the return home plan. These include access to family therapists and
commissioning of specialist services where required.
and improved upon. The Permanence Board, together with a dedicated
permanence coordinator, oversees a broad range of initiatives: for example,
clear permanence guidance for staff, a sub-clause in independent fostering
agency contracts, allowing older children to stay put, and assistance for social
workers with childrens permanence reports.
permanence coordinator, some commencing even before birth. Permanence
planning meetings, overseen by managers, take place regularly for children
looked after and young people, so that they are matched in a timely way with
the most appropriate carers. Within RBKC, in a very high number of cases the
decision for permanence is discussed and made at the second review, although
recording of this highly important decision in a childs life is not always explicit
in review records.
almost always timely and RBKC has the best performance across the triborough at 99.7% for 20142015. Highly comprehensive reviews clearly focus
on the needs of children looked after. They lead to specific, measurable and
timed recommendations that drive the care plan, from which the intended
outcomes are very clear. Prior to a review, in almost all cases the IRO meets
with the child to gain their views, and in all cases seen they undertake midpoint monitoring to ensure that the plan is progressing appropriately.
tri-borough training, including action learning sets, and good links with
managers and staff to keep abreast of practice developments. IROs are enabled
to get to know children and young people very well and to advocate for them,
providing additional reviews in more complex situations. Identified areas for
development include improving the numbers of young people who chair their
own reviews, and a more innovative focus on overseeing young people
returning home and exiting care proceedings via supervision orders.


is very high. In 20142015, the vast majority of children had regular reviews of
their care plans (96%) and 97% of young people participated in their reviews.
There is a culture across the tri-borough of issues being resolved either at a
very early stage or via a system of informal and formal challenges, which can
lead to changes in care plans for children and young people. Reviews do not
routinely appoint independent visitors where children are eligible and would
benefit from having a suitable adult in their life (Recommendation).
sophisticated understanding and approach to the placement needs of the whole
population of children looked after, and work is progressing on identified future
developments to enhance placement choice. A well-established and
experienced placements team ensures careful planning and sensitive matching
for children looked after where matching is not possible within the in-house
family placement service. Children are appropriately placed with their brothers
and sisters, and have carefully arranged contact with their families. Strong and
effective relationships exist with independent providers, and the tri-borough has
been influential in commissioning tailored placements for young people with
specialised needs.
placements, for example accompanying children and young people to school
and contact where their existing carer is unable to do so, or providing cover
where a foster carer is also acting as a mentor for young people involved in
drug and gangland culture. As a result of being amalgamated, the tri-borough
fostering service has more in-house placement choice, with wider flexibility to
utilise staff, resources and carers. An ambitious and proactive fostering
recruitment programme commenced in October 2015. This followed gaps
identified by the tri-borough service in in-house placement choice for young
people with challenging behaviour, family groups, children with disabilities and
children requiring long-term fostering or permanence.
focusing on their strengths and areas for development. A well-organised and
independent tri-borough connected persons team is in place to respond in a
timely and thorough way to all connected persons and special guardianship
assessments.
Retention of foster carers is therefore strong. All carers interviewed spoke very
highly about their supervising social workers. Shared care in fostering is used in
a child-focused way to support placement stability. Delegated authority is in
place for foster carers to take some day-to-day decisions so that children and
young people can easily participate in the activities that they enjoy.


people are not immediately placed for permanence. Inspectors saw evidence of
appropriate and careful matching of children to long-term or permanent carers,
and every effort being made to find the appropriate cultural and ethnic match.
Children and young people are helped to form strong attachments with their
carers via appropriate therapeutic support. Life story books reviewed by
inspectors were consistently of a good standard, with one that was exceptional.
settled placements with consistent care. Latest published figures show that the
percentage of children looked after with three or more placements was 9%
during the year ending 31 March 2014, which was better than the England
average of 11%. In relation to children looked after in the same placement for
at least two years, the latest published data show the performance for the year
ending 31 March 2014 as 69%, which is slightly better than the national
average of 67%, and recent local data for quarter 3 for 20152016 shows a
further improvement to 76%.
specific and measurable. Priority is given to meeting the childs needs rather
than just the completion of formal paperwork. Childrens plans are routinely
considered and recommendations tracked in supervision sessions, and in all
meetings related to the child this leads to actions to progress the care plan that
are tracked to completion.
arrangements are the subject of regular reviews to ensure that they remain
positive experiences for the child looked after. Strenuous efforts are made to
trace absent parents and to seek their views when it is safe to do so. Social
workers ensure that, even when parents have stopped engaging in contact,
they provide parents with regular updates to try to encourage communication.
services. The looked after childrens nurse rigorously maintains oversight of all
childrens health progress, no matter where they live. The service knows all the
children and young people well, so that their individual health needs receive
appropriate and prompt interventions when needed.


initial assessment in RBKC. This ensures both close monitoring and health
needs assessments of a consistently high quality. Performance in relation to
annual health reviews stands at 100% completed within timescales, and all
children and young people undertake strengths and difficulties questionnaires
as part of their annual assessment. This close individual monitoring enables the
swift provision of services when needed. Impressively, when children looked
after who live out of the borough develop a need for a specialist health
assessment, they return to the borough for assured timely assessments, so that
there are no delays in health service provision. This is highly effective corporate
parenting.
have identified needs relating to drugs and alcohol, sexual health, parenting,
low self-esteem or are at risk of child sexual exploitation. Specific partnerships
and local agreements ensure that the unique health needs of unaccompanied
minors receive prompt provision of services to meet their particular needs.
improving the educational outcomes of children and young people looked after.
It works well with schools both within and outside the borough, and RBKC
benefits from the expertise and experience available through the wider triborough arrangements. At the time of this inspection, 98% of children were
attending good or better schools with none attending an inadequate school.
The virtual school attends the Care Placement and Planning Group where the
educational needs of the individual child and the quality of schools are given
very high priority when considering care placements. It also provides one-toone tuition to help unaccompanied minors to prepare for school if they become
looked after during school holidays, and it provides weekly English tuition
throughout the year to boost language skills.
some are exceptional. The virtual school provides training to ensure that social
workers have the skills and knowledge to question schools on the improvement
targets and progress of children looked after. The virtual school maintains an
accurate database of childrens attendance and progress, enabling effective
tracking and prompt intervention through weekly child in focus meetings when
individual children pose a cause for concern.
it is used to support children looked after according to individual needs.
Targeted support is particularly effective in helping children to improve their
English and mathematics, and a range of effective projects and initiatives
encourage foster carers to support childrens education and to encourage
children to read. For example, children receive carefully selected, ageappropriate books on a termly basis, based on childrens interests, which they
read with their foster carers.


been looked after for 12 months or more, are low, making statistical
comparisons difficult. Over three quarters of children looked after in the
borough have some form of special educational needs. During the last
academic year, the cohort of pupils at Key Stage 1 did not achieve national
standards but they did make good progress, and one achieved the targets set
in reading, writing and mathematics. The targeted use of pupil premium
funding led to well-coordinated support for pupils at Key Stage 2 and Key Stage
training at the end of year 11. In 20142015, the entire cohort progressed into
some form of education or training, with almost all completing their courses.
Young people aged 16 to18 are now monitored more closely by the virtual
school through monthly education, employment and training panel meetings.
Weekly child in focus meetings identify young people who need targeted 1:1
support through designated youth services. At the time of the inspection, there
was only one pupil in alternative provision within a mainstream school, with
none on reduced timetables or missing education.
academic years, although unauthorised absence is higher for pupils placed
outside the authority. The virtual school tracks attendance daily, and this
enables the virtual school to review attendance support and plan alternative
action more swiftly when concerns about individual pupils become apparent.
provide valuable opportunities for young people to represent the views of
children looked after, and to discuss matters affecting them with the corporate
parenting group. Topics of discussion include RBKCs pledge and the views of
young people on matters, such as safeguarding and online safety.
child sexual exploitation or who go missing lead to individualised support
packages to alleviate concerns. The children-missing coordinator follows up
with the allocated social workers when child looked after goes missing. In
addition, the childs IRO receives notification of the missing episode and will
ensure that a return home interview is undertaken and that the risks are
evaluated. Inspectors saw evidence of very effective follow-up work and service
provision during case tracking, which has led to significant reduction of risk for
children where sexual exploitation is a feature of concern. In one case, the
parent of a child at risk of sexual exploitation gave very positive feedback about
the diversionary interventions provided that led to a significant reduction in risk,
and a successful return home.


young people to enhance their social skills and to promote their interests.
These include hobbies, as well as educational enrichment activities. Social
workers regularly attend childrens activities, such as concerts and awards
ceremonies, and this helps further cement their positive relationships. In all
cases, social workers spoken to take pride in the progress of their children and
talked with relish of achievements made by children looked after.
and parents with diverse backgrounds. Robust assessment of diversity issues
means that identified needs are well understood and promoted extremely well.
The Children with Disabilities service is very well-resourced and children with
learning difficulties and autism significantly benefit from the work of the
Behaviour and Family Support Team, who work with families to manage
challenging behaviour and keep children with them. As a result, RBKC has only
three children placed in specialist residential placements, as the service is able
to increase the confidence of parents and carers to manage such behaviours
and to maintain children with a severe disability in their home environment.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is outstanding
Securing permanence through adoption is given a very high priority. Adoption is
managed within an overarching tri-borough service and this arrangement is
highly effective for RBKCs children looked after. A very innovative approach is
both enabled and stimulated by sharing this strategic function. The
arrangement provides both economies of scale in the use of scarce resources,
and an environment of collective creativity that is demonstrated by consistently
strong professional practice.
permanence option is considered for children at the earliest possible stage.
Adoption is considered for all children at this time. This way of working is
threaded throughout the tri-boroughs clear understanding of permanence, and
adoption is given the highest priority. For example, this is demonstrated by the
work of the Permanence Project, which is chaired by the DCS and ensures that
proactive work is undertaken with the courts to secure agreement for family
finding before a placement order is made.
of the wider adoption market is demonstrated by managers of the adoption
service. They routinely reflect upon and measure their performance against
both national indicators and that of other London boroughs. A comprehensive
range of tracking and monitoring systems for adoption performance includes
detailed analysis of any issues affecting timeliness and an understanding of the
needs of individual children.
subject to a plan for adoption. Social workers, including senior managers, have
a detailed knowledge of all children, what is happening for them and why.
Progress made by individual children awaiting adoption is closely monitored and
placement options are continuously explored.
additional posts. For example, the move to appoint to the role of a permanence
coordinator is highly insightful in improving adoption performance. Regular
permanence planning meeting minutes demonstrate exceptional practice in the
rigour and thought put into highly effective planning.
level of adoption activity over the past 12 months is relatively low in number,
although proportional to the looked after population overall. Nine children have
progressed through all or part of the adoption process. Five children have been
successfully adopted, and active family finding is taking place for the four
remaining children.


three key indicators. Very high levels of performance are being achieved when
the local authority receives court authority to place a child, and the time taken
to match a child to an adoptive family averages 69 days, as against the national
threshold of 125 days. Children who wait less than 18 months to move from
care to an adoptive family show much improved performance at 67% achieved
over the last three years. This is better than statistical neighbours at 50% and
the England average of 51%. Time taken from children entering care to being
placed with an adoptive family is less effective at 640 days set against the
current threshold of 547 days, although this figure is affected by the time taken
for a highly complex case set against the low numbers being adopted.
awaiting a match, of whom 18 have been approved in the current year. The triborough ensures that adopters are available for inter-agency placements, and
routinely uses the adoption register and other national matching fora for both
children and adopters waiting.
standard, providing clear analysis of the adopters ability to meet an adopted
childs needs. Adopters spoken to were very positive about the recruitment and
assessment process. Delays in approval are mostly due to external issues, and
the service is actively working to improve timeliness in adopter assessments.
The impact of any delay has been minimal on adopters and children.
foster-to-adopt and concurrent arrangements are discussed with every adopter,
and the first concurrent adopter has recently been recruited. Some adopter
assessments have been fast tracked to prevent delay, including a specific
foster-to-adopt match that is a possibility for second-time adopters.
ways of working. This includes working with an external agency on recruitment,
enhancing the capacity of adopters to meet childrens support needs, and
training and equipping adopters to feel confident. Thirteen mentors have been
recruited across the tri-borough to support adopters from the outset of the
recruitment process, and adopters spoke highly of the value that they place on
the mentoring support offered.
training, and they reported that they feel more confident as a result. Innovative
workshops have included the opportunity for adopters to work with a
psychologist and to explore information that increases their openness when
matching, particularly in relation to mental health issues.


chairs who bring a wealth of adoption and safeguarding experience. Very clear
quality assurance processes are firmly in place and adopters spoken to confirm
that the process is an exceptionally rigorous one. Prospective adopter reports
and childpermanence reports are consistently very strong, with appropriate
detail and a good level of analysis. Thorough and well-considered panel
minutes and agency decision maker decisions in all cases demonstrate that
both the panel and the decision-making processes work extremely well.
any issues that impact negatively on performance and swiftly makes any
adjustments required. For example, they noticed a slower application for
adoption orders for children in inter-agency placements, once the family-finding
worker had withdrawn. To address this, the service now ensures that the family
finder remains involved until the adoption application has been submitted.
commissioned service. The service includes birth-parent counselling, support
and advice including literacy help with letter box contact, and information
sharing between an adopted child, their birth family and adoptive family. The
service also supervises face-to-face contact between adopted children and birth
parents where this has been assessed to be in the childs best interests.
range of provision. Adopters are highly aware of their entitlement to adoption
support, and they spoke positively about the support offered. Adoption support
plans were consistently good. The adoption support fund for individual children
is used very well.
families. Life story work is of a very high quality; it is clear, colourful and jargon
free. Social workers are highly skilled in undertaking direct work with children,
helping them to understand their histories, and enabling them to transfer their
attachments to their new family. This allows children to settle quickly, with very
low adoption disruptions. There have been only two in the last two years.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is outstanding.
resourced very well, and a particularly strong feature is the care and time taken
by social workers and personal advisers to develop trusting and caring
relationships with young people. Personal advisers are confident in their work
and are supported well to improve their practice. Almost all care leavers are in
appropriate accommodation and are prepared well for independence. The IST is
in contact with almost all care leavers and relentless in supporting young
people to improve their outcomes, not least, those who have drug and alcohol
problems, who are in the judicial system or those who find retaining education,
training or work placements challenging. A high proportion of care leavers
progress successfully to higher education, but not enough advantage is yet
taken of the opportunities offered through apprenticeships
of care leavers exceptionally well. Care leavers in RBKC have a highly distinctive
profile that is well understood by the service. According to the councils current
figures, over 50% of the looked after population is over the age of 16,
compared to 20% nationally and 30% across London. RBKC has 41 young
people looked after, aged 16 to 18, and 126 care leavers aged 19 and over, of
whom 82 are 19 to 21 years of age. A distinctive feature of the borough is that
workers and personal advisers work closely together to ensure that young
people are safe and to prepare them for transfer to IST when they reach the
age of 18.
Plans are initially prepared by social work locality teams at meetings attended
by young peoples personal advisers as well as their IROs. Plans are
appropriately reviewed every six months at meetings chaired by their IRO, until
the young person is 18. They ensure that young peoples views are listened to
and influence the plan. All 18-year-olds who transfer to IST, therefore, have
comprehensive pathway plans in place, and these address their needs well. To
ensure that a broad perspective on young peoples needs is maintained and
solutions offered to any barriers, care leaver reviews are chaired alternately by
personal advisers and senior social workers.


planning, most particularly on matters of culture and religion. Accommodation,
education and preparation for living independently are given very close
consideration, as are practical matters such as managing finances and young
peoples rights. Social workers and personal advisers pay particular attention to
young peoples emotional well-being when planning for independence, and
focus on the effectiveness of any emotional support provided. Pathway plans
are always reviewed on time. Most young people contribute to their reviews
and appreciate the opportunity provided for discussing their future, clarifying
the support that they can expect and the actions that they and personal
advisers need to take. Service managers are keen to develop alternatives and
even more innovative approaches to pathway planning that will encourage and
motivate all young people to engage fully in the process and to take increasing
personal responsibility for planning their own future.
leavers receive in RBKC is the time that social workers and personal advisers
spend developing ongoing and trusting relationships with young people, and
ensuring continuity of support. For example, for one young person who came
into care at the age of 17, the social worker is continuing to provide support
alongside the personal adviser after the young person reached the age of 18. A
clear indication of the trusting relationships established is that the IST is in
contact with 98% of care leavers. The home address of only one care leaver is
not known to the service, and staff have no concerns over the safety or wellbeing of this young person, who has always been independent, confident and
clear in their intentions. Personal advisers understand the risks and challenges
faced by care leavers very well and maintain regular contact by phone and text.
They are highly alert to changes in young peoples emotional well-being, as well
as risks to their safety. They meet young people regularly in their homes,
taking time to talk and explore emerging concerns early, should they arise.
well in their work. For example, an embedded clinical psychologist advises
social workers and personal advisers on how best to work with young people
who are particularly vulnerable, assists with complex cases and helps plan
interventions. Some 10% of 16- to 18-year-olds are identified as being at risk
of sexual exploitation and are provided with additional, well-planned and
sensitive support. The adult safeguarding officer similarly works closely with
personal advisers on complex cases where there have been safeguarding
concerns, for example in helping young people who will require additional
support to live safely when they reach the age of 21, but do not meet the
eligibility criteria for adult services. Bridging the gap between services for young
people and adults by securing appropriate support is a key factor in helping
these young people to live independently.


confident in their ability to help young people to live independently and achieve
good outcomes. Regular training on topics such as sexual exploitation,
radicalisation and adult safeguarding helps personal advisers to reflect upon
and improve their practice continuously. Supervision by senior staff provides
further valuable opportunity for reflection. For instance, of the six care leavers
identified with drug or alcohol concerns, personal advisers have been successful
in encouraging five to engage with services offered. In the case of one young
person who could not recognise that they had a problem, social workers and
personal advisers worked hard, at length and patiently, to secure the young
persons cooperation and to engage with the help offered.
not give up on young people. The three care leavers who were in custody at
the time of this inspection are supported well by their personal advisers, who
visit them regularly. Four young people came into care through being on
remand at the time of their 18th birthday and thus eligible for leaving care
support. Personal advisers work closely with the youth offending team, the
probation service, and parents and carers, and arrangements are managed well
for accommodating, supporting and ensuring that young people engage in
meaningful activities when they are released. For example, a tenancy is being
kept open for one young person so that they are not homeless on release.
Another challenging young person, with a history of troublesome behaviour,
has progressed successfully to higher education through the unstinting support
provided.
increasingly effective in engaging care leavers in education, employment and
training (EET), and improving their outcomes. At the time of the inspection,
three-quarters were EET, which is well above the average of 58% nationally. A
comparatively high proportion of care leavers  17% (22 young people) - were
in higher education, and they were supported well by personal advisers. By
contrast, only one young person was undertaking an apprenticeship. The IST
and the virtual school are working with local employers to improve the
availability of such opportunities, as well and working with children looked after
of secondary school age to raise their awareness and to encourage more to
take advantage of apprenticeship opportunities. The 12 care leavers who were
young parents at the time of this inspection were coping well with their
responsibilities.


courses and opportunities to young people who are not in education,
employment or training (NEET) or at risk of becoming NEET. Young people are
enabled to improve their skills, motivation and self-esteem through services
commissioned from staff-led mutual youth services, and a staff member
embedded within IST supports care leavers very well. The service provided is
effective in supporting two thirds of those care leavers who are NEET to
achieve positive outcomes. Care leavers who came to RBKC as unaccompanied
minors benefit significantly from English for speakers of other languages classes
provided by the virtual school. Care leavers who spoke to inspectors enjoy the
opportunity both to learn and to socialise. The way in which personal advisers
differentiated support services to work with young people who have emotional
health problems or entrenched involvement with gangs provides a further
example of their extremely high level of commitment to care leavers specific,
identified needs.
individual care leavers, including the provision of a named person to liaise with
RBKCs housing department. As a result, at the time of this inspection, 97% of
care leavers were considered to be in suitable accommodation. Very good use
is made of the accommodation options available to enable care leavers to live
semi-independently with differentiated levels of support. The semi-independent
accommodation review panel meets monthly to determine the best option for
matching levels of support identified in pathway plans to the accommodation
options available. Young people have opportunities to express their views and
preferences, supported by foster carers, social workers and personal advisers.
Care leavers are prepared very well for living independently, learning to budget,
cook and deal with issues such as basic household maintenance. Personal
advisers are quick to help young people to resolve problems, should any arise
with their accommodation or tenancies, and the housing department is highly
sensitive to the particular needs of care leavers.
accommodation for these three young people on release is a clear priority in
their pathway planning. At the time of the inspection, 13 (15%) of 19- to 21year-olds were continuing to live with their foster carers. Unaccompanied
asylum-seeking young people who spoke to inspectors confirmed their
preference for living independently as soon as possible, and this is
understandable given the circumstances that brought them to this country.
There were no young people in bed and breakfast accommodation at the time
of inspection, and it is only used as a last resort in emergencies.


routinely provided with a chronology and health history on leaving care. The
looked after childrens nurse routinely carries out health assessments before
young people transfer to the IST. Young people are encouraged to access
specialist health services. Social workers and personal advisers persevere in
encouraging care leavers, who are at first reluctant, to engage with child and
adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) or services provided by ISTs clinical
psychologist. These services are increasingly effective in supporting care
leavers who have complex emotional health needs.
evident. Young people are supported well financially by the borough, including
financial support of 6,000 for those progressing to higher education. Young
people who spoke to inspectors confirmed that they were aware of the pledge,
which is discussed during pathway plan reviews. They felt that their personal
advisers were always accessible should any aspect of their rights require
clarification.
complaint should they have a concern, and the Advocacy and Participation
Service effectively supports young people through the process. The service
aims to resolve concerns through discussion, and this helps young people to
develop valuable life skills. Examples of concerns requiring recourse to the
formal complaints procedure are rare. RBKC maintains a complaints and
compliments log to monitor care leavers views, and young people are provided
with a form to complete during pathway plan reviews on their levels of
satisfaction.
successes, and foster carers, social workers and personal advisers pay
particular attention to celebrating birthdays and special events. Young people
who support the Children in Care Council are recognised and rewarded through
trips and activities. The annual Stepping Up Awards is a public demonstration of
commitment to young people and the councils pride in their successes, and this
helps to develop care leavers confidence and self-esteem.


Leadership, management and
governance

Outstanding

Summary
RBKCs arrangements for leadership, management and governance are outstanding.
The council benefits extensively from the economies of scale and high quality of
shared services afforded by its involvement in the tri-borough agreement with both
Westminster, and Hammersmith and Fulham councils.
Tri-borough arrangements augment existing exemplary management systems within
RBKC, under the clear and charismatic leadership of the DFS, who has been pivotal
in developing Focus on Practice. A longstanding, stable and talented senior
management team provides highly effective leadership and ensures an exceptionally
high level of social work practice.
Sound governance of services is effectively delivered by the Chief Executive, elected
members and statutory partnership boards, such as the Health and Wellbeing Board.
All of these link regularly and directly to the tri-borough DCS, who manages this
complex arrangement extremely well and ensures effective oversight within a mature
culture of appropriate challenge.
Highly skilled performance management is a core attribute of the organisation. Clear
and consistent management reports exist for all levels of the organisation, and these
are widely used to understand comparative performance very well and in depth. A
programme of regular and rigorous auditing includes innovative practice weeks
when, using case file review and observations, senior managers audit a high number
of cases and undertake a thorough analysis of their findings.
The comprehensive earning and improvement framework quarterly report collates
the findings from a very wide range of management activities to make sure that any
learning is integrated and used to drive the continuous development of services. This
report supplements detailed oversight of practice maintained by managers, who link
directly and often with the front line and know their services exceptionally well.
Detailed workforce planning means that RBKC has a stable and loyal workforce. Welltrained and impressive social workers are able to retain their expertise in practice
and to pursue career opportunities other than management, including as advanced
or specialist social work practitioners and family therapists. The virtuous circle this
creates means that RBKC can attract and retain a high-quality workforce.
Exceptional added value is delivered by the tri-boroughs talented and able
commissioning team, including joint commissioning. Through collaborative
commissioning, the team has brokered substantial additional resources to strengthen
and expand an already extensive range of services.


Inspection findings
outstanding. Exceptional tri-borough management arrangements are
exemplified by the excellently well-managed Focus on Practice initiative.
Funded as part of the governments innovation programme, this highly
innovative project aims to enhance social work intervention by adopting a wellthought through and well-resourced model of practice in which RBKCs talented
DFS has been pivotal. Innovative elements include a comprehensive and
accredited training programme, and skills coaching from trained specialist
practitioners. RBKC was already established as an inventive and reflective place
to practise social work, and Focus on Practice has effectively harnessed existing
attributes and built them into a shared and well-understood way of working.
The model has been widely disseminated, and is evidently fully accepted and
implemented across the workforce. This was widely in evidence to inspectors
during case observation and tracking, when Focus on Practice and its highly
positive impact on children was described with enthusiasm by social workers.
the senior leadership of the tri-borough communicates regularly and effectively.
A formal cycle of meetings between the DCS, the DFSs, the LSCB chair, senior
leaders such as the boroughs chief executives and elected members makes
sure that they are very well-informed on matters for which they hold strategic
responsibility. Senior leaders operate within a culture of respectful challenge
and they will, when necessary, hold each other to account. The senior
management team, including the DCS, is highly interactive with frontline
services and knows individual children and social workers very well. Highly
robust lines of communication from frontline social workers to senior leaders
enables them to know their services to children thoroughly and extensively.
clear expectations, and ensures that senior managers thorough oversight is
used to drive forward improvements in practice. The learning and improvement
framework quarterly report is highly effective in collating findings from serious
case reviews, user feedback (including young people, parents, and carers),
complaints and compliments, monthly audits and practice weeks. Highly
rigorous performance management means that senior leaders in the tri-borough
are very aware of the comparative performance of the services that they
provide to children.


that managers and leaders are knowledgeable and well informed about their
services performance against key indicators, and this enables them to
understand it very well. Detailed scrutiny and correction of any performance
deficits support the delivery of social work of a very high quality, and this
means that an ever-greater number of children receive a high-quality service.
For example, the RBKC management team identified, as part of its scrutiny of
performance reports, an increase in child protection investigations.
Management information was scrutinised at case level, performance
improvement measures agreed by the management team, then monitored and
delivered so that investigations have again decreased, reducing the possibility
of children being unnecessarily subjected to child protection procedures.
assured that it is of a consistently high quality. Scrutiny of case records by
inspectors indicates that management supervision is frequent, regular and
evident on the childs file. Records generally evidence a very firm focus on the
child. This child-centred approach is strongly supported by the work of
innovation-funded advanced and specialist practitioners and clinicians. All of
these highly skilled and well-trained professionals are embedded within the
social work teams as part of Focus on Practice, and they add significant value
by ensuring that social workers do not have to buy in specialist services at
considerable additional expense.
innovative and regular practice weeks, which comprise extensive case audits
and practice observations undertaken by senior managers. Full participation by
a range of services provides invaluable insight into the actual quality of
practice. An extensive overview of the impact of social work intervention on
childrens lives is obtained. Inquisitive and detailed analysis of the key findings
leads to tangible in-borough recommendations to support continuously
improved performance. Detailed feedback is provided immediately to social
workers. Young people and family members are able to comment on their
experiences and the effectiveness of the help and support that they have been
offered. Areas for improvement are quickly identified, and change is swiftly and
positively affected.
has a very stable and experienced workforce, and this enhances consistency
and quality of service. Using high-quality performance reports, senior managers
are enabled to understand fully the workforce and to ensure that practice
standards are rigorously maintained. They describe a virtuous circle in which
quality candidates or students aspire to work in the tri-borough. The offer of
very low caseloads and career development through training and promotion
opportunities attracts, then retains high quality social workers. This skilled and
well-trained staff group is then able to deliver the highly innovative and
aspirational Focus on Practice outcomes, making RBKC a place where social
workers want to work.


dedicated to improving childrens lives. They are proud to work for and be part
of RBKC, and share a collective vision channelled through Focus on Practice.
Experienced social workers are enabled to continue in practice and to develop
and promote their own and others social work skills without going into
management, by becoming advanced or specialist practitioners, or qualified
family therapists. Children benefit directly from the wide range of social work
knowledge and expertise that is available to support the help that they receive.
highly coherent model of commissioning, including joint commissioning.
Significant additional resources have been drawn down to support services in a
very wide variety of ways, using collaborative commissioning techniques, for
instance, the conversion of RBKCs youth services to a staff-led mutual
company funded by central government. The demographics of the tri-borough
means that commissioners can draw upon trust funds, philanthropic giving and
social enterprises to a greater extent than other areas. Tri-borough
commissioners are therefore exceptionally skilled at brokering additional
resources and using these to add considerable value to existing services. Triborough commissioners are also highly active in shaping resources to meet
identified need. They have very efficiently decommissioned and
recommissioned some services, such as semi-independent living for care
leavers.
formal complaints are relatively low in number across the tri-borough. Social
workers, activity officers and participation workers build meaningful
relationships with children and families, and work hard to resolve any
dissatisfaction at an early stage before it escalates into a more formal
investigation. Robust advocacy arrangements ensure that children and young
people are well supported and helped to articulate their complaints. Complaints
literature for children and young people has been reviewed and refreshed to
ensure that the complaints process is better promoted and more easily
understood. Thorough analysis of complaints and compliments effectively
informs the learning and improvement framework, in recognition that learning
from complaints is an important element of service development. Individual
annual complaints reports for each borough appropriately reflect differing
learning outcomes across the tri-borough. Detailed training on effective
handling of complaints is successfully delivered to all managers and staff.


means that social workers attend court having undertaken all necessary
assessments to support robust and well-resourced care packages. Rigorous
placement finding is very well supported by a comprehensive sufficiency
strategy, with clear links to the joint strategic needs assessment prepared by
public health. Evidence to support care plans is consistently robust and includes
appropriate and thorough consideration of family members. This significantly
minimises delay in children looked after achieving the best possible plan for
permanence. Positive relationships with Cafcass enable meaningful dialogue
and challenge differences. As a result, all issues identified are effectively and
quickly resolved. Joint quarterly review of cases of children looked after in
proceedings by senior managers gives them the opportunity for challenge and
learning to improve services.
support robust, well-considered decisions when children are in care
proceedings. Social workers present their cases confidently, and their evidence
is clear and balanced. Timeliness of care proceedings is improving overall, and
where it falls outside of 26 week timescales this is in the main due to complex
cases and special guardianship orders. Judges report that tri-borough
arrangements stand out as leading good practice across London. The triborough legal team is described as exceptional and demonstrate a wide range
of experience and knowledge that stands up to challenge and supports robust
recommendations to court, and this secures the legal position of children looked
after.
governance arrangements in which the DCS is appropriately the central figure.
The DCS manages extremely effectively the complex accountabilities that are
inherent in tri-borough arrangements. The DCS works closely with the chief
executive and lead member for childrens services to ensure the effective
delivery of childrens services, and they are both well informed and highly
engaged. The lead member champions the needs of children and young people
and reports that she is acutely aware of the risks that social workers carry.
Robust and effective scrutiny arrangements are in place and driven by a
comprehensive business plan and work programme, which show that a range of
themes are considered in detail and reported on. External consultants are used
well to support members in their scrutiny role. Challenging questions on service
delivery that hold officers appropriately to account are well evidenced in
scrutiny minutes.


local authority works effectively with the health and well-being board. The triborough JSNA underpins the work of the board and key priorities such as
childhood obesity, young peoples mental health and child poverty inform the
health and well-being work programme for 201516. The work of the LSCB is
widely understood through the presentation of the LSCB annual report at key
strategic meetings, including both the health and well-being board and the
scrutiny committee.
services means that any young person referred to Prevent is passed to social
workers, and similarly referrals to Prevent are regularly made by a range of
childrens teams and schools. The channel process enhances joint working
between services to children, schools and the Prevent team. This ensures a
youngperson-focused and proportionate response to any referral. Proactive,
collaborative practice results in early detection and prevention of radicalisation.
Parenting Board is chaired by the lead member for childrens services and
supported in its work by the service improvement group. Workstreams are
appropriately linked to the six objectives set out in the Looked After Children
and Care Leavers Tri-Borough Strategy 20142017. Children and young people
are consulted and are active participants in corporate parenting arrangements.
Recent work has been undertaken on how children are supported in education,
including those living and educated out of borough. Learning has been drawn
out and actions from the consultation have now been established, including
developing a group to track EETs and NEETs, and to look at better employment
opportunities for care leavers, including apprenticeships.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good

Executive summary
LSCB arrangements are good because the tri-borough achieves the right balance
between shared and local functions, and this ensures that children are effectively
safeguarded. Overall, amalgamation under a single LSCB creates significant benefits
for young people and for all partner agencies. These include rationalisation of time,
the secure involvement of senior representatives from partner agencies, many of
which span several boroughs, pooling resources to tackle issues in common, and
alignment with tri-borough childrens services.
Robust links are in place between the LSCB and other statutory bodies, and this
allows the board to make sure that childrens safeguarding stays high on everyones
agenda.
Extensive engagement by partner agencies has been secured and the work of the
board is therefore well resourced through partners financial contributions. The
boards business support team would benefit from a work plan to sit alongside the
boards business plan and drive through its priorities for children.
Through systematic analysis of audits under Section 11 of the Children Act 2004, the
LSCB has assured itself that safeguarding is a priority for all partner agencies. The
boards quality assurance sub-group effectively monitors multi-agency safeguarding
performance across the tri-borough. Detailed analysis of data is routinely undertaken
by the sub-group and reported to the board by exception, although the board would
benefit from a review of this process to assure itself of its effectiveness. Actions
arising from reviewing data lie with individual partner agencies, and no system is in
place to monitor whether actions identified are carried through.
Rigorous multi-agency themed audits have been systematically undertaken by the
board. These audits provide appropriate recommendations for change, but further
checks have not taken place to establish whether practice has actually changed or
improved.
Effective monitoring by the child sexual exploitation and missing sub-group enables
the board to have a robust understanding of missing children and their behaviour
across the tri-borough.
An established case review sub-committee ensures that lessons learnt from reviews
are disseminated promptly across the tri-borough. The sub-committee has clear
action plans in place for each individual case review but does not have an overall


action plan to cover its ongoing work.
A clear and detailed learning and improvement framework incorporates the learning
from SCRs, themed audits and performance monitoring by the board. The learning
and development sub-group of the LSCB undertakes its role across the tri-borough
and ensures that sufficient safeguarding training is provided across all partner
agencies. However, no formal analysis of the impact of training takes place either
across the tri-borough or at borough level.
A wide range of activity to tackle the board's priorities and any lessons from SCRs is
appropriately included in the LSCB annual report. An attendance log shows that
some members have infrequent attendance, but no challenge is evident. A
comprehensive safeguarding plan covers all of the boards priorities.
RBKC's partnership board effectively addresses local safeguarding issues. It works to
a comprehensive action plan that is suitably aligned to the priorities of the triborough LSCB.

Recommendations
 Review the extensive dataset to ensure that it is aligned to the Boards priorities.
 Devise a system for ensuring that actions arising from data scrutiny are carried
out in the individual boroughs.
 Ensure that recommendations from multi-agency themed audits are carried out,
and analyse their impact, if any, on improving practice.
 Develop an overarching SCR action plan to track the progress of work arising
from individual case reviews.
 Devise a system to escalate concerns about infrequent partnership attendance at
the board.
Inspection findings
functions of the LSCB and its sub-groups are delivered across the tri-borough.
Each borough appropriately maintains a local LSCB partnership group, and this
ensures that local safeguarding issues are suitably considered and reported to
the LSCB.


elected members and chief executive officers in each of the respective bodies
have been effectively developed by the board and are clearly documented. The
independent chair links frequently with the DCS for the tri-borough, while
remaining appropriately independent. Key LSCB representatives, such as the
DCS, are able to ensure that safeguarding children issues are considered across
strategic boards, and that elected members are engaged in the local LSCB
partnership groups. The independent chair meets with the chief executives of
each borough at least annually, and with the chief executive for RBKC twice
yearly. However, this minimal involvement does not provide them with a
sufficiently detailed oversight of safeguarding within boroughs. The
independent chair operates across the tri-borough, and this limits the time
available for maintaining links with key elected members and strategic
partnership groups, such as the health and well-being boards.
promotes safeguarding issues across the partnership and community, and
provides appropriate challenge. As a result, extensive engagement by partners
has been secured across the full range of safeguarding work. Partners are
encouraged and enabled by the chair to raise issues and challenges
constructively. This is well evidenced in the minutes of the board and its subgroups.
appropriately provides financial contributions, and these fund the business
support team for the board. The team is actively involved in enabling
community and service user involvement in the boards work. The board was
able to demonstrate the involvement of young people in developing publicity
material, but acknowledges that the engagement of young people in helping to
develop its work could be further enhanced. Over the past year, there have
been several changes in the business manager post holder, and recently a new
manager has been seconded to the post. While this has not negatively
impacted on the support provided to the board, a business plan to coordinate
the activities of the business support team and the work arising from LSCB and
its sub-groups is not evidently in place.
agencies. A biannual cycle of audits under Section 11 of the Children Act 2004
is currently being renewed. The board has developed and piloted a bespoke,
online self-assessment tool that is currently going live. Previous returns have
been systematically analysed and reported to the board. Schools in particular
are actively engaged and represented in the work of the board, as are the full
range of health partners, police and representative voluntary sector
organisations.


safeguarding performance across the tri-borough. It draws upon both
qualitative and quantitative data, and is supported well by the tri-borough
performance team in compiling data into a detailed, high-quality performance
report. Partner agencies now contribute to the dataset, which was initially
extensively based on local authority childrens services data. However, the LSCB
has not systematically reviewed this extensive dataset to ensure that this is
refined, aligned to its priorities and manageable (Recommendation).
safeguarding functions. Detailed analysis of the data is routinely undertaken by
the sub-group and reported to the board, drawing out themes and trends.
Partners provide commentary on the data supplied to clarify and add context to
it. The groups report to the LSCB is by exception, identifying issues that the
board may want to interrogate further. Responsibility for actions arising from
the scrutiny of data lies with individual agencies, but no system is in place to
monitor whether actions identified are carried through (Recommendation).
undertaken by partners on behalf of the board. These are appropriately
selected in response to key issues arising from quality assurance, data analysis
or to inform short-life working groups. These facilitate learning and identify key
areas for improvement in services. For example, a focused audit of young
people at risk of sexual exploitation identified effective practice by involving
systemic family therapists. While the multi-agency audits provide
recommendations for change, further auditing of the themed issues has not
been undertaken to enable the LSCB to know whether practice has actually
changed or improved as a result (Recommendation).
monitors information on children who go missing, and this enables the board to
have a robust understanding of missing children and their behaviour across the
tri-borough. The missing person coordinator provides weekly information on
missing children, and ensures that this information is updated by operational
workers. The coordinator maintains lists of both the top 10 missing young
people across the Borough, and the top 10 within each borough. This
information is suitably analysed through a quarterly meeting, where reductions
or escalations in missing episodes are discussed. Through this close analysis
and weekly monitoring, the sub-group is aware that only a small number of
young people are involved in the majority of missing episodes. This enables
those young people to be closely monitored and targeted work to be
undertaken with them to minimise risk. Through careful monitoring, the LSCB
has a clear picture of the profile of child sexual exploitation and offending
across the boroughs. Data mapping has helped to build a picture of hotspots.
All this information, as well as information on new cases, is fed into the MASE
and the LSCB. This ensures that the LSCB has a clear understanding of child
sexual exploitation: its profile, offenders, victims, and the quality and
effectiveness of services as well as the hotspots and places of concern.


balanced representation from all agencies, including representation of voluntary
services and the police. It has appropriately recommended timely
commissioning of SCRs to the LSCB, and these have been conducted with a
suitable focus on the lived experience of the child. The majority of reviews
undertaken in recent years were completed within realistic timescales, and
when there have been delays due to external constraints, for instance criminal
proceedings, the sub-committee ensures that emerging lessons learnt are
shared prior to completion in order to improve practice swiftly.
and that these are disseminated promptly across the tri-borough, regardless of
their borough of origin. A detailed and succinct summary of lessons learnt is
circulated on a quarterly basis to all agencies and staff in order to to promote
awareness, with a representative of each agency tasked to ensure its
distribution. Participation on the case review sub-committee of the learning and
development business manager helps to ensure that priority is given to training
needs identified as a result of SCRs, and that adjustments to training materials
are made and cascaded to all multi-agency partners. The lead designated
officer for the tri-borough uses her extensive networks with other boroughs
well, so that statutory safeguarding training reflects up-to-date practice.
scope of an SCR are still reviewed, with a number of significant lessons learnt.
The board carefully reviews the criteria for SCRs and where necessary will
commission one even when formal thresholds are not met, and when it is
considered that lessons can be learnt. The impact of SCRs is evaluated through
case file auditing to check for the positive application of lessons learnt.
frontline workers, including tools to identify and assess early neglect, the
quality of intervention in cases of domestic violence, and issues around the
mobility of abusive families. A wide range of methods is used to highlight and
follow up identified themes and issues with all partners, including a useful
website, additional community work and regular meetings with school
improvement advisers. The sub-committee has good, close relationships with
the three partnership boards to share themes and provide advice to improve
practice. The sub-committee has clear action plans in place for each individual
case review, but does not have an overall action plan to cover its ongoing work
(Recommendation).


duties across the tri-borough. It is well attended and chaired. Members are well
informed and demonstrate a clear understanding of trends in local child deaths,
and the reasons for these. The number of incidents across the tri-borough is
relatively low, with 23 reviews last year. As a result, there is no disaggregation
of data by borough, although work is commencing with other CDOPs across
North West London in order to gain a fuller picture. Research undertaken into
sudden, unexplained death led to training for professionals, and awareness
raising around issues such as co-sleeping. A clear understanding of issues
relevant to the area, such as deaths in private hospitals, abroad and of older
children, has led to further work, such as that around vulnerabilities linked to
death by stabbing, in order to drill down and identify the issues, and has helped
to prevent further deaths. Social Care Institute of Excellence methodology has
been used to undertake learning reviews in some cases, with lessons
appropriately disseminated, and this appears to be having a positive impact on
practice.
LSCB. The most recent reports main theme was related to peri/neonatal
incidents, and life-threatening illnesses. A review of the neonatal deaths was
undertaken, and concluded that good care was provided. The report
appropriately provides a breakdown by age and ethnicity, and some analysis of
the issues.
implemented and recently reviewed by the LSCB. This has incorporated the
learning from SCRs, themed audits and performance monitoring by the board.
The development sub-group of the LSCB across the tri-borough ensures that
sufficient mandatory safeguarding training is provided across all partners, both
on a multi-agency basis and within individual partners training programmes. All
key voluntary and statutory partners are represented on the sub-group, and
they are actively engaged in delivering as well as developing training. The
group has maintained core safeguarding training, while developing or updating
training modules in response to current, high-profile safeguarding issues. For
example, a practice sharing conference on Prevent for schools has been
developed, and is being followed up by similar events on child sexual
exploitation and neglect. The training has led to increased referrals from
schools, and early years settings are also contacting Prevent teams for
training. Partners, particularly from the voluntary sector, receive regular
information and access to safeguarding training.


need to develop further its work and continually raise awareness of the LSCB.
The sub-group has identified the need to undertake more systematic evaluation
of the impact of the extensive safeguarding training provided through the LCSB.
Currently, the sub-group primarily bases its evaluation of training on selfreporting attendee questionnaires immediately following training sessions. Plans
to develop this will require attendees to complete questionnaires three months
after the training to evaluate what difference the training has made, but these
are at an early stage. At the time of this review, there was too great a reliance
on anecdotal information with no formal analysis of the impact of training either
across the tri-borough or at borough level.
or conference type environments. For some partners, releasing staff to attend
such training is a challenge. The sub-group has developed some more flexible
sessions, for instance to enable police officers to attend. However, the provision
of a wide range of elearning modules, to improve access to training, has been
delayed by internal technology challenges.
are systematically reported to, and considered by the board. It has been
proactive in supporting and developing a number of safeguarding services. For
example, the LSCB has supported a pilot project to tackle female genital
mutilation, an identified gap in services. As a result, 68 women have been
supported in the last year through early help, and others through child in need
or child protection plans. The board has been instrumental in the development
of the harmful practices project, which also reports to the existing violence
against women group. This tri-borough project tackles harmful practices such
as forced marriage, honour-related violence and faith-based abuse.
group following analysis of the high prevalence of neglect as a category for
child protection plans. The multi-agency group extensively reviewed research,
SCRs and direct work tools. They then completed a case file audit and
established the most effective method of working with families to fit with
existing structures, working practices and local need. A further aim of the group
is to raise awareness among practitioners. The toolkit subsequently developed
highlights the lived experience of the neglected child and is currently being
trialled for effectiveness by early-help practitioners and social workers. Early
indicators have shown that it creates a focus on the child rather than the
family, and that parents have embraced this way of working. An awareness
raising conference is currently being planned for May 2016 in partnership with
the NSPCC. This will form the start of a campaign that aims to ensure that
awareness of neglect reaches all services within the voluntary and statutory
sectors. Effectiveness will be measured through various means such as a reaudit of case files, increased consultation on neglect issues both within partner
organisations and within social care, and a reduction in the longer term of
children on a child protection plan under neglect.


to tackle the board's priorities, and lessons from SCRs are appropriately
included. However, the report does not provide a rigorous and transparent
assessment of safeguarding across the tri-borough. Each priority has a 'what
difference has it made' section, although the section is more process or action
based, rather than evidencing outcomes for children. The report attempts to
understand the population across the tri-borough and the differences between
them, although there is little analysis of this. No safeguarding data is presented
in the report, and it does not detail any challenges or demonstrate the impact
of these. An attendance log shows that some members have infrequent
attendance, but there is no challenge to this outlined in the report
(Recommendation).
priorities. All actions have a lead organisation or sub-group attached, although
there are no timescales for completion of those actions. The description of the
evidence of impact is, in places, more outcome focused than the business plan.
This could be further improved.
partnership group effectively identifies local concerns, discusses local issues,
shares information and identifies organisational changes that may affect
partnership working. Networking and information sharing are valued and
effective functions of the group. The differences that the partnership group
makes to children and families in RBKC are numerous. For example, a toolkit
and campaign on neglect, focusing on frontline staff, ensures that workers are
more attuned to identify children and young people who could be at risk of
neglect. Private fostering has also been highlighted throughout partner
agencies.
are using the boroughs well to trial potential new ways of working, for instance
the introduction of questionnaires to assess the impact of training on practice.
board, enabling actions and impact to be monitored and tracked. These reflect
LSCB priorities, although having a focus at the local level. Actions arising from
the partnership meetings are carried forward to ensure completion. Agencies
challenge each other and this supports learning and removes barriers to
effective safeguarding. For example, the voluntary sector challenged the
management of historical allegations and referrals to the boroughs. A challenge
log is maintained to track any issues that have arisen. The partnership board
recognises that an area for development is bringing the voice of the child into
its information-sharing and decision-making processes.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This includes children and young
people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and starting
their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other, and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the LSCB was carried out under section 15A of the Children Act 2004.
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the LSCB under its power to combine reports in accordance with section
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Ian Young HMI
Deputy lead inspectors: Emmy Tomsett HMI, Helen Cawston Senior HMI
Team inspectors: Fiona Millins HMI, Lisa Williams HMI, Cath McEvoy HMI, Dr
Kenneth Jones HMI, Rachel Holden HMI Designate, Fiona Parker Associate Inspector.
Shadow inspector: Lolly Rascagneres HMI
Senior data analyst: Hywel Benbow
Quality assurance manager: Paul Armitage HMI Deputy Director Social Care
Inspection


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted . If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


