North Lincolnshire
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 20 June 2017  13 July 2017
Report published: 4 September 2017

Childrens services in North Lincolnshire are outstanding

Good

permanence

Outstanding


Outstanding


Outstanding


Outstanding


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
North Lincolnshire council has impressively sustained good and outstanding services
for children and families since the last Ofsted inspection in 2012. Its focus on
keeping children and young people at the heart of everything is the most striking
element of this outstanding local authority. The voice and views of children and
young people are effectively sought and considered, in a range of creative ways to
inform and evaluate strategic developments, and this is making a significant
difference to their experiences. Effective direct work undertaken by a well-trained
and stable workforce ensures that children are engaged fully, and this leads to
measurably improved outcomes. This is evident across the full range of social work
services.
Highly effective and principled leadership clearly models and articulates ambition for
children in North Lincolnshire, and this is fully supported by a whole-council approach
that prioritises children and ensures continuing investment and high-quality service
provision. Continuity of exceptional leadership for childrens services, particularly the
head of paid service and executive director, people and transformation (chief
executive) and the director of childrens services (DCS) in current and previous roles,
has been instrumental in embedding and sustaining a culture of child-centred
excellence. A range of innovative approaches further secure best possible outcomes
for children, including the development of a highly effective social enterprise model
for the provision of accommodation and support for care leavers, PHASE (Pathways,
Horizons, Accommodation, Support and Education).
There is very effective and coordinated partnership working at both a strategic and
operational level. Comprehensive performance management and quality assurance
systems, both within the local authority and across the partnership, ensure that
accountabilities are firmly embedded, service effectiveness is well understood and
areas for development and improvement are swiftly identified and progressed. There
is a relentlessly strong culture of continuous learning and improvement within the
local authority and across the partnership.
Services for children in need of help and protection are good. No children were found
to be in situations of unassessed or unmanaged risk of significant harm. A wide
range of good-quality and effective early help services ensure that children and
families are supported at the earliest opportunity. Thresholds for services are well
understood by partners and are effectively applied, and there is clear management
oversight at the front door in the vast majority of cases. In a small number of cases,
appropriate service decisions have not been made at that point, which has meant a
short delay in children and families receiving the right service.
Prompt, well-coordinated and thorough responses were seen for children who are at
risk of significant harm, and a highly effective reviewing service, with additional and
creative oversight mechanisms, ensures the timely progression of plans to support
childrens safety.


Multi-agency arrangements to identify, support and protect children at risk of child
sexual exploitation and children who go missing are exceptional. Appropriate
arrangements and services are in place to respond to homeless 1617 year olds. In
a very small number of cases where bed and breakfast was used for homeless young
people, this was risk assessed, monitored and used for the shortest possible time.
However, this accommodation should not have been offered as an alternative to the
suitable accommodation available.
Services for children who are looked after are outstanding. A very high percentage of
children looked after are placed within 20 miles of their homes and are living in highquality in-house provision. This means that children benefit from a range of good
and accessible services, which effectively support stable placements and
demonstrably improve outcomes for them.
The educational attainment and progress of children looked after in North
Lincolnshire, particularly at key stages 1 and 2, is impressive and compares
favourably with national and statistical neighbours. The prompt availability of the
high-quality child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS) is a key element in
ensuring that childrens emotional well-being is effectively supported. The multiagency corporate parenting board, which have clear links to and effective
contributions from the Children in Care Council (CiCC), very passionately and
effectively champions children looked after and care leavers and oversees and
develops services for them.
Permanence is achieved for children in North Lincolnshire without delay, underpinned
by comprehensive early planning, monitoring and reviewing. The adoption service is
highly effective and valued, and there is a range of creative approaches supporting
adopters, children and birth families in a timely way. An increasing number of
children are achieving permanence through special guardianship orders. In a small
number of cases, children were supported in the right placement for them, but the
connected persons and special guardianship assessments had not been completed in
a timely way.
The local authority is hugely ambitious and aspirational for care leavers, and the
views of care leavers are central to all developments. The innovative approach to the
provision of accommodation and support ensures that care leavers are effectively
supported to secure and sustain their own tenancies. Significant investment and
intensive support are highly effective in securing education progression and
opportunities for future employment.
North Lincolnshire has been outstandingly effective in creating an environment
where good social work is flourishing. A sufficient, stable, suitably experienced and
skilled workforce is sustained, and social workers are overwhelmingly positive about
working for the authority and the support and training they receive. Social workers
have manageable caseloads that support highly effective engagement with children
and casework of a consistently good quality.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two childrens homes. Both were judged to be
outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was
published in June 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was published in June 2012. The local authority was judged to be outstanding.
Local leadership
 The DCS has been in post since November 2016, having previously been assistant
director.
 The DCS is also responsible for community resilience.
 The executive director, people and transformation, who was previously the DCS,
has been in post since November 2016.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since 2011.
 The local authority has commissioned PHASE to provide accommodation and
support to care leavers and young people aged 16 and 17 who present as
homeless and are assessed by childrens services to require accommodation and
support. PHASE is a council-owned social enterprise.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 35,220 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in North Lincolnshire. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 20% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 14% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 12% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 7% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian and Mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 11% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 8% (the national average is 16%).
Child protection in this area
 At 19 June 2017, 911 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service.
 At 19 June 2017, 110 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 31 per 10,000 children).
 At 19 June 2017, three children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from nine at 31 March 2016.
 In the two years before inspection, one serious incident notification has been
submitted to Ofsted and one serious case review (SCR) has been completed.
 There are no SCRs ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 19 June 2017, 212 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 60 per 10,000 children).
 no children live in residential special schools
 eight children live with parents, of whom 13% live out of the authority area
 eight children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 14 adoptions
returned to be looked after
living
 no young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in houses
of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that screening and first-line management decisions about thresholds of
need are of a uniformly high standard so that all children receive services that
are well matched to their level of need and they do not experience delay.


Ensure the timely completion of all connected persons and special
guardianship assessments.


Ensure that bed and breakfast is not offered as an option to homeless young
people in circumstances in which they refuse more suitable accommodation.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children and young people in North Lincolnshire are among the best
in England. Senior managers and elected councillors make sure that children are
a top priority and that they can participate in and contribute to plans for their
care and the services on offer.
 Social workers know the children that they work with very well and they make
sure that their views are clearly considered when working with them and their
families.
 There are a lot of services to support children and their families when difficulties
start to arise, and this helps families to sort these out as soon as possible. Social
work support should have been offered to a very small number of children more
quickly.
 When children are seen to be at risk, social workers, police and other services
work very well together to make sure that children are protected.
 When children are at risk of sexual exploitation or of going missing, all the
services work very well together to make sure that children are supported to be
safe.
 When children are looked after, they do very well. Most children live in foster care
and are in or near to North Lincolnshire, and this means that they can still see
their family and friends, and the services that support them can continue. Even
when children live further away from North Lincolnshire, social workers,
advocates, health staff and other services from the area continue to support them
well.
 Children who are looked after by North Lincolnshire generally do very well in
school, compared to other children looked after across the country.
 When children need to be adopted or live permanently with families other than
their parents, social workers and their managers make sure that this happens as
soon as possible.
 When young people leave care, they are very well prepared and supported to live
independently, and their personal advisers make sure that they have the best
chance to do well in their education, training or employment.


The experiences and progress of
Good
children who need help and protection
Summary
Services to safeguard children in North Lincolnshire are good. When children need
a social work service, social workers work well to develop trusting and meaningful
relationships with them. Children are at the centre of the work, their voice is
strongly heard and they are effectively engaged in direct work, assessment and
planning.
When concerns are heightened, risk is addressed quickly and most children benefit
from an effective early response. Children and their families have access to an
extensive range of accessible and good-quality early help services, which support
children and families at the earliest opportunity.
Thresholds for services are well understood by partners and are consistently
applied in the vast majority of cases. Children in need of a social work service,
including children at risk of immediate harm, are identified and responded to well.
Strategy discussions take place promptly, result in appropriate outcomes and
benefit from the co-location of core partners. In a small number of cases seen, the
screening and decision-making were not sufficiently effective to ensure the
appropriate level of intervention, resulting in some delay in these children receiving
the right service.
Assessments of childrens needs and risks are consistently good. They are
comprehensive and analytical, and social workers consistently use the
underpinning risk assessment framework. This leads to plans that effectively
reduce risk and are of good quality, focused and measurable. Child-friendly plans
are developed for children who are in need of help and protection to help them
understand their experiences and what this means for them and their family.
Children at risk of sexual exploitation and children who go missing receive
excellent support through coordinated multi-agency arrangements. Highly effective
arrangements are also in place to manage children who are at risk from domestic
abuse, parental mental ill health and substance misuse.
The assessment and provision for homeless 16- and 17-year olds are appropriate
and compliant with case law. In the very small number of cases where bed and
breakfast has been used, the placements were risk assessed, there was daily
support and monitoring, and they were used for the shortest possible time.
However, this accommodation should not have been offered as an alternative to
the suitable accommodation available.


Inspection findings

Thresholds are understood well by partners and effectively applied through
screening and initial responses in the vast majority of cases. There is clear
management oversight with timely decision-making and direction, and
childrens wishes and feelings are effectively sought at the point of referral.
Consent is well understood and sought correctly. In a small number of cases,
the screening and decision-making were not sufficiently effective to ensure
the appropriate level of intervention, resulting in not all risks being fully
assessed for these children and, subsequently, some delay in their receiving
the right service. (Recommendation)


When children are at risk of significant harm, responses are thorough, timely
and well coordinated. There is effective information sharing between the
police, health and education, which are co-located with childrens social care.
This enhances decision-making that is based on the most up-to-date and
proportionate information available. Strategy meetings are consistently well
attended by specific agencies that know the child best, and thresholds for
section 47 enquiries are appropriately applied, proportionate and with clearly
recorded actions for next steps.


There is a seamless 24-hour social work service. Inspectors saw timely and
effective social work with responsive on-call management arrangements and
the backup of additional staff should demand increase. Good communication
with daytime colleagues and clear record-keeping ensure that children and
their families receive a timely follow up.


North Lincolnshire provides a broad early help offer with a range of agencies
involved in early help assessments (EHAs). Targeted work undertaken by the
local authority, families are safe, supported and transformed (FaSST) service
is effective and underpinned by detailed planning in which risks and needs are
well understood. Work undertaken by a wider range of early help providers is
at the appropriate level of intervention and of sufficient quality to identify risks
and strengths.


Engagement of children and young people is a strength. Social workers
develop meaningful relationships with children, and changes in social worker
are kept to a minimum. Social workers in their first year of practice are
provided with a creative range of tools and methods to facilitate
communication and direct work with children and young people. All social
workers spoken to know their children well, visit them regularly and ensure
that their voice is heard in assessments, meetings and plans.


In North Lincolnshire, children and young people matter. Children in need and
those on a child protection plan have their own Cool KIDZ Club, a place for
social activity, fun and meaningful consultation. Cool Kidz has consulted with
children about what makes a good social worker, and is currently working with
reviewing officers to produce information for children going to conference.



Child protection conferences are held appropriately and in time and are well
attended by partner agencies. Strong and effective practice by the child
protection chairs ensures a good focus on childrens needs and effective
engagement with and participation of parents and children. The service is
exceptionally child and family centred, having developed an empathic and
respectful pledge to families that find themselves in the child protection arena.


The reviewing officers hold local authority and other agencies to account for
their practice with regular pit stop meetings. Enhanced risk analysis meetings
(ERAMs) held at the second review and then at three-monthly intervals
monitor progress effectively between conferences and consider whether
thresholds continue to be met. This ensures that plans remain meaningful
processes for affecting change and that children do not remain on plans for
any longer than necessary.


There is a well-established and well-used advocacy service. Where it is
appropriate, children are supported by their advocate to attend their meetings
or to contribute to them. The advocate completes a workbook before every
conference, which details the childrens views and supports their
understanding of the process.


Overall, the quality of assessments is very good, and timescales for
assessment completion are commensurate with the identified needs of the
child. Social workers consistent use of the risk assessment framework ensures
a clear analysis of risk and protective factors, and these are further supported
by the use of intelligent chronologies, which contain an analysis of the
significant events every three months. The childs voice is clear, and there is
evidence of direct work being undertaken, and determined and successful
efforts to engage significant adults, including males.


Children in need and child protection planning also effectively use the risk
assessment framework to provide an overview of the risks and protective
factors and a plan, which is simple and clear to understand. Timely progress
was seen in addressing and reducing risk. Reviews are well attended, and
multi-agency engagement is strong. Services work well together to deliver
against the plan, and this helps to improve outcomes for children.


Arrangements for reducing risks for vulnerable children, including those
children who go missing and who are at risk of sexual exploitation, are very
effective. These are supported by mature well-managed partnerships. Senior
managers regularly scrutinise interventions provided to young people
considered as high risk at thorough multi-agency child exploitation (MACE)
meetings. Timely and effective responses from the dedicated child sexual
exploitation team ensure that support is offered commensurate with the level
of need. The team builds relationships of trust through intensive direct work
with young people, and this is central to its effectiveness in reducing risk.
Specialist therapeutic interventions are readily available from commissioned
services to complement that support to meet more complex needs.



Return home interviews conducted by independent advocates are timely,
analytical and of good quality, which allows for clear safety planning. In the
year to 31 March 2017, 92% of those children who went missing from home
or care agreed to a return interview, and 78% of those interviews were
undertaken within 72 hours.


The local authority has effective systems to track and report on children who
go missing from education. Staff know the destinations of all children who
have gone missing from education in 201617. There are effective links with
other agencies and other local authorities to share intelligence on the
movement of families and children.


When children are at risk through living in homes where there is domestic
abuse, drug or alcohol misuse or parental mental health issues, formal multiagency arrangements work well. The identification, intervention and
management of significant risk and harm posed by adults are well managed
within formal settings, such as the multi-agency risk assessment conference
(MARAC) and multi-agency public protection arrangements (MAPPA). There is
a range of services embedded in universal, targeted early help and statutory
childrens services, to support families who are affected by the toxic trio of
concerns. Inspectors found an impressive understanding across the workforce
of the complexities of working with domestic abuse, and social workers
demonstrate a respectful effective challenge to parents.


Children who have disabilities receive an excellent service in North
Lincolnshire. Assessments are thorough and support clear child-focused plans.
There is effective multi-agency working that ensures that childrens complex
needs are met. Social workers are ambitious for their children and they know
them well. Their work successfully balances an analysis of risk and
enablement.


The recently strengthened designated officer arrangement has improved the
oversight and scrutiny of allegations and concerns about professionals. There
are clear systems and processes to record, review and track all enquires and
ongoing investigations to ensure childrens safety.


Those vulnerable young people aged 16 and 17 who present as homeless are
promptly assessed, informed of their rights and entitlements and provided
with a range of accommodation options by the social enterprise housing
provider. Bed and breakfast accommodation has been used twice in the last
year in line with young peoples wishes, despite more suitable accommodation
being offered. Risks of the bed and breakfast placement were considered and
effectively monitored. (Recommendation)


North Lincolnshire has done much to ensure that effective and coordinated
arrangements and responses to female genital mutilation are in place. There
are currently no children or young people who have met the threshold for the
Prevent duty in the North Lincolnshire area during the past 12 months.



At the time of the inspection, a small number of children were in private
fostering arrangements and, while they were safe and settled in their
placements, these were not fully compliant with regulations. The local
authority accepted this and swiftly remedied practice deficits in those cases
during the inspection, which included assessing children of the household who
were aged 18 and maintaining separate files for the carers. Private fostering
policy and procedures were also appropriately amended, and dissemination
methods to ensure practice improvements across the service were put in
place.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Outstanding

Summary
The local authority is a highly ambitious and effective corporate parent,
championing children looked after, care leavers and adopted children, and working
very productively with partner agencies to ensure that these children receive
outstanding services and that outcomes for children are good and improving.
A very successful sufficiency strategy ensures that the vast majority of children
who are looked after by North Lincolnshire live near to their families, friends and
schools, and that disruption to their lives is minimised. Similarly, a very high
percentage of children live in high-quality and well-supported in-house provision
which, allied to highly effective multi-agency partnership services, means that
stability in placements is good, crucially supporting positive outcomes.
An effective virtual school ensures that the educational outcomes for children
looked after are impressive, and better than those in similar local authorities, and
that the emotional well-being of children is particularly supported by the timely
accessibility of an effective CAMHS for children looked after.
The strength of childrens views and voices is striking, both through the impact of
the CiCC in strategic developments and in informing and shaping individual
casework. High-quality social work underpins productive direct work with children,
and an impressive advocacy service ensures that all children who become looked
after are fully aware of their entitlements and it provides a regular and crucial link
for all children who are placed out of authority.
Permanence is achieved for children in North Lincolnshire without delay,
underpinned by very effective management oversight and decision-making, early
planning, monitoring and reviewing. The adoption service is highly effective and
valued, and a range of creative approaches support adopters, children and birth
families. An increasing number of children are achieving permanence through
special guardianship orders. In a small number of cases, children are being
supported in the right placement, but there has not been a timely completion of
the connected persons and special guardianship assessments.
An innovative approach to the provision of accommodation and support ensures
that care leavers are effectively supported to secure and sustain their own
tenancies. Good investment and intensive support are highly effective in securing
education progression and opportunities for their future employment. The views of
care leavers are central to service developments and improvement.


Inspection findings

Effective work and services at the edge of care ensure that appropriate work
is undertaken to support children to remain in the care of their families
wherever possible and where risk is manageable. When families are subject to
pre-proceedings work under the Public Law Outline (PLO), they are clear
about what needs to change and by when. Regular management oversight of
this work ensures that there is timely escalation to care proceedings if change
is not achieved, and there is timely exit from the PLO process when
improvement is evident.


When children are at risk of becoming looked after or when they become
looked after in an emergency, immediate support is available from a dedicated
team (FaSST). In a small number of cases, work to reunify children with their
families immediately after a crisis was not successful, but risk was
appropriately managed during the work and subsequent decisions for children
to be looked after were appropriate.


Highly effective management scrutiny and decision-making ensures that no
children who should not be looked after are looked after by North
Lincolnshire, and this management oversight also supports effective early
planning for permanence. For example, when children come into care as part
of a planned move, this is well managed, such as children who have been the
subject of a pre-birth assessment and placed directly from hospital with foster
carers who plan to adopt them.


When children looked after return to live with their families as part of a
planned move, these arrangements are managed well. Assessments, including
risk assessments, are appropriately completed and the transition back to
family is satisfactorily achieved, using placement with parent regulations
appropriately.


Social work services delivered to children looked after are strong, and there is
a robust care system. All children looked after are allocated to social workers
who have manageable caseloads, and this allows social workers to get to
know children well. A dedicated courts social work team delivers assessments
and plans for court that are of a good quality, and there are very positive
relationships between childrens services, the Children and Family Court
Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and the judiciary. The vast majority of
casework is of a good or better quality. Assessments and plans are thorough,
identify needs effectively and are up to date. Social workers are trained and
confident in the delivery of direct work to children looked after. A toolkit of
resources to support this work is of exceptional quality and means that
children spend productive and appropriately focused time with their social
worker.


The one placement policy, means that a high proportion of children becoming
looked after will stay where they are originally placed, receiving the services


that were initially identified to meet their assessed needs, and this has a very
positive impact on the lived experience of the child looked after. The vast
majority of children looked after are placed within 20 miles of their home. This
means that most of them can maintain their own school, general practitioner
(GP), leisure interests and friendship groups. Contact with their family is
generally well planned, delivered and recorded by dedicated contact officers,
and the evaluation of these visits is appropriately used to inform care
planning.

The very small number of young people looked after who go missing or who
are at risk of sexual exploitation are promptly offered a return home interview,
and the learning is effectively used to inform care planning and to keep them
safe. Young people looked after who offend, for example through sexually
harmful behaviour, are offered a comprehensive multi-agency package of
support through a very close working partnership with the youth offending
services (YOS).


The voice, views and feelings of children looked after come through strongly
and clearly in every aspect of their care. A culture of participation and
advocacy is clearly visible at every level, such as in excellent arrangements for
the CiCC, and its mature relationship with the corporate parenting board. All
children becoming looked after receive a visit from the childrens advocate to
ensure that they are fully aware of their rights and support options. Every
child looked after is allocated to an independent reviewing officer (IRO) who
has caseloads that fall well within guidance, which means that IROs can keep
in touch with and have effective oversight of children looked after between
reviews. Reviews are generally timely and conducted effectively to ensure
contributions from all participants. IROs ensure that children looked after are
helped to voice their wishes and feelings about their care without barriers to
communication.


The overall success of the sufficiency strategy means that 92% of children
looked after who are fostered are placed within high-quality and wellsupported in-house provision, and 98% are within 20 miles of their family
home. This impressive achievement makes an outstanding contribution to the
stability of children looked after in placement and meets the needs of most
children looked after. When gaps occur because of specialist and complex
needs, for example those of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children, the
local authority targets recruitment of new foster carers and trains existing inhouse carers. When placements are commissioned externally, robust
procurement processes ensure that they are appropriate to the assessed
needs of children looked after. The local authority is a member of the White
Rose procurement partnership, which enables placements generally to be
local. Through robust management tracking processes, senior leaders have
recognised that a very small number of disruptions are having a
disproportionate effect on placement stability, and they have accurately
identified this vulnerable cohort as their current priority for improved
commissioning. Learning from this analysis has already led to improved


training for foster carers in anticipation of potential problems when children
reach adolescence.

Childrens needs are exceptionally well met locally by an appropriately focused
range of high-quality support services. Support packages can be very swiftly
drawn together, as almost all of the partnerships in-house services are local
to where the child is living. For instance, timely initial health assessments are
completed, and this enables effective monitoring of improved health outcomes
for children looked after.


One particularly positive aspect of support to placements is the readily
available service from a dedicated and responsive CAMHS for children looked
after. A wide range of support services are available according to assessed
need, such as the counselling or independent visiting services offered by a
national charity, the YOS, or the family nurse partnership. The range and
accessibility of services available to support placements is strong, and children
looked after generally thrive in care.


Children looked after are routinely offered a high-quality advocacy service. In
particular, the service ensures that all children looked after who are placed
out of area receive a minimum of four visits per year, to ensure ongoing links
with and oversight of these most vulnerable children. Several services
continue to visit young people placed out of area, even at a considerable
distance, further enhancing the continuity, links with and quality of support
from North Lincolnshire.


The educational achievement, attainment and progress of children looked
after in North Lincolnshire are very good The local authority has restructured
its access and inclusion service effectively to increase the capacity of its virtual
school, to improve the educational outcomes for vulnerable children, including
children looked after. As a result, the local authority is now better placed to
monitor the attendance of children looked after, track their progress and work
with schools more effectively to follow up actions agreed in personal
education plans (PEPs).


Children looked after make good progress in their education, particularly at
key stages 1 and 2. At both these key stages in 201516, a higher proportion
of children looked after in North Lincolnshire reached the expected standard in
reading, writing and mathematics than their counterparts in similar authorities
and in the rest of the country. The gap in attainment between children looked
after and their peers in North Lincolnshire is much narrower than it is in other
local authorities.


At key stage 4, the average attainment of children looked after is lower than
that of their counterparts in the rest of the country. However, the rate of
progress that they make from their starting points is higher. The proportion of
children looked after in this age group in North Lincolnshire who have special
educational needs is very high.



The quality of PEPs has been improved by their recent transfer online, and
these are now a highly effective means for planning the education of children
looked after. They contain challenging but realistic attainment and personal
development targets, and they assign clear accountabilities for actions, which
staff from the virtual school monitor assiduously.


Currently, the vast majority of children looked after attend schools that are
judged to be good or better. Rates of attendance of children looked after are
very high and are among the best in the country. The head of the virtual
school and her staff have been highly effective in working with schools to
reduce the percentage of children looked after who receive fixed-term
exclusions.


Achieving permanence for children looked after is given high priority.
Decision-making and progress are tracked from the earliest possible stage, so
that children do not experience drift and delay. Plans for permanence are
promptly identified before or very soon after children become looked after and
are subsequently endorsed at childrens second statutory reviews.


There has been a significant increase in the number of children achieving
permanence through special guardianship in the last year, resulting from an
increased focus on and improvement of services to special guardianship
arrangements. This is further supported by timely and thorough viability
assessments, and children looked after move to live with connected carers
only when this is judged to be safe and appropriate. While children are safe
and appropriately placed, in a small number of cases special guardianship and
connected persons assessments have not been completed in a timely way.
(Recommendation)

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is outstanding


The adoption team offers a service that is highly effective, forward thinking,
sensitive, increasingly timely and child focused, and the support offered to
children and adopters throughout their adoption journey is valued and is a
real strength.


Achieving permanence through adoption for children is a high priority in North
Lincolnshire. Comprehensive permanence planning and consideration of
adoption begin at the earliest possible stage, and concurrent and twin tracking
planning ensures that children do not experience drift and delay. Decisionmaking and progress are effectively monitored, further supporting timely
permanence.


North Lincolnshire has shown continuous improvement in the average
timescales for children entering care and moving in with their adoptive


families. Current published national data indicates that North Lincolnshire is
performing better than national and statistical neighbour averages, ensuring
that children are placed with their permanent family as soon as possible.
When there has been a decision to move away from adoption for a very small
number of children, this has been appropriate and permanence has been
achieved through other means.

The adoption service has increased the number of children being adopted
from the previous year and has been particularly effective in placing children
aged over five, and brothers and sisters together. There has also been
effective and successful use of early permanence adopters (foster to adopt).
When it is not appropriate, or no adopters are identified in North Lincolnshire,
children are matched and placed either regionally or nationally in a timely
way. Currently, only a small number of children are waiting to be adopted,
and all these children have families identified or are awaiting further court
outcomes.


Arrangements for the recruitment, assessment and training of prospective
adopters are highly effective and timely. The needs of children likely to be
considered for future adoptions are effectively addressed through targeted
recruitment strategies. There are effective and timely assessments of adopters
in line with national requirements, and the service is responsive and sensitive
to the needs of the adopters within the process. Prospective adopters are
encouraged to give feedback to the service at every stage, which is then used
to further enhance the service provided.


Extensive packages of easy-to-access training and a comprehensive library are
available to adopters. Adopters said that they value the courses provided to
support their parenting. The training and resources offer is based on feedback
from children and adopters, as well as from adoption social workers. Packages
are matched to adopters needs, which are assessed through the selection
process, and to support ongoing placements. Creative methods are used to
ensure that service information is available appropriately. For example, when
adopters requested more information on the pupil premium usage in schools,
the service held a successful information event and, following on from this,
the service is now holding hints and tips sessions on a variety of different
issues that affect adoptive families.


The agency adviser is meticulous in the quality assurance of childrens
permanence reports, providing detailed and constructive feedback to the
authors. This ensures that the information and language used is child focused
and thorough, and will be informative and sensitive in later life. This is
combined with the training offered to social workers by the adoption service,
to ensure that the quality of reports is consistently good. The prospective
adopters reports and matching reports contain detailed relevant information,
and there is a clear, well-informed analysis of prospective adopters strengths
and any vulnerabilities. At the adoption panel, the members ask welldocumented questions to ensure that they base their decisions on clear and


correct information. Training events, organised by the panel chair and agency
adviser for the panel members and the adoption and fostering teams to share
good practice, take place twice a year. This supports good-quality practice
and communication.

Well-attended and highly valued child appreciation events are held for all
children prior to children being introduced to prospective adopters. These
draw together a wide range of professionals, carers and significant people in
childrens lives to give information, to tell stories and to give a real sense of
the children who may be placed with them. These events are recorded in a
very sensitive, detailed and child-focused way, to support childrens
understanding of their journeys in later life.


Preparation and planning for the childs transition to the adoptive family are
thorough, sensitive and effective. Adopters reported that children are
prepared well for adoption by their foster carers and their worker, and, in
some cases, the foster carers have remained friends of the childs family. The
move to adoption is marked and celebrated.


Impressively effective and responsive adoption support is offered in a variety
of creative ways, dependant on need. The evidence of effectiveness is that
there have been no adoption breakdowns involving North Lincolnshire
adopters over the last two years. The support ranges from formal
individualised support plans, based on a comprehensive assessment, to
regular adopters informal support meetings and an annual event celebrating
adoption. Adopters and children spoken to by inspectors stated, for example,
You can always speak to someone who will listen and help you. Adopters also
spoke of the invaluable support that they receive from buddying
arrangements that put them in touch with other adopters who have
experienced similar circumstances. Learning from an adoption breakdown,
involving carers who were not from North Lincolnshire, has led to enhanced
adoptive parenting sessions being held on a one-to-one basis with all new
adopters, to help and support them in the early stages of placement. When
more intensive support and therapeutic intervention are needed by children or
adopters, CAMHS or other specialist provision is sought and provided in a
timely way.


Movingly, all children spoken to had life story books and memory boxes that
they cherish. These are of good quality and contain all relevant information.
Children, where appropriate, have ongoing contact with brothers, sisters and
birth families. Age-appropriate direct work to help children to understand their
histories and form secure attachments to their new families is a significant
strength of the service and evident at every stage of the adoption process.


Sensitive work takes place with birth parents to support their childrens
transition to their new families. The adoption service holds a birth parent
support group four times a year, enabling the sharing of experiences and


ongoing support for the future. Sensitive settling in letters, written by birth
parents, effectively support childrens emotional well-being.

A highly successful adopted childrens group is very well attended and has
over 22 members. The group provides an excellent opportunity for adopted
children to enjoy friendships and to seek support from others who understand
their lived experience. The group is well supported by the adoption social
workers and a committed older adopted young person who shares her
experiences to help support the younger members. In addition to this, up to
seven younger children attend a monthly stay and play session, offering a
supportive environment to these children and adults to discuss adoption
issues.


Social events take place for other children within the adoptive family to give
them space to discuss their feelings and to make friendships with children
who understand some of the issues they face. They also provide an
opportunity to get to know the adoption workers so, if in the future they need
additional support, the workers will be familiar to them.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is outstanding


The experience and progress of care leavers in North Lincolnshire are
outstanding. The local authority has high ambitions for and develops the
aspirations of all its care leavers. Strong levels of corporate commitment and
sustained investment ensure that care leavers receive intensive support to
improve their chances of progressing to further education and future
employment. An innovative approach to the provision of accommodation gives
care leavers plenty of opportunities to secure and sustain their own
independent housing. The views of care leavers are central to service
developments and improvements. The local authority is in contact with the
vast majority of its care leavers. The rate of contact compares very favourably
with that of similar local authorities in the rest of the country. Care leavers
seen by inspectors all spoke positively about the support they receive from
their social workers and personal advisers, for example, The support is always
there when you need it. Most of them stated that they would not have
achieved what they have without the constant encouragement and
reassurance of care leaving staff.


Care leavers receive effective advice on the dangers associated with risky
behaviours and about how to keep safe. The local authority has been very
effective in engaging care leavers in the design and development of leaflets
and videos on child sexual exploitation, how to stay safe on line, body imagery
and the impact of bullying. Personal advisers and support staff carry out risk


assessments on all the accommodation in which they plan to place care
leavers. As a result, care leavers who were spoken to stated that they feel
safe where they live.

All care leavers receive a detailed health passport when they turn 18, which
contains information on their health conditions, their immunisations and the
contact details of the doctors and dentists. Medical support from the children
looked after doctor and nurse continues after the care leavers 18th birthdays.
Care leavers have good access to advice on sexual health and drug and
alcohol use. Referral onto accessible support services is timely and effective.


Care leavers develop good independent living skills. Support workers draw up
bespoke plans for each care leaver to address their specific needs. A central
feature of this work is support on the management of tenancy agreements
and the cultivation of the disciplines needed to make a tenancy sustainable,
such as budgeting, negotiating with landlords and maintaining accommodation
to an acceptable standard. Support workers also help care leavers to conduct
job searches and prepare themselves for interviews.


The local authority has been highly innovative in the way it secures
accommodation and provides support services for its care leavers. It has
established a social enterprise, PHASE, from which it now commissions all of
its accommodation for care leavers. PHASE has increased the range of
housing options, so that it is now possible for a care leaver to move up a
ladder of different types of accommodation before reaching a fully
independent tenancy. It is about to expand its provision further to open up
new training and retail facilities where care leavers can develop their
employability skills.


The very great majority of care leavers live in suitable accommodation. The
number of care leavers who remain with their foster carers when they turn 18
has increased. Young people in residential care in the local authority-run
provision can stay close by moving into supported accommodation in the
same complex, a move for which they are thoroughly prepared and which
they find highly reassuring.


As part of its range of accommodation, PHASE has a complex of flats and
houses for young parents, the majority of whom are care leavers. The aim is
to help young parents to develop their parenting skills, and, where there are
concerns about their ability, to care safely for the baby. They are given the
best possible support and opportunity to achieve this. The proportion of care
leavers in education, training and employment in North Lincolnshire is much
higher than that in other parts of the country. This is due to the early focus
that staff place on developing the career aspirations of vulnerable children in
secondary school, and the identification of and support for those who are at
risk of not securing a positive destination when they turn 16. As a result,
progression rates into further and higher education are high among care
leavers.



The local authority and its partners have developed a good range of workexperience opportunities to enable care leavers to develop their employability
skills and sample potential career opportunities. These include an increasing
number of apprenticeships and internships for those care leavers who have
complex needs.


Pathway planning is effective. Personal advisers and support workers have a
good understanding of the needs of their care leavers and are skilled at
harnessing a range of local resources to support them. However, the pathway
plan itself is not a helpful document to support planning. This has been
recognised, and care leavers are currently engaged in work to improve its
effectiveness.


Care leavers are confident that the local authority will respond to their
concerns, both formally through consultations and more informally through
frequent contacts with personal advisers and support workers. The local
authority seeks and acts on the views of its care leavers. BIZZ, the formally
constituted care leavers group, regularly meets with senior managers and
councillors to suggest ways that services can be improved, most of which are
implemented.


Care leavers are fully aware of the grants and support available to them when
they move into independent accommodation and when they continue with
their further and higher education. As one care leaver stated, I wouldnt have
completed my degree without this support. The local authority provides care
leavers with free passes into all of its local leisure facilities. It regularly
celebrates the achievements of its care leavers through awards evenings and
through presentations to the corporate parenting board.


Leadership, management and
governance

Outstanding

Summary
Strong, committed and effective leadership by the DCS and his senior team is well
supported by a whole-council ownership and prioritisation of childrens welfare,
and there is tangible pride in and celebration of childrens achievements. There is
committed political support expressed through continued investment in
maintaining and enhancing a broad range of appropriately focused services to
meet the needs of children and families. As a result of this, leaders and managers
have been influential in ensuring that good and outstanding outcomes for children
are sustained. Many services are innovative and model best practice, such as the
effective PHASE service for care leavers.
Very impressive engagement with and listening to children and young people at a
strategic and casework level are particular strengths. The local authority is a highly
effective corporate parent. It is ambitious for children looked after and is
particularly well engaged with the active and influential CiCC.
Highly effective leadership by the local authority is central to ensuring the strength
of multi-agency working. Work to protect children from sexual exploitation and the
risks from going missing and to enhance their emotional well-being is particularly
impressive. However, while the local authority works well with the LSCB, its own
internal arrangements for scrutiny by elected members are less robust.
A strong framework for performance management and quality assurance supports
workers and managers to monitor performance and helps senior managers to have
a clear line of sight to the quality of frontline practice. This means that areas for
development are generally swiftly identified and action is taken to ensure progress.
First-line management decision-making and oversight of practice are strengths that
are positively influencing the quality of practice in almost all cases. However, for a
very few children, managers threshold decision-making is not consistently well
matched to presenting need, and this causes delay for children receiving services
that fully match their needs.
Social work flourishes in North Lincolnshire. Social workers were overwhelmingly
positive about working for the council. They are part of a sufficient, stable and
suitably experienced and skilled workforce. They have manageable caseloads and
access to a good range of training and regular supervision. As a result of this, the
local authority has created an environment in which good practice can thrive and
in which social workers can build effective and consistent relationships with
children. This in turn is supporting the achievement of good and excellent
outcomes for children.


Inspection findings

Strong, steadfast and visible leadership by the DCS and senior managers has
been exceptional in creating a culture within the local authority that is both
child focused and committed to continual improvement. As a result of this,
leaders and managers are influential in shaping innovative practice and
improving the outcomes achieved by children and young people, for whom
they are highly ambitious. This commitment to engage with children at all
levels is exemplified by the well-embedded childrens feedback forms, the
learning from which is used to shape services at both an individual and a
strategic level. There is consistent use of individual, child-friendly plans to help
children understand the nature and purpose of the services they are receiving.


The executive director, people and transformation, has a detailed
understanding of, and commitment to, the local authoritys work with children.
She has been pivotal and resolute in developing and embedding wholecouncil ownership of this work. At a political level, this backing is expressed
through ongoing investment in maintaining and enhancing services for
children. This has ensured that there is an impressive range of well-focused
and resourced services available. The leader of the council and the lead
member for children have a comprehensive knowledge of how well services
help and protect children and young people. The lead member chairs the local
authoritys corporate parenting panel and the multi-agency children and young
peoples partnership (CYPP), observes every LSCB board meeting and meets
regularly with children in a variety of fora.


The executive director, people and transformation, holds the independent
chair of the LSCB to account for the good running of the board through a
detailed annual appraisal and makes effective use of the critical friend role of
the board through regular meetings with the independent chair, the lead
member for children and the DCS. However, the local authoritys own
arrangements for scrutiny by elected members, while appropriately
constituted, would benefit from a sharper focus and challenge on outcomes
for children to ensure that the quality of outstanding services continues.


Highly effective leadership by the local authority means that partner agencies
have a strong and shared commitment to joint working and to children. This is
exemplified by the CYPP and the clear and well-focused North Lincolnshire
Childrens Strategy 2020, which outlines the partnerships role and ambitions.
Both the CYPP and the strategy are driven by feedback from, and the active
engagement of, children and young people. The CYPP is consistently attended
by childrens and young peoples representatives from bodies, including the
youth parliament, youth council and CiCC. Children and young peoples views
are gathered in a variety of ways, but of particular importance is the role of
lifestyle surveys that engage a broad range of children within different age
bands. Alongside local and national information on demographics, services for
children and the outcomes they achieve, learning from these surveys also
provides a foundation for the local joint strategic needs analysis (JSNA). The


most recent adolescent lifestyle survey was completed in February 2017, and
there was a high level of responses from a range of schools and settings.
Historically, the JSNA, although well focused on wider public health issues, has
lacked a sufficiently sharp focus on the safeguarding needs of the most
vulnerable children. The introduction in 2016 of a vulnerable children and
young people supplement has substantially addressed this concern. In
addition, a refresh of the JSNA is currently under way, to further improve its
content. Childrens views are well used at this multi-agency level, to shape the
services they receive, for example in the content and presentation of
information about emotional well-being and related topics in the Life Central
website and application (app), developed as part of the ongoing CAMHS
transformation strategy.

Arrangements for both local authority and multi-agency commissioning are
particularly strong. A clear strategy and productive engagement with health
agencies and other partners mean that commissioning activity clearly reflects
local priorities for children. Good alignment between subject experts and
commissioning managers, impressive child engagement in monitoring and coproduction and effective management of clear service specifications mean that
the range and quality of commissioned services are well matched to need and
are continually reviewed to provide further improvement. For example, the
commissioned drug, alcohol and substance misuse service for children and
young people prioritises services for the most vulnerable, including children
looked after, care leavers and those at risk of sexual exploitation. It has a
dedicated youth offending service worker and routinely offers sexual health
screening. To ensure continuous development, the service specification
contains not only key service details and performance measures but also an
annual development plan based on new and emerging priorities, such as
tackling the use of legal highs and spice.


Multi-agency working is exceptionally effective in tackling the risks to children
and young people from sexual exploitation and going missing from home or
care. The needs of and risks to these children and young people are overseen
by a clear and well-joined-up system of strategic and operational meetings,
including regular, very well-attended MACE and missing children meetings.
The missing children advocate and local authority operational lead for child
sexual exploitation each attend both meetings, to ensure a good join-up
between these two areas, as does a senior education lead, to make sure that
information is also shared about children missing education and those whose
attendance is poor. The decisions of MACE meetings are routinely recorded in
childrens electronic case files and are well integrated with wider planning for
them. This has resulted in swift, coordinated and effective interventions for
children who go missing and an ongoing reduction in the number of children
assessed as being at risk of sexual exploitation. Overall, these approaches
have had a very positive impact on outcomes for children and young people.


Information and intelligence sharing between the police and the local
authority and the subsequent profiling and analysis of risk are exceptional.


This supports very high-quality awareness raising, prevention and disruption
work, including the successful prosecution of offenders and the use of child
abduction notices and sexual harm prosecution orders. Targeted work
includes group-work with children in hotspot areas and work with licencing
and fire and rescue services, to support the closure of premises. Broader
awareness raising and prevention include mandatory training and a bi-annual
exam undertaken by all licensed drivers, information and discussion sessions
in schools and the well-publicised Not in our community social media
campaign.

The local authority is a highly effective and proud corporate parent. It acts as
a champion for children looked after, care leavers and adopted children, for
whom it provides outstanding services. The corporate parenting board, led by
an effective lead member and well supported by the multi-agency looked after
childrens partnership provides strong leadership and governance, particularly
with regard to the successful sufficiency strategy. As a result of this, children
looked after in North Lincolnshire are more likely to live nearer to their
families, friends and schools and are more likely to enjoy long-term stability in
their foster homes than children looked after in similar local authorities.


Accommodation for care leavers is commissioned from the local authorityinitiated social enterprise, PHASE. PHASE provides an increasing range of
good-quality accommodation and support and has opened up new training
and retail facilities where care leavers can develop their employability skills.
The active and influential CiCC has sub-groups for children of different ages
and is one of a number of groups in which children looked after and care
leavers are well engaged. This engagement is a key driver for the
development of services, such as short films that the CiCC has developed for
helping teachers understand the particular needs of children looked after and
for developing the skills of foster carers to support children who go missing.


The framework for monitoring, analysing and improving the quality and
performance of services is well considered and mature. There is an effective
framework of meetings and a range of good-quality performance and audit
reports. This supports social workers and first-line managers, for example
through electronic team white-board displays of real-time case progression
and regular compliance reports. It also means that senior managers have a
clear line of sight to the quality and impact of frontline practice and can take
action when improvement is necessary, for example in the timeliness of court
work and the stability of childrens placements. The local authority has a
detailed overview of the quality and impact of its own early intervention
FaSST teams. First-line management decision-making and oversight of
practice are strengths. Managers consistently oversee all key decision-making
points for children. This is well recorded in case records, which show how
clear direction by managers, for example at the start of child protection
investigations and assessments, is positively influencing the quality of work in
almost all cases. However, during the course of the inspection, inspectors saw
that, for a very few children, threshold decisions made by first-line managers


about the level of services that children receive are not always proportionate
to childrens levels of need. This was particularly seen within the new single
access point (SAP). Although this has not resulted in any children being left at
risk of significant harm, it has meant that a small number of children have
been left in situations in which risk has not always been sufficiently assessed
or they have experienced some delay before receiving the services that their
needs warrant. The local authority has been monitoring and developing the
work of the SAP since its recent launch and, through a shared focus on
neglect with the LSCB, is taking action to improve the ability of its staff to
recognise risk to children when it comes from a chronic pattern of harm rather
than from a single acute incident. When, during the course of the inspection,
inspectors identified any areas of relative weakness, such as in the quality of
services for privately fostered children, the local authority took swift and
effective action to address these.


Through its highly successful workforce strategy and approach to training and
developing its staff, the local authority has ensured that it has a sufficient,
stable, experienced and suitably skilled workforce. At 31 March 2017, 74% of
social workers had more than three years post-qualification experience, while
annual turnover stood at 11%. This is an impressive achievement. Social
workers and other staff have manageable caseloads and access to a broad
range of good training and learning opportunities, and have regular
supervision. Social workers told inspectors that they feel well supported and
that managers at all levels are visible and approachable. There is a strong
support package to protect and develop the skills of social workers who are in
their first post-qualification year of practice. The principal social worker has
been important in driving this learning culture and in ensuring that training
and development are well linked to learning from performance and quality
management. As a result of this, the local authority has created an
environment in which good practice can thrive. This in turn is supporting the
achievement of good and improving outcomes for children.

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is outstanding
Executive summary
North Lincolnshire Safeguarding Children Board is outstanding.
The board is outward looking and constantly striving to improve the effectiveness
of its agencies in safeguarding children. The board partnerships are exceptionally
strong, with comprehensive representation, commitment and a healthy culture of
challenge. The board chair is highly visible and formidable in holding partners to
account.
The LSCB is highly influential in informing planning and services for children and
families. Priorities for the board are very well aligned to those of other strategic
boards and appropriately informed by performance data, auditing and research.
The significant strength of the board is the power of the voice of the child in
influencing practice, service delivery and training. This ensures a clear focus on
what it is like to be a child in North Lincolnshire.
The effectiveness of the board is further enhanced by the safeguarding operational
management (SOM) group and the newly formed safeguarding pathways lead
officer group (SPLOG). They provide robust oversight and an important link
between the strategic board and frontline practice.
The LSCB effectively promotes a culture of continuous learning and improvement.
The work of the board is significantly enhanced by the comprehensive training
programme, which reflects the priorities of the board to increase the effectiveness
of frontline practice, to improve outcomes for children and families.
There is a strong and embedded culture of performance management, supported
by comprehensive data and robust auditing processes, to ensure that board
members have a clear understanding of key issues for children and areas for
improvement.
The board is well served by the lay member who has a clear understanding of her
role and is vigorous in her challenge, especially of issues of diversity. The lay
member takes an active role in auditing and has led training on female genital
mutilation.


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The LSCB is highly influential in informing planning and services for children
and families. The LSCB is proficient at driving and shaping the ways in which
local services work together to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
and young people. Priorities for children are clear and comprehensively
informed through auditing processes, performance information, local and
national intelligence, learning from SCRs, child death overviews and, most
importantly, from children. The impact of the board is clearly seen through
developments such as the neglect strategy, domestic abuse triage systems
and the highly effective multi-agency responses to child sexual exploitation.


Strong governance arrangements combined with effective direction from a
highly effective and experienced independent board chair ensure an
unremitting focus on safeguarding children. The chair is very influential and
maintains a high profile across the partnerships. This ensures good
communication, information sharing and opportunities for challenge.
Importantly though, it is clear that it is the commitment from board partners
that sustains the effectiveness. The business management arrangements for
the board are strong and effectively support the various groups and working
arrangements.


Partnership representation is very strong, and there is consistent commitment
and a healthy culture of challenge to drive forward the work of the board.
Priorities are well aligned to the key strategies of partner agencies, including
the Health and Wellbeing Board (HWB) and the CYPP. The chair maintains a
high profile with these and other partners, including the Safeguarding Adults
Board and the Safer Neighbourhoods Executive Board, and attends meetings
ensuring good communication and opportunities for challenge.


The LSCB proposed priorities for 201718 are aligned to the key strategies of
partners to safeguard children. The priorities continue to focus on reducing
harm from child sexual exploitation, domestic abuse and neglect. To further
improve the effectiveness of services, the business priorities include the
introduction of outcome-based accountability within the performance
management framework.


The overwhelming strength of the board is the voice of the child in the
development of services, influencing practice and contributing to the learning
and development of all agencies working with children. This ensures a clear
focus on what it is like to be a child in North Lincolnshire. The voice of the
child is evident in all areas of the work of the board, such as learning from
SCRs, whereby a group of children, dedicated to promoting positive emotional
well-being and mental health, produced the positive steps leaflet and
organised a conference to raise awareness for children and professionals.
Children have also been at the forefront of the development of and creation of


the North Lincolnshire Children and Young Peoples Emotional Health and
Wellbeing Transformation Plan.

The significant effectiveness of the board is enhanced through the SOM group
and the newly formed SPLOG. These groups ensure robust oversight and
contribute to the development of key areas of practice and to strategic
planning. The focus of SPLOG comes from the findings of audits, performance
data and other intelligence and has already resulted in effective changes in
practice, for example in strengthening the arrangements for the management
oversight of re-referrals and identifying training needs in health settings with
regard to domestic violence procedures and services. SPLOG priorities further
inform the multi-agency audit agenda, looking at the key pathways for
children, which for this year are particularly focused on thresholds. While
thresholds are clearly defined and understood by partners, information and
data have identified the need for a renewed focus to ensure that thresholds
are applied consistently, to ensure that children receive the right services at
the right time to meet their needs.


The SOM group provides a valuable forum with good links between the
strategic board and frontline practitioners. The group has a focus on key areas
of practice, to improve the effectiveness of partners in North Lincolnshire
through the development of policies, identification of training needs and
dissemination of research and good practice. The SOM group is particularly
good at ensuring that all professionals working with children and families are
consistent in their practice and use a common language to ensure clarity for
children and families.


The extensive LSCB training programme is underpinned by a comprehensive
learning and development framework. The programme reflects the priorities of
the board to increase the effectiveness of frontline practice to improve
outcomes for children and families. The framework and training programme is
informed by research, case audit processes, SCRs, partner agency needs
analyses and child death reviews. Robust evaluation processes ensure that the
training programme is clearly focused on the needs of partners to deliver
effective services. The impact of training is measured through case audits to
consider the application of theory into practice and the difference that it is
making. When interviewed by inspectors, professionals working with children
had a good knowledge and understanding about LSCB training, including
learning from SCRs. The learning and development coordinators are
passionate, demonstrating a very strong commitment to ensuring the wider
dissemination of training across the partnerships.


Engagement with schools is highly influential through annual conferences
promoting the safeguarding agenda. There is excellent engagement with
children to develop some exceptionally good training tools to raise awareness
of hard-hitting messages about child sexual exploitation through skater boy
story and Ferns story. Training is also disseminated through street pastors
and multi-faith groups and to night-time economy services, ensuring that


information and awareness about important issues, such as child sexual
exploitation, reach the widest possible audience.

The comprehensive performance data and highlight reports provided to the
board ensure that board members have a clear understanding of key issues
for children in North Lincolnshire from which to identify areas for development
across the partnerships. For example, the most recent report identifies key
areas to consider in respect of the understanding and application of thresholds
and has resulted in this area of work being identified at SPLOG, to be taken
forward as part of the auditing programme.


All partners are highly committed to the section 11 auditing processes of the
board to evaluate individual effectiveness. The LSCB has a well-established
process in place to measure compliance with section 11 duties. This involves
annual themed challenge events at which each agency presents an annual
report and each representative has a one-to-one challenge interview with the
chair and a selected panel on their contribution to and effectiveness of
safeguarding arrangements.


The LSCB multi-agency case evaluation process and line of sight meetings and
reports enable partners to evaluate the effectiveness of safeguarding services
and quality assure practice to determine the impact of interventions for
children and families. The arrangements for multi-agency case auditing have
been further strengthened, and all board members and practitioners have
been included in the processes. Case audits have resulted in changes to
strengthen frontline practice, for example in the development of domestic
abuse triage systems.


The SCR group has appropriate representation to meet its statutory functions.
The learning from the last SCR is well developed and has resulted in changes
to practice and wider developments across the partnerships, and beneficial
coordinated work with other agencies.


The child death overview panel (CDOP) is appropriately constituted and works
well. The panel has effectively taken forward issues relating to suicide and
emotional well-being. This has contributed to some very valuable and
successful work in improving and developing responsive services and in
involving children in the development of child-friendly information, such as the
lets talk about it tool for practitioners to identify and engage with children
when talking about emotional well-being and mental health.


The board is very good at ensuring a focus on child sexual exploitation.
Mature information and intelligence sharing about child sexual exploitation,
children missing education and missing from home or care, support targeted
awareness raising, prevention work, disruption and the prosecution of
offenders. The board has focused on the auditing of childrens cases in which
child sexual exploitation was a factor and has received detailed information
through regular line of sight meetings.



The board also receives detailed reports to inform its wider safeguarding role,
on key areas of practice. These include private fostering, IRO annual reports,
managing allegations against people who work with children and, importantly,
detailed reports on some of the most vulnerable children, including disabled
children and those living out of the area.


Responses to female genital mutilation are an ongoing priority of the board.
Responses are robust. Each partner agency has identified a safeguarding lead,
provision of specialist training, clear guidance and procedures and ensures
that awareness of female genital mutilation is raised across communities.


Extremism is considered well by the LSCB through direct links to the Prevent
duty multi-agency partnership board. This enables the board to ensure that all
organisations have an awareness of the Prevent duty and the various forms
that radicalisation takes, so that practitioners are able to recognise signs and
indicators of concern and respond appropriately. Awareness training includes
professionals and children. Awareness is further promoted through a local
colleges involvement in a Department for Education training pilot, which is to
be adopted nationally in the summer of 2017.


The annual report 20152016 is a highly informative succinct document,
clearly linked to outcomes for children. It includes an excellent executive
summary and evaluation of the effectiveness of the board in carrying out its
statutory functions and the effectiveness of multi-agency practice to safeguard
and promote the welfare of children.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This includes children and young
people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and starting
their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted,
one Ofsted inspector (OI) and one senior Her Majestys Inspector (SHMI).
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Graham Reiter
Deputy lead inspector: Dominic Stevens
Team inspectors: Jan Edwards, Ian Young, Rachel Holden, Charles Searle, Fiona
Millns (OI)
Senior data analyst: Peter McLaughlin
Quality assurance manager: Sarah Urding (SHMI)


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


