Westminster City Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 January 2016 to 4 February 2016
Report published: 29 March 2016

Childrens services in Westminster City Council are outstanding

Good

permanence

Outstanding


Outstanding


Good


Outstanding


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Westminster, augmented by the exemplary tri-borough
partnership with Hammersmith and Fulham, and Kensington and Chelsea, benefit
from outstanding, highly ambitious and confident operational and political leadership.
Consequently, almost all vulnerable children and young people who come into
contact with childrens services receive good or outstanding support. Significant and
sustained improvements have been made since the last inspection in October 2011,
when services were judged to be good. Leaders and managers demonstrate a strong
track record of effective, high-quality service delivery.
Rigorous performance management means that senior leaders are extremely
knowledgeable about the performance of services provided to children. An
exceptional performance framework supports the delivery of social work to a very
high and, in most cases, outstanding quality.
Considerable economies of scale are achieved through combined administrative and
management arrangements across the tri-borough partnership. Solid governance
strategies are delivered effectively by the chief executive, the lead member and
statutory partnership boards such as the health and well-being board. All of these
link regularly and directly to the tri-borough executive director of childrens services
(DCS), who manages this complex arrangement exceptionally well, within a mature
culture of appropriate challenge.
A dedicated and highly coherent model of commissioning ensures that children and
families in Westminster are offered extensive, holistic early help, and targeted and
specialist services. These are making a vast difference in keeping them safe from
harm. This child-centred approach is strongly supported by the work of innovationfunded, advanced and specialist practitioners and clinicians.
Excellent services are consistently delivered using the tri-borough partnerships welldeveloped focus on practice model of social work, which places a high value on
relationship-building between children and their social workers. Exemplary
application of this highly innovative model is supported by low social work caseloads.
Young people at risk of child sexual exploitation receive excellent support, which is
delivered with great sensitivity and persistence by dedicated professionals. Robust
monitoring and understanding of children missing is driven assertively and
confidently by a missing children coordinator. More work is needed to ensure that all
children missing from home and care are routinely offered a return home interview.
Westminster has an extensive network of tri-borough and in-borough services to help
children and families address difficulties concerning domestic abuse, substance
misuse and parental mental ill health. Consequently, children and young people are
protected from harm.
Services for children looked after or those requiring adoption are outstanding. The
local authority is a highly ambitious corporate parent. A child looked after in
Westminster is surrounded by a team of professionals that works closely and


collaboratively to help them achieve in life. As a result, children and young people do
well in education, placement stability is good and children feel safe.
Westminster care leavers receive an effective, aspirational service, reflected in the
excellent work undertaken by the virtual school, personal advisers and social workers
in promoting an extensive range of options for all young people.
Children and young people at risk of radicalisation, female genital mutilation, forced
marriage and honour-based violence are protected through a range of excellent
initiatives.
Excellent workforce planning means that the tri-borough partnership has a very
stable and experienced workforce, and this enhances consistency and quality of
service. Well-trained and impressive social workers are able to retain their expertise
in practice and pursue career opportunities other than management, if they so wish.


Contents
Executive summary

The local authority



Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection 9
The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence


Leadership, management and governance


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates no childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
September 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for looked after children
was in September 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since September 2011.
 The DCS is executive director of childrens services for the tri-borough
partnership, which comprises Westminster, Hammersmith and Fulham, and the
Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since April 2012.
 The LSCB is shared with Hammersmith and Fulham, and the Royal Borough of
Kensington and Chelsea.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 40,694 children and young people under the age of 18 live in
Westminster. This is 17.2% of the total population of the area.
 Approximately 36.7% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 31% (the national average is 16%)
 in secondary schools is 32% (the national average is 14%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 57% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Other Ethnic, and Asian or Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 in primary schools is 70% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 64% (the national average is 15%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2015, 1,240 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 March 2015, 113 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 99 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 March 2015, 10 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from five at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection, two serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and two serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at
the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2015, 179 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 50 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 176 (49 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014.
Of this number:
 seven live in residential childrens homes. Of these, 100% live outside the
authority area
 three live in residential special schools3. Of these, 100% live outside the
authority area
area
 two live with parents, and both live within the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 14 adoptions
 six children became subject of special guardianship orders
returned to be looked after


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or fewer per year.


independent living
 four children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.

Recommendations

Ensure that all cases of children in need are systematically evaluated by
managers regularly, focusing on whether changes are being achieved and
sustained.


Ensure that children missing from home and care are routinely offered a return
home interview, and that aggregated information from interviews informs
service planning.


Review out-of-hours arrangements to ensure that children and young people
are offered a standard of practice consistent with daytime services.


Ensure that personal advisers have frequent contact with care leavers in
custody and that managers routinely review the quality of work with these
young people.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children and families in Westminster are of very high quality.
 Children and families are provided with a wide range of services to help and
support them to feel safe. Social workers act quickly when children and young
people need help and protection.
 Social workers, teachers, police and health workers work together well to make
sure that things get better for children and families. This means that problems
are often sorted out at an early stage.
 Social workers spend time getting to know children and their parents. This means
that they understand what is happening and are really good at helping families to
make positive changes. They are very good at listening to children and
understanding things that are important to each child, such as how they feel,
where they want to live and what needs to happen to make things better.
 Children and young people at risk of sexual or gang exploitation are helped by
dedicated, caring workers to make them safe.
 Children and their families who arrive from different countries are provided with
good help and advice.
 Senior leaders and councillors have a passion to make things better for all
children. They want them to do well. This is making a positive difference to
young peoples lives.
 Social workers care about the children and young people they work with and do
all that they can to help children live safely with their families. Some children and
young people can only be supported and protected by being taken into care.
When this happens, they are helped to live with their brothers and sisters, if
possible.
 Children and young people in care benefit from social workers who know them
well, are committed and skilled and who do not give up on them. They are helped
to keep in contact with their families. Children and young people who live with
foster carers or live in childrens homes are looked after well. Foster carers are
supported well by the council.
 If young people want to stay with their foster carers when they reach 18, they
are helped to do so. Young people are supported to attend university and college,
or helped to find a job and safe accommodation when they leave care.
 When children need to be adopted, this happens quickly. They are adopted with
their brothers and sisters whenever this is possible. Westminster City Council tries
hard to find adoptive families for as many children as possible. Families who
adopt children have plenty of support to help make sure that they can care for
the children until they become adults.
 Children and young people are provided with many opportunities to have their
views heard. This is making a positive difference to how services are provided
across the city.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Good

Summary
Children and families in Westminster are offered extensive and timely early help
through accessible, high-quality, universal and targeted services, protecting them
from harm.
There is widespread understanding among professionals of the thresholds for
access to social care intervention. Contacts and referrals for children in need and
at risk are managed promptly in the tri-borough multi-agency safeguarding hub
(MASH). There is some delay in starting assessments for a small number of
children.
Social work practice is patient, tenacious and respectful. Issues of increased risks
to children on open cases, when identified, are escalated appropriately. Case
records illustrate strong and thorough direct work. The quality of social work
assessments is consistently good or outstanding, demonstrating effective and
thoughtful engagement with families.
Good-quality children in need plans are evident in the majority of cases, but a
minority of children remain on these plans for too long. A small number of plans
and reviews lack clarity. Child protection enquiries are carried out by experienced
and knowledgeable social workers. Strategy meetings are timely and involve all the
relevant key agencies. Child protection plans are concise. Effective planning and
reviewing quickly reduce risks to children.
Management oversight is a clear strength, with social workers receiving regular,
reflective supervision, providing clear direction and a shared ownership of risk,
from the frontline to senior management.
Young people at risk of child sexual exploitation receive excellent support. Children
who go missing from school are identified quickly, with prompt and effective action
taken to address absences. More work is needed to ensure that all children missing
from home and care are offered a return home interview.
Children and young people at risk of radicalisation, female genital mutilation,
forced marriage and honour-based violence are protected through a range of
highly effective initiatives.
The tri-borough partnerships out-of-hours service ensures that children are safe.
However, action is needed to make sure that formal safeguarding procedures are
followed routinely and that social workers always accompany children to foster
care.



Children in Westminster benefit from a well-coordinated array of services that
provide help at an early stage. The pathway into targeted early help provision is
clear, with three multi-agency locality teams considering new referrals and both
step down and step up referrals from social workers at weekly meetings. An
extensive range of services are provided through childrens centres and schools.
A team around the family model considers a holistic, multi-agency perspective
on families needs. The well-established tri-borough family recovery project is
part of the service network. These services are underpinned by a coherent
multi-agency strategy, and this is making a significant difference in improving
the lives of children and families.


Early help is carefully prioritised for the most vulnerable families living in the
most deprived wards in the borough. Parents seen during the inspection highly
valued the specific programmes they attended such as English classes,
readiness for employment and parenting courses, and support with domestic
abuse, mental ill-health and substance misuse. They also appreciated the
accessibility of informal support at drop-in facilities at childrens centres.
External, independent, academic evaluations verify that parents benefit from
the blend of practical and emotional support at the heart of early help
provision.


Strong partnerships serve to protect children from harm. All referrals are
prioritised by the duty social worker in the access and assessment team, using
blue, green, amber and red ratings, according to the seriousness of the
concern. The vast majority of referrals rated red and amber receive a timely,
safe response. Although inspectors found delays in progressing a small number
of child protection referrals, these do not leave children exposed to higher
levels of risk. However, delayed timescales are likely to provoke uncertainty and
anxiety for families affected.


The tri-borough partnerships multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) is an
effective information gathering and sharing hub. Most children and young
people benefit from an effective multi-agency response to their needs through
the MASH. The co-location of staff enables highly-effective gathering of
information. For example, the integrated gangs unit, the missing person
coordinator working collaboratively with social workers and the police analyse
information, which informs prompt action. Strong management oversight
ensures that MASH recommendations are safe. In a small number of cases,
MASH checks took longer than timescales designated by the colour-coded
system, which led to delay in the local authority being able to act.


Children living in families where parental difficulties are causing instability and
risk are supported by highly trained, skilled and able social workers,
undertaking sensitive direct work. Social workers are supported in this work by
experienced clinicians, who have undergone advanced training such as family
therapy. This assists their professional thinking and approaches to complex
families through systemic reflection and evaluation. Social workers told
inspectors that they appreciated the focus on practice systemic training they


had recently completed, as it is providing new insights and improving
engagement, particularly where families are resistant to involvement.
are determined, tenacious and respectful. Issues of increased risks to children
on open cases, when identified, are promptly escalated and plans are reviewed
accordingly. In the large majority of cases, social workers quickly build strong
relationships with children and families who need protection and help. Children
are seen promptly and alone. Their views on their family circumstances are
captured well using genograms, the three houses and other direct work tools.
Interpreters are used consistently for families whose first language is not
English, alongside sophisticated consideration of families cultural backgrounds
and heritage. This allows, for example, for women from middle-eastern and
Indian sub-continent backgrounds to talk about the domestic abuse they are
experiencing, with social workers quickly putting them in touch with culturally
sensitive services to support and advise them.
involved with the child, and are held within 24 hours of the referral. Meetings
are well recorded and management decisions are clear. In a minority of cases
seen, timescales for completing actions were not specific and this omission
contributed to delays. Obtaining parental consent to share information, or
overriding it where necessary, is scrupulously considered and recorded,
indicating a respectful approach to parents and carers. Thresholds for access to
child protection services are well understood across the partnership. Referral
rates to childrens social care services are consistently lower than in comparable
local authorities. The rate of referrals increased by 8% in 201415, from 402
per 10,000 to 411, still below the rate of similar authorities at 558 and the
England rate of 548.
preceding the inspection, with 71% concluding that an initial child protection
conference (ICPC) was unnecessary. The local authority reports that this trend
has recently started to decline, but the low conversion rate indicates that too
many children and families may be undergoing unnecessary statutory
investigations. In cases seen by inspectors, decisions both to initiate child
protection enquiries and to convene ICPCs were balanced and carefully
evidenced.
regard to the timeliness of initial child protection conferences. In cases seen by
inspectors, applied exemptions were appropriate, with most involving small
delays in order that key professionals or parents were able to attend
conferences. The large majority of ICPCs lead to childrens placement on child
protection plans, indicating that decision making is more appropriate here than
in commencing child protection enquiries.


about children. The majority of referrals to childrens social care result in
assessments and the provision of services. Re-referrals are much lower than in
comparable authorities, suggesting that the help families and children receive
addresses risks and needs, achieving sustained improvements. A joint panel of
childrens services and housing enables collaborative assessments for 16- and
the local authority when necessary. Assessments include good attention to
young peoples health, substance misuse and offending patterns.
is taken to understand parental and family histories, with well-constructed
genograms and chronologies informing this task. Consistently strong efforts are
made to understand parental cultures, religious and belief systems, alongside
the impact of mental illness, poverty and insecure housing. Exceptionally
competent examples were seen of social workers evaluating how these, and
other vulnerabilities, interact with the ability of parents to provide stable, warm
and consistent care for their children.
illustrating strong and thorough direct work. New information results in reevaluations of findings, with services provided promptly during assessment
periods. A DfE timescale exemption also applies to assessment timescales.
About 28% of assessments took longer than 45 working days in the preceding
six months. Exemptions were applied appropriately in the majority of instances
seen by inspectors, with management directions and decisions clearly recorded.
standards of casework by qualified and skilled social workers. Caseloads are
manageable, allowing considerable time for direct work with families.
to help children and families address difficulties concerning domestic abuse,
substance misuse and parental mental ill-health. The focus on practice
programme provides specific content for social workers on this toxic trio of
vulnerabilities. Service provision is embedded in universal, targeted early help
and statutory childrens services. Through effective direct work, early help
practitioners and domestic abuse specialists help children to voice their
experiences of living in families where these parental difficulties prevail.
Perpetrator and victim programmes provide sufficient capacity for work with
adults. Parents are helped to understand the impact of their behaviours on their
children. Some exceptionally creative, skilled interventions with families affected
by these circumstances were observed during the inspection.
risk and harm by adults are understood well within formal settings such as the
multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC) and multi-agency public
protection arrangements (MAPPA).


forced marriage and honour-based violence are protected through a range of
impressive initiatives. A thorough and bespoke needs analysis in Westminster
culminated in a partnership with a local hospital, identifying and working with
expectant mothers previously subjected to female genital mutilation,
simultaneously assessing risk to their daughters and other young girls in their
extended families. This initiative has significantly increased the number of
women and girls receiving intervention. The hospital initiative is strengthened
by intensive community efforts, including a virtual team based in local maternity
clinics and working alongside midwives.
that are competently chaired by experienced child protection advisers (CPAs).
Children are automatically provided with an advocate, unless they choose to
opt out. Child-friendly versions of plans are prepared by advocates with CPAs,
allowing children and young people to understand the purpose and objectives
of the plans. The quality of child protection plans is good, with clear outcomes
underpinned by measurable objectives and actions. Risks to children are
reduced quickly, with only a few children remaining on child protection plans for
longer than a year, and none for longer than two years. Very few children are
placed on child protection plans for a second or subsequent episode.
minority of children in need plans lacked clearly defined outcomes, with reviews
that did not progress work with children and families purposefully. However,
the majority of plans seen were comprehensive, informed by all involved
agencies, and with the participation of children and their parents clearly
apparent (Recommendation).
Effective tri-borough multi-agency arrangements ensure swift informationsharing and identification of children and young people at risk. Senior managers
regularly evaluate interventions with higher-risk young people at thorough
multi-agency sexual exploitation panel (MASE) meetings. Emerging risks to
young people are identified early, partly through an innovative multi-agency
integrated gangs unit (IGU) that meets weekly, tracking and intervening quickly
with new gang affiliates, in addition to more established members. IGU is
pivotal in providing intelligence for trend analysis on missing young people. A
dedicated IGU young womens worker engages with young women at risk of
sexual exploitation, and other forms of abuse and control, through their gang
associations. Child sexual exploitation risk assessments were used in the
majority of cases seen by inspectors. MASE panel oversight was clear in these
cases, although case recordings did not consistently reflect updated panel
decisions.
cases, and delivers training and consultation for social workers. Each week,
senior managers evaluate responses to children missing from home. Return


interviews are not routinely offered for frequent absconders. The tri-borough
strategic panel has recognised that further work is required to aggregate
patterns and trends, and the local authority has developed effective plans to
progress this work (Recommendation).
assessed and supported well by a knowledgeable, dedicated worker. Effective
awareness-raising work occurs regularly, which has led to a recent increase in
referrals and enquiries.
and investigations regarding allegations against staff who work with children.
CPAs effectively chair strategy meetings, ensuring regular tracking and
recording of outcomes.
performance data, and information is regularly evaluated. Effective, prompt
action is taken by a dedicated team to identify and track children who are
missing from school. Appropriate checks are made with social care, housing,
police, and revenue and benefits agencies to ascertain childrens whereabouts.
Consequently, very few children remain missing and the large majority are
placed in suitable provision within a term, which is in line with the local target.
School attendance orders are initiated where necessary.
children at home. A designated adviser promptly contacts families, ensuring
that effective action is taken to assess the suitability and quality of childrens
education in these circumstances. The majority of families engage well with the
local authority, which also carefully liaises, as necessary, with other council
departments to promote childrens welfare.
dedicated social work team. The team responds to crises and emergencies out
of hours, ensuring that safe arrangements are in place and that protective
action is taken to safeguard children if required. While EDT staff check that
children are safe, staff do not always follow formal safeguarding procedures.
This results in delays to initial risk assessments, which do not begin until
daytime services initiate procedures. Additionally, examples were seen of
children placed in care without being seen or escorted by an EDT social worker
(Recommendation).


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Outstanding

Summary
Children looked after in Westminster receive an outstanding service. Significant
improvements have been made since the last inspection in October 2011, when
services were judged to be good. The tri-borough partnership has centralised and
amalgamated key services for children looked after, achieving economies of scale,
and improvements in consistency and in the quality of social work practice. The
local authority is able to demonstrate innovative practice, with areas of
outstanding and sustained progress leading to exceptionally good outcomes for
young people. Children and young people have consistent and enduring
relationships with committed, skilled and determined social workers.
Decisions for children and young people to become looked after are appropriate,
and informed by strong assessments and good-quality chronologies that support
care planning. Decision making is timely and there is a sense of urgency in
establishing permanent and stable homes for children who are unable to live with
their families. Court work is of a consistently high standard. Children are supported
to return home when this is in their best interests and exceptional effort is made to
support children to remain in their wider families, including placing children
abroad.
The local authority is a highly ambitious corporate parent. A co-located child and
adolescent mental health service and a proactive virtual school all work to support
each individual child. As a result, children and young people do well in education,
placement stability is good and children feel safe.
Members of the children in care council have regular, positive contact with senior
managers, whom they know well. Elected members and strategic leaders give high
priority to children in their care. The corporate parenting board provides strong
leadership and champions the needs of all children. A vibrant culture of celebrating
successes and achievements of young people is embedded and there is an active
and influential children and young peoples panel.
Adoption services are outstanding. They are extremely well managed, with
adoption considered for a diverse group of children, including older children,
brothers and sisters, and children from a wide range of cultural backgrounds, with
consistently outstanding work. Adoption support is very strong, with innovative
services in place to support adopters.
Care leavers receive a good service overall and have a high profile in Westminster.
The local authority is aware that greater focus needs to be given to young care
leavers in custody.


with their families, if it is safe for them to do so. The number of children looked
after in Westminster has remained stable. Senior managers routinely monitor
and analyse any trends to ensure that they understand the changing needs of
vulnerable children in their community.
culture of urgency, ensuring that children have permanent and stable homes if
they cannot live with their families. Assessments are of a high quality, with
many being outstanding. They are timely, comprehensive and analytical, and
lead to appropriately focused help that is well informed by historical events.
Clear, up-to-date chronologies demonstrate outstanding practice, helping
children to understand why they are in care. Prompt action is taken to
safeguard children. Risk is understood and responded to well. Assessments for
children pre-birth are strong, and timely action results in robust plans.
looking and pioneering in developing innovative, effective, preventative
approaches to reduce the number of children coming into care. For example,
the Action for Change project supports 45 women who have previously had a
number of children removed by the courts. To date, only one child has since
been born and has remained with its mother. Woman are effectively supported
to come to terms with previous traumas.
unaccompanied asylum-seeking young people. Staff are trained to meet this
changing profile, working effectively across cultures on human rights and age
assessments.
Strong management oversight at a tri-borough and local level by the executive
director of childrens services ensures that pre-proceedings work is of a very
high standard. Pre-proceedings letters are clear, succinct, well-evidenced and
use straightforward language.
view of the judiciary is that the tri-borough arrangements stand out as leading
good practice across London. Performance in Westminster for the third quarter
of 201516 was 29 weeks for care proceedings, which is slightly above the
expected timescale of 26 weeks. The local authority has a coherent, wellanalysed understanding of timeliness for each case, including where this has
been impacted upon by its participation in the innovative family drug and
alcohol court.
conferences (FGCs) are used early to inform care planning and to identify
extended family members. Exceptional effort and expertise are employed to


ensure that children have the opportunity to live within their families. This
includes examples of outstanding practice in placing children abroad. The local
authority minimises the additional time this might take by ensuring that fosterto-adopt placements are available for these children.
Going Home project is undertaking innovative tri-borough research with 10
young people looked after in Westminster, enabling them to remain at home
safely with their families.
within expected timescales. Case recording is clear and up to date, and the
voice of the child is consistently evidenced. Direct work and engagement with
children and young people are a particular strength. Effective direct work was
seen, with social workers being persistent in developing relationships with
harder to engage or resistant young people. All young people who spoke to
inspectors had had consistent social worker relationships. Some young people
had had the same social worker for more than five years, or up to 11 years.
Significant effort is made to engage with challenging or avoidant families,
including good use of a wider network of professionals to support parents.
exploitation are driven assertively and confidently by a missing children
coordinator and the MASE panel. Considerable work has been undertaken to
ensure that children looked after who go missing are safe and their experiences
understood. An audit of 40 missing children in July 2015 identified the need to
work further on routine take-up of return interviews. This is improving,
evidenced by cases tracked and sampled, and data on the reduction of missing
episodes. Professionals have a good understanding of the push and pull factors
for individual children going missing, and recent training has enhanced ways to
work with young people to keep them safe.
after children nurse, and the quality of health assessments is strong. About
place on time. Three quarters of young people have had a dental check in-year,
so far. Young people who spoke to inspectors were aware of the role of the
nurse, including being given information on drug and alcohol services and
sexual health.
and timely. There is no waiting list and contact is usually within two weeks, but
will be immediate if the risk is high. Clinical expertise and advice are embedded
throughout the service through regular consultations with frontline managers
and by CAMHS representation on both the transitions and the adoption panels.
Cases seen by inspectors showed the positive impact of this service, including
direct work with carers supporting brothers and sisters to live together.


from their starting points. The virtual headteacher and team have good
oversight of the attendance, progress and achievement of children looked after.
They have a thorough understanding of the individual needs and circumstances
of all children. Staff maintain a comprehensive database and act swiftly when
children, including those who live outside of the area, begin to experience
problems with their education. Staff effectively target their support towards
those children who are most at risk of not achieving, and intervene effectively.
support they receive at school. Most attend a school that has been judged good
or better. In 2014/15, all children at Key Stage 1 achieved well in reading and
mathematics, and made the progress expected of all children. There is a strong
track record of childen looked after achieving well by the time they reach 11
years old. In 2014/15, all children at Key Stage 2 achieved age-related
expectations in reading, writing and mathematics. At Key Stage 4,
approximately one third of children achieved five GCSEs at grades A* to C,
including English and mathematics, which is higher than children looked after in
similar areas.
peers. In 2014/15, children looked after at Key Stage 2 achieved better than
their peers. At Key Stage 4, local data for 2014/15 show that while the
achievement gap remained wide, with a 25% gap between children looked
after and their peers achieving five GCSEs at grades A* to C, including English
and mathematics, it had narrowed by approximately 10%.
participation in post-16 education. They maintain good contact with young
people who have become disengaged with education, employment or training
(EET). Personal advisers know young people well and carefully plan their next
steps in EET. As a result, most young people remain in EET in Years 12 and 13.
childrens education. Staff advocate effectively on behalf of children and put in
place sound strategies to ensure that children stay in school. As a result, there
have been no permanent exclusions of children looked after for many years,
and the use of fixed-term exclusions is being reduced well. Where children are
awaiting a school place, individual tuition is quickly put in place.
quickly and effectively. As a result, overall school attendance of children looked
after is good, and has been so for the last three academic years. The
percentage of sessions missed by children looked after is reducing and is lower
than those in similar areas. Unauthorised absence is being reduced well. Few
children and young people report incidents of bullying, and most would turn to
a trusted adult in the network should they be bullied or become concerned
about their safety.


education plan (PEP). Professionals, including social workers, designated
teachers and the virtual school share information well to review the progress
that children are making and put in place additional support where it is needed.
Most children looked after report that they find their PEP reviews useful. In a
very small number of cases sampled, PEPs varied in quality.
effectively to support children and young peoples progress. For example,
funding is used well to provide additional tuition for children, laptops to assist
with research and homework, and revision aids. However, in a minority of cases
it was not sufficiently clear how the pupil premium was being used to support
the specific individual needs of children.
and recreational activities. Recent examples include: visits to the Victoria and
Albert museum; a bike project; and a digital innovation and arts project. Social
workers accompany children to London universities, health fun days, trips to
the seaside and on a residential trip specifically for children under the age of
they have specific experiences, for example opportunities to shadow a midwife
or work experience in a barristers chambers. The Looked After Children
Achievement Awards are held each October and older care leavers, established
and settled in their lives, return to talk about their experiences. Delegated
authority is in place for foster carers to take day-to-day decisions, so that
children and young people can participate in the activities they enjoy.
children looked after at November 2015 having had more than three moves in
the previous 12 months. Long-term placement stability in 201415 was 77%
and for 201516 so far is at 79%, so it remains strong. A consultation on
placement stability in September 2015 showed that eight of 11 young people in
foster care felt a sense of stability and security. Five of these young people had
lived with the same carer for more than five years. About 23% of children are
placed outside Greater London in order to meet their specific needs. The local
authority actively audits the experience of these children to ensure that they
are receiving the best service.
attend permanency planning meetings and are committed, knowledgeable and
passionate about their work. They know the young people well. Five formal
challenges in the last six months were quickly addressed and did not progress
any further, and most issues are addressed informally. Almost all reviews are
on time, and care plans are clear and comprehensive. IROs ensure that the
review meeting remains meaningful for settled young people by offering a more
informal individualised experience and enabling young people to chair or cochair their review. About 97% of young people participate in their reviews.


IROs in Westminster benefit from regular meetings with tri-borough colleagues,
including externally facilitated training and case discussion.
About 77% live in foster care and 96% are placed in settings judged good or
better by Ofsted. Brothers and sisters are placed together when this is in their
interests. One case seen ensured that three children from one family were
provided with additional support to live together, to allow a thorough
assessment of their future needs.
with wider flexibility to use staff, resources and carers. An ambitious and
proactive fostering recruitment programme to recruit 25 new carers
commenced in October 2015, with external support to fill the recognised gaps
in placement choice for young people. The 16% net deficit for foster carers has
arisen from positive reasons including retirement, offering permanent
placements or staying put arrangements. The recruitment and assessment of
prospective foster carers are strong. The quality of assessments is good. They
are thorough and sensitive, focusing on strengths and areas for development. A
well-organised and separate tri-borough connected persons team responds in a
timely and thorough way to all connected persons and special guardianship
assessments. There are currently 18 special guardianship orders (SGOs)
underway.
Respite care in fostering is only used to support placement stability. All carers
spoke very highly about their supervising social workers. Annual reviews are
regular and independently undertaken by dedicated fostering IROs, managed
within a separate service. Creative use is made of all foster carers, for example
supporting children who return home to parents or acting as a mentor for
young people involved in drug and gang activity.
progress of individual children through tracking systems and routine monitoring
meetings. The small number of children with a plan for adoption is
proportionate to the looked after population, and reflects the right plan being
sought for children in a timely way. Children with a plan for adoption include
older children, brothers and sisters, children with complex needs and children
from a diverse range of cultures. Childrens permanency needs are informed by
high-quality together or apart assessments and child permanence reports.
These are consistently well analysed and well evidenced. Contact is
appropriately considered.
dedicated participation worker drives this work, but it is viewed as everyones
responsibility and embedded throughout the service. This is evidenced through
direct input and active involvement of social workers, the virtual school, IROs


and senior managers, including the director of family services and the triborough assistant director for looked after children and care leavers. The
children in care council, known as the children and young peoples panel
(CYPP), is lively, reflective, committed and proactive. Its role is valued and it is
keen to represent all young people looked after. Alongside the participation
worker, members of the CYPP present findings from consultations to the
corporate parenting board. Children and young people are members of
recruitment panels for social workers and senior staff. They are trainers on
fostering skills courses for prospective carers, advising on the personal qualities
required to be a foster carer. They have redesigned the statutory review
document, which is now child-friendly.
complaints service ensures that it resolves any concerns at an early stage. Proactive involvement of the childrens rights officer ensures that the majority of
representations made by children looked after and care leavers are responded
to effectively. They rarely need to be considered in the formal complaints
process. For example, care leavers raised concerns about the impact of changes
in housing benefits on housing options. This resulted in workshops facilitated by
the housing officer and individual welfare rights sessions, for young people
directly affected. The young people were supported in developing a leaflet to
enable all care leavers to have access to appropriate help and support.
religious and belief systems are understood, and inform care planning.
Examples were seen of outstanding social work practice that included sensitive,
direct work with unaccompanied asylum-seeking young people, using an
interpreter to understand the young persons experiences, and culturally
matched family group conferences that enabled children to live in their birth
families.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is outstanding
Adoption services are managed effectively within a single, overarching, triborough service. Sharing strategic functions results in economies of scale in
relation to resources, and an environment where creativity and innovation
thrive, demonstrating consistently high-quality professional practice.
Consequently, children benefit from an outstanding service.
understanding of clear permanence planning, ensuring that the best
permanence option is considered for children at the earliest stage. This way of
working is threaded through the tri-borough partnerships understanding of
permanence and adoption practice, and is given the highest priority. This is


shown, for example, in the work of the permanency project, which is chaired by
the tri-borough executive director and ensures that pro-active work with the
courts is completed, to secure agreement for family-finding, prior to the
placement order.
understanding of adoption practice and of the wider adoption market. They
routinely reflect and measure their own performance against national indicators
and other London boroughs. There is a range of comprehensive tracking and
monitoring systems for adoption performance, including detailed analysis of any
issues affecting timeliness and to assist with understanding the needs of
individual children.
adoption plan are robust. Staff, including senior managers, have a detailed
knowledge of all children, what is happening for them and why. The progress
made by individual children waiting for adoption is closely monitored and
placement options are continuously explored.
create extra posts. For example, the move to appoint to the pivotal gateway
role of a permanency coordinator is highly insightful, and regular permanence
planning meeting minutes demonstrate exceptional practice in the rigour and
thought put into highly effective planning.
nine children were adopted. At the time of the inspection, the local authority
had nine children who were awaiting a match, and six children matched to
adopters but awaiting a final order. Adoption practice reflects the authoritys
commitment to early family-finding, to securing adoption for children placed
with their brothers and sisters and for children from a variety of ethnic
backgrounds.
Westminster waited an average of 512 days between entering care and moving
in with an adoptive family, well within the national threshold of 547 days.
average of 196 days between receiving court authority to place and an adoptive
match being decided. This is outside the national threshold of 152 days.
However, inspectors identified reasonable delay due to the complexity of the
careful work required in matching children with families who can meet their
needs.
match, including 18 approved in the current year. The tri-borough partnership
ensures that adopters are available for inter-agency placements and routinely


uses the adoption register and other national matching forums for both children
and adopters waiting for a match.
The service is actively working to improve timeliness for adopter assessments.
Delays are mostly outside the services control. The impact of this has been
minimal on adopters and children. Adopters spoken to were very positive about
the recruitment and assessment process.
work practice, resulting in early permanence placements being made. Both
foster-to-adopt and concurrent arrangements are discussed with every adopter
and the first concurrent adopter has recently been recruited. Some adopter
assessments have been fast-tracked to prevent delay, including where a
specific foster-to-adopt match is a possibility and for second-time adopters.
how the service could be improved. This includes working with an external
agency to increase recruitment, enhancing the capacity of adopters to meet
childrens needs and to support, train and equip adopters to feel confident.
Thirteen mentors have been recruited to support adopters through the
recruitment process from the outset, and adopters spoke of the value they
place on the mentor support offered.
reported feeling more confident as a result. Innovative workshops have
included adopters working with a psychologist to increase openness in
matching, particularly in relation to mental health.
bring a range of adoption and safeguarding experience. There are clear quality
assurance processes, and adopters spoken to confirmed that the process was
rigorous.
strong, with appropriate detail and a good level of analysis. The panel process
and the decision-making process are highly effective, with all panel minutes and
agency decision-maker decisions being thorough and well considered.
adjustments as required. For example, managers noticed a slower application
for adoption orders in inter-agency placements when the adoption familyfinding worker had withdrawn. To remedy this, the service now ensures that
the family-finder remains involved until the applications have been submitted
for these children.
of provision. Adopters are aware of their entitlement to adoption support. They
spoke positively about support offered, and adoption support plans were


consistently good. This was supported by the view of the independent chair.
Good use is made of the adoption support fund for individual children.
families. Life story work is of a high quality. It is clear, colourful and jargonfree. Social workers are skilled in undertaking direct work with children, helping
them to understand their histories and enabling them to establish attachment
to their new family. This allows children to settle quickly, with very low
adoption disruptions. There have been two disruptions in the past two years.
Where disruptions have occurred, effective and timely disruption meetings have
taken place, and learning has been embedded in organisational practice and
planning for individual children.
The provision offered is comprehensive and includes birth parent counselling,
support and advice, including literacy help with letterbox contact. The service
also facilitates information sharing between an adopted child, their birth family
and the adoptive family. Currently, the service facilitates letterbox contact for
three adopted children.
The graded judgement for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
that it is good
care leavers. Personal advisers know young people well and have a good
understanding of their individual needs and circumstances. They maintain
regular and effective contact and offer good practical support, such as
accompanying them to health appointments and to college interviews. Young
people benefit from working with a supportive, flexible and experienced team.
Clinicians are available to assist in complex cases, effectively reducing risk.
vulnerabilities, who go missing or are at risk of sexual and gang exploitation,
are effectively monitored by senior managers. They are included in a risk log of
cases discussed routinely by the tri-borough assistant director for looked after
children and the Westminster director of family services.
and vocational aspirations. They provide effective challenge and guidance to
young people on their career options and next steps in education, employment
or training (EET). As a result, a good and increasing proportion of care leavers
are in EET. Some care leavers report that they would like more help in finding
part-time work, work experience and work placements. Plans are well-advanced
to broaden work experience opportunities and vocational mentoring for young
people leaving care.


the excellent work undertaken by the virtual school, personal advisers and
social workers in promoting university as an option for young people. There are
currently 20 young people at university. They benefit from good financial
support to attend. In a minority of cases, the accommodation needs of care
leavers during holiday periods are not considered in a timely fashion and this
leads to a small number of young people feeling anxious about where and with
whom they will stay.
of care leavers and options for them. There is a good range of accommodation
available to young people and a good proportion of care leavers live in suitable
accommodation. Managers from the leaving care service and housing
department have worked successfully together to increase and broaden the
range of housing options available to young people, such as affordable private
rented accommodation.
people are being met effectively. The different levels of support needed by
young people are well understood. As a result, care leavers are in
accommodation where they are well supported. Young people who spoke to
inspectors said that they felt safe where they lived. The service works
collaboratively with housing, health and adult social care, improving transition
arrangements. Those young people with additional needs are supported well by
the complex needs panel.
under 18 years old. In each of the three cases in the last year where young
people aged over 18 were placed briefly in bed and breakfast accommodation,
managers carefully assessed the risks involved and staff provided good
oversight of young peoples welfare.
unaccompanied asylum seekers who become care leavers. They are helped to
settle quickly into accommodation and receive good support for their health and
education needs.
build their skills to live independently, such as learning to save money, budget
and cook for themselves. Housing providers deliver short courses that build
young peoples skills and knowledge so that they can live independently. Most
young people living independently successfully maintain their tenancies.
skills well, including cooking, and provides good opportunities for their personal
and social development through discussions on, for example, sexual health and
personal safety. Young people have good opportunities to mix with others,
make friends and extend their support network.


knowledge that personal advisers and managers have of young peoples
circumstances. However, in a minority of cases, pathway plans are not timely
and do not reflect young peoples current needs. In these cases, planning is not
as effective and outcomes for a small number of young people are not
improving.
leavers in developing and improving services. Young people are routinely
involved in staff recruitment, in the training of foster carers and in promoting
the rights and entitlements of their peers.
authority provides good financial support for those attending university through
an annual parental contribution. Top-up funding for young people on
apprenticeships is available, and young people are entitled to 2,000 to set up
their first home. For those young people in further education, additional tuition
is provided where necessary.
service, providing direct intervention and emotional support. Young people
know their health history and are well placed to manage their own health. All
young people have a final health assessment, receive information on any
outstanding health needs and have an up-to-date copy of their health care
plan, including a summary of their health history. They are given information
about who to contact should they have concerns about their health and can
contact the nurse for children looked after should they wish to. In most cases
sampled, care leavers are well supported in accessing health services, including
keeping GP appointments and accessing specialist health services.
and contact with all care leavers who are in custody. This means that not
enough has been known about all of the young peoples current circumstances,
welfare or progress. As a result of the inspection, managers have undertaken a
thorough review of all custody cases and the needs of these young people are
now being prioritised (Recommendation).


Leadership, management and
governance

Outstanding

Summary
Stable and highly effective operational and political leadership ensures that children
and families in Westminster benefit from good or outstanding services. Senior
leaders and elected members have high aspirations for children. They demonstrate
care and compassion, and a rigorous approach to achieving excellence at all levels.
They have a comprehensive knowledge of the strengths and areas for improvement
and are quickly responsive to external challenge.
Underpinning their work is an imaginative approach, enhanced by the exemplary triborough partnership, to service provision and problem solving. Robust collaborative
arrangements help services to meet local need effectively. The tri-borough director
of childrens services is a pivotal figure and manages this complex set of
arrangements exceptionally well. Consequently, the local authority has demonstrated
significant continuous improvement in quality of services since the last inspection in
The director of family services is highly visible and an effective leader. As a result,
the quality of social work practice is consistently good or outstanding. Managers are
not complacent. Instead, systematic learning from direct observations enables senior
managers to quickly identify and resolve any practice concerns, ensuring that
services are continually improving and are highly effective. A strong and embedded
child-focused culture ensures that children and young people are listened to and are
influential in informing service delivery. Vulnerable children and families benefit from
exceptional, well-targeted early help and specialist services, commissioned
specifically to reflect the complex diversity of the local population.
A comprehensive performance management system is a core element of success.
Professional accountability and rigorous management oversight enable senior leaders
to be extremely knowledgeable about the impact of services provided.
Strong partnership arrangements and robust multi-agency working ensure that work
with gangs is integrated and that work with children at risk of child sexual
exploitation is well coordinated and highly effective. An effective and accountable
Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) ensures that partners work well together
to safeguard children and young people.
Services for children looked after or those requiring adoption are outstanding.
Corporate parenting is well established across the council.
The commitment to implementing the focus on practice innovation project is
attracting high-calibre workers who are delivering outstanding social work practice,
improving the lives of vulnerable children and families in the borough.


director for childrens services (DCS), are exemplified by the well-managed
focus on practice initiative. Funded as part of the governments innovation
programme, this highly innovative project enhances social work intervention by
adopting a well thought through and well-resourced model of practice.
Innovative elements include a comprehensive and accredited training
programme, and skills coaching from trained specialist practitioners. The model
has been widely disseminated, and is clearly fully accepted and implemented
across the workforce. The role of principal social worker, fully integrated into
the focus on practice approach, is effectively enhancing improved direct work
with families in Westminster and was widely in evidence to inspectors during
case observation and case tracking.
the senior leadership team of the tri-borough partnership communicates
regularly and effectively. A formal cycle of meetings between the DCS, the
LSCB chair, senior leaders such as the three borough chief executives and
elected members makes sure that they are very well informed on matters for
which they hold strategic responsibility. Senior leaders operate within a culture
of respectful challenge and they hold each other to account. The senior
management team, including the DCS, is highly interactive with frontline
services. Senior managers know individual children and social workers very
well. Highly effective lines of communication from frontline social workers to
senior leaders enable them to know their services to children thoroughly and
extensively.
she leads and shows exceptionally strong leadership and commitment to
continued improvement, working diligently to progress the small number of
areas for improvement that remain. There is no complacency. Instead, a strong
culture of continuous learning, professional accountability and responsibility,
devoid of blame, enables staff to flourish in a safe but challenging environment.
performance areas identified for improvement. An accessible monthly update
report on progress is presented at each scrutiny committee and is subject to
rigorous challenge and debate. The cabinet member for children chairs a sixweekly hotspots meeting to ensure thorough examination and awareness of
high-risk cases. The chief executive is accessible to all staff through his regular
meet the chief days, and young people know who the senior managers are.
The lead member undertakes regular visits to meet service users. A meeting
with foster carers, to understand their role better and to encourage applicants,
led to implementing a total rebate of council tax to foster carers and a
significant increase in initial enquiries locally.
that priorities for the local authority are closely aligned to the children in care
and care leavers strategy. The inclusion of an opposition-elected member,


initiated by the lead member, has improved the challenge and scrutiny of the
panel and strengthened corporate parenting across the council. There is clear
evidence of impact in Westminster, demonstrated through the work of the
virtual school in improving educational outcomes for children looked after and
of the councils housing commissioner in increased housing options for care
leavers.
expectations, and ensures that thorough oversight by senior managers drives
improvements in practice. The learning and improvement framework quarterly
report is highly effective in collating findings from serious case reviews, user
feedback (including from young people, parents and carers), complaints and
compliments, monthly audits and practice weeks. Highly rigorous performance
management means that senior leaders in the tri-borough partnership are very
aware of the comparative performance of the services that they provide to
children. A comprehensive suite of concise and consistent performance reports
means that managers and leaders are knowledgeable and well informed about
their services performance against key indicators, and this enables them to
understand it very well. Detailed scrutiny and correction of any performance
deficits supports the delivery of social work of a very high quality, and means
that an ever-greater number of children receive a high-quality service.
contribute fully to performance scrutiny and improvement. Team-level data
provide opportunity for healthy performance comparison, and monthly
management discussions improve consistency of practice and outcomes across
teams. Dips in performance, quickly identified, are addressed appropriately at
team and individual level.
very low numbers of referrals concerning female genital mutilation in
Westminster, a successful DfE innovation fund pilot project, established at St
Marys Hospital, created referral pathways between health, maternity and
childrens services to assess risk, support victims and communities, and ensure
effective monitoring and information sharing at all points of a girls life. This
outstanding, sensitive and culturally creative practice has led to increased
confidence in the women and, in 18 months, 42 have received appropriate help
and support.
assured that it is of a consistently high quality. Scrutiny of case records by
inspectors indicates that management supervision is frequent, regular and
evident on the childs file. Records generally evidence a very firm focus on the
child. This child-centred approach is strongly supported by the work of
innovation-funded advanced and specialist practitioners, and clinicians. All of
these highly skilled and well-trained professionals are embedded within the
social work teams as part of focus on practice, and they add significant value
by ensuring that managers do not have to buy in specialist services at


considerable additional expense. Social workers have regular opportunities in
reflective group supervision to discuss cases, identify areas for practice
improvement and share learning.
innovative and regular practice weeks, which include extensive case audits and
practice observations undertaken by senior managers. Full participation by a
range of services provides invaluable insight into the actual quality of practice.
An extensive overview is delivered on the impact of social work intervention on
childrens lives. Inquisitive and detailed analysis of the key findings leads to
tangible recommendations to support continuously improving performance.
Detailed feedback is provided immediately to social workers. Young people and
family members are able to comment on their experiences, and the
effectiveness of the help and support they have been offered. Areas for
improvement are quickly identified and change is swiftly and positively effected.
assessments and analysis of risk, is an example of tangible improvement in
practice, as a result. Work with fathers and wider family members has improved
as a direct result of learning from serious case reviews and directly observed
practice.
stable and experienced workforce. This enhances the consistency and quality of
service. Using high-quality performance reports, senior managers are helped to
understand the workforce fully and to ensure that practice standards are
rigorously maintained. They describe a virtuous circle in which quality
candidates or students aspire to work in the tri-borough partnership. The offer
of protected, and then very low, caseloads, and career development through
training and promotion opportunities, attracts, then retains, high-calibre social
workers. The skilled and well-trained staff group is able to deliver the highly
innovative and aspirational focus on practice outcomes.
and promote their own and others social work skills without going into
management, through becoming advanced or specialist practitioners, or
qualified family therapists. Children benefit directly from the wide range of
social work knowledge and expertise that is available to support the help that
they receive.
possible due to manageable caseloads, accessible resources to support families,
and excellent supervision. The local authority values its workforce and acts
creatively to support it, providing career development and training opportunities
to attract and retain high-calibre workers. Secondment and internal acting-up
opportunities retain social workers with local knowledge, and commitment to
Frontline and Step up to social work enables workers to move into specialist
practitioner or management posts, creating a stable and loyal workforce.


highly coherent model of commissioning, including joint commissioning.
Significant additional resources have been drawn down to support services in a
very wide variety of ways, using collaborative commissioning techniques. The
demographics of the tri-borough partnership means that commissioners can
draw on trust funds, philanthropic giving and social enterprises to a greater
extent than in other areas. Tri-borough commissioners are therefore
exceptionally skilled at brokering additional resources and using these to add
considerable value to existing services. Tri-borough commissioners are also
highly active in shaping resources to meet identified need. They have very
efficiently decommissioned and recommissioned some services, such as semiindependent living for care leavers.
children and families that is responsive, accessible and accessed quickly.
Targeted services, focused on identified need, are effective in enabling early
support to families. Services tailored and commissioned to reflect the complex
diversity of the local population are available to families, and social workers are
pro-active in securing timely access.
effective tri-borough multi-agency collaboration, ensuring swift information
sharing and identification of children and young people at risk. Extensive work
has been undertaken to understand the profile of children at risk across the triborough partnership. Senior managers regularly evaluate interventions with
higher-risk young people at multi-agency sexual exploitation panel (MASE)
meetings. This highly effective multi-agency approach maps, tracks and
intervenes, thereby reducing risks. Inspectors observed exceptional multiagency analytical work using technology to identify and disrupt dangerous
perpetrators, linked to vulnerable children at risk of child sexual exploitation.
focus on emerging or increasing risks. These are identified early through an
innovative multi-agency integrated gangs unit (IGU) that meets weekly,
tracking and intervening quickly with new gang affiliates. A dedicated gangs
unit young womens worker engages with young women at risk of sexual
exploitation, and other forms of abuse and control, through their gang
associations.
exploitation is driven assertively, systematically and confidently by a tri-borough
missing children coordinator and the MASE panel. Considerable work has been
undertaken to ensure that children looked after who go missing are safe and
their experiences understood. Senior managers evaluate responses to children
missing. Each week, risks are monitored effectively and issues are escalated if
necessary. The tri-borough strategic panel has recognised that further work is
required to aggregate patterns and trends, and has effective plans to progress
this work.


complaints are relatively low in number across the tri-borough partnership.
Social workers, activity officers and participation workers build meaningful
relationships with children and families, and work hard to resolve any
dissatisfaction at an early stage before it escalates into a more formal
investigation. Robust advocacy arrangements ensure that children and young
people are well supported and helped to articulate their complaint. Complaints
literature for children and young people has been reviewed and refreshed to
ensure that the complaints process is better promoted and more easily
understood. Thorough analysis of complaints and compliments effectively
informs the learning and improvement framework, in recognition that learning
from complaints is an important element of service development. Individual
annual complaints reports for each borough appropriately reflect differing
learning outcomes across the tri-borough partnership. Detailed training is
successfully delivered to all managers and staff on effective handling of
complaints. Children and young people are regularly consulted on six themes
linked to the strategy for children looked after, so that they can inform service
improvement and delivery.
of representations made by children and young people are responded to
effectively and rarely need to be considered in the formal complaints process.
Care leavers in Westminster, raising the issue of changes in housing benefits
affecting accommodation options, resulted in workshops facilitated by the
housing officer and individual welfare right sessions with young people directly
affected. The young people developed a leaflet to enable care leavers across
the tri-borough partnership to have access to appropriate help and support.
partnership means that social workers attend court having undertaken all
necessary assessments to support robust and well-resourced care packages.
Rigorous placement finding is very well-supported by a comprehensive
sufficiency strategy, with clear links to the joint strategic needs assessment
prepared by public health. Evidence to support care plans is consistently robust
and includes appropriate and thorough consideration of family members. This
significantly minimises delay in children looked after achieving the best possible
plan for permanence. Positive relationships with Cafcass enable meaningful
dialogue and challenge where differences arise and, as a result, all issues
identified are effectively and quickly resolved. Joint quarterly reviews by senior
managers of cases of children looked after in proceedings give them the
opportunity for challenge and learning to improve services to children looked
after.
support robust, well-considered decisions when children are in care
proceedings. Social workers present their cases confidently and their evidence
is clear and balanced. Timeliness of care proceedings is improving overall and,
where it falls outside of 26-week timescales, in the main this is due to complex


cases and special guardianship orders. Judges report that tri-borough
arrangements stand out as leading good practice across London. The triborough legal team is described as exceptional and demonstrates a wide range
of experience and knowledge that stand up to challenge and support robust
recommendations to court. This secures the legal position of children looked
after.
are appropriately constituted. Relationships are mature, resulting in effective
coordination, intelligence-sharing and work to raise awareness and prevent
radicalisation. Quarterly meetings effectively retain oversight of the delivery of
the Prevent agenda across the three boroughs. Established links to the LSCB
ensure that safeguarding children is prioritised, for example in direct work with
parents groups, effective work in schools as part of the curriculum and
sensitive engagement with faith communities. The interface between the
Prevent team and children's services is strongly collaborative. Any young
person referred to Prevent is passed to the access and assessment teams and,
similarly, referrals to Prevent are regularly made by a range of teams in
childrens services and also schools. The Channel process represents an area of
strength in mutual collaboration between children's services, schools and the
Prevent team, ensuring a safeguarding-focused and proportionate response to
any referral. Proactive collaboration results in early detection and prevention.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
Overall, amalgamation under a single LSCB creates significant benefits for young
people and for all partner agencies. These include: rationalisation of time; the secure
involvement of senior representatives from partner agencies, many of which span
several boroughs; pooling resources to tackle issues in common; and alignment with
tri-borough childrens services. The tri-borough partnership achieves the right
balance between shared and local functions, and this ensures that children are
effectively safeguarded.
Robust links are in place between the LSCB and other statutory bodies. This allows
the board to make sure that childrens safeguarding stays high on everyones
agenda.
Extensive engagement by partner agencies has been secured and the work of the
board is therefore well-resourced through partners financial contributions. The
boards business support team would benefit from a work plan to sit alongside its
business plan and drive through the priorities for children.
Through systematic analysis of audits under section 11 of the Children Act 2004, the
LSCB has assured itself that safeguarding is a priority for all partner agencies. The
boards quality assurance sub-group effectively monitors multi-agency safeguarding
performance across the tri-borough partnership. Detailed analysis of data is routinely
undertaken by the sub-group and reported to the board by exception, although the
board would benefit from a review of this process to assure itself of its effectiveness.
Actions arising from reviewing data lie with individual partner agencies, and no
system is in place to monitor whether actions identified are carried through.
Rigorous multi-agency themed audits have been systematically undertaken by the
board. These audits provide appropriate recommendations for change, but further
checks have not taken place to establish whether practice has actually changed or
improved.
Effective monitoring by the child sexual exploitation and missing sub-group enables
the board to have a robust understanding of missing children and their behaviour
across the tri-borough partnership.
An established case review sub-committee ensures that lessons learnt from reviews
are disseminated promptly across the tri-borough partnership. The sub-committee
has clear action plans in place for each individual case review, but does not have an
overall action plan to cover their ongoing work.
A clear and detailed learning and improvement framework incorporates the learning


from serious case reviews, themed audits and performance monitoring by the board.
The learning and development sub-group of the LSCB undertakes its role across the
tri-borough partnership and ensures that sufficient safeguarding training is provided
across all partner agencies. However, no formal analysis of the impact of training
takes place either across the tri-borough partnership or at borough level.
A wide range of activities to tackle the board's priorities and any lessons from serious
case reviews are appropriately included in the LSCB annual report. An attendance log
shows that some members have infrequent attendance, but no challenge is evident.
A comprehensive safeguarding plan covers all of the boards priorities.


Recommendations
priorities.
out in the individual boroughs.
and analyse their impact on improving practice.
from individual case reviews.
at the board.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
functions of the LSCB and its sub-groups are delivered across the tri-borough
partnership. Each borough appropriately maintains a local LSCB partnership
group, and this ensures that local safeguarding issues are suitably considered
and reported on to the LSCB.
elected members and chief executive officers in each of the respective bodies
have been effectively developed by the board and are clearly documented. The
independent chair links frequently with the DCS for the tri-borough partnership,
while remaining appropriately independent. Key LSCB representatives such as
the DCS are able to ensure that safeguarding children issues are considered
across strategic boards and that elected members are engaged in the local
LSCB partnership groups.
annually. However, this minimal involvement does not provide them with
detailed oversight of safeguarding within the individual boroughs. The
independent chair operates across the tri-borough partnership, and this limits
the time available for maintaining links with key elected members and strategic
partnership groups such as the health and well-being boards.
promotes safeguarding issues across the partnership and community, and
provides appropriate challenge. As a result, extensive engagement by partners
has been secured across the full range of safeguarding work. Partners are
encouraged and enabled by the chair to raise issues and challenges
constructively. This is well evidenced in the minutes of the board and its subgroups.


appropriately provides financial contributions, and these fund the business
support team for the board. The team is actively involved in enabling
community and service user involvement in the boards work. The board was
able to demonstrate the involvement of young people in developing publicity
material, but acknowledges that the engagement of young people in helping to
develop its work could be further enhanced.
post-holder, and recently a new manager has been seconded to the post. While
this has not impacted negatively on the support provided to the board, a
business plan to coordinate the activities of the business support team and the
work arising from LSCB and its sub-groups is not evidently in place.
agencies. A bi-annual cycle of audits under section 11 of the Children Act 2004
is currently being renewed. The board has developed and piloted a bespoke
online self-assessment tool that is currently going live. Previous returns have
been systematically analysed and reported to the board. Schools, in particular,
are actively engaged and represented in the work of the board, as are the full
range of health partners, police and representative voluntary sector
organisations.
safeguarding performance across the tri-borough partnership. It draws upon
both qualitative and quantitative data, and is supported by the tri-borough
performance team in compiling data into a detailed, high-quality performance
report. Partner agencies now contribute to the dataset, which was initially
extensively based on local authority childrens services data. However, the LSCB
has not systematically reviewed this extensive dataset to ensure that this is
refined, aligned to its priorities and manageable (Recommendation).
safeguarding functions. Detailed analysis of the data is routinely undertaken by
the sub-group and reported to the board, drawing out themes and trends.
Partners provide commentary on the data supplied to clarify and add context to
it. The groups report to the LSCB is by exception, identifying issues that the
board may want to interrogate further. Responsibility for actions arising from
the scrutiny of data lies with individual agencies, but no system is in place to
monitor whether actions identified are carried through (Recommendation).
undertaken by partners on behalf of the board. These are appropriately
selected in response to key issues arising from quality assurance and data
analysis or to inform short-life working groups. These facilitate learning and
identify key areas for improvement in services. For example, a focused audit of
young people at risk of sexual exploitation identified effective practice through
the involvement of systemic family therapists. While the multi-agency audits


provide recommendations for change, further auditing of the themed issues has
not been undertaken to enable the LSCB to know whether practice has actually
changed or improved as a result (Recommendation).
monitors information on children who go missing, and this enables the board to
have a robust understanding of missing children and their behaviour across the
tri-borough partnership. The missing person coordinator provides weekly
information on missing children and ensures that this information is updated by
operational workers. The coordinator maintains lists of both the top 10 missing
young people across the tri-borough partnership, and the top 10 within each
borough. This data is suitably analysed through a quarterly meeting, where
reductions or escalations in missing episodes are discussed. Through this close
analysis and weekly monitoring, the sub-group is aware that only a small
number of young people are involved in the majority of missing episodes. This
enables those young people to be closely monitored, and targeted work is
undertaken with them to minimise risk. Through careful monitoring, the LSCB
has a clear picture of the profile of child sexual exploitation and offending
across the boroughs. Data mapping has helped build a picture of hotspots. All
this information, as well as information on new cases, is fed into the MASE and
the LSCB. This ensures that the LSCB has a clear understanding of child sexual
exploitation: its profile; offenders; victims; and the quality and effectiveness of
services, as well as the hotspots and places of concern.
has a balanced representation from all agencies, including representation of
voluntary services and the police. It has appropriately recommended timely
commissioning of serious case reviews (SCRs) to the LSCB, and these have
been conducted with a suitable focus on the daily life of the child. The majority
of reviews undertaken in recent years were completed within realistic
timescales, and where there have been delays due to external constraints, for
instance due to criminal proceedings, the sub-committee ensures that emerging
lessons learned are shared prior to completion, to improve practice swiftly.
and these are disseminated promptly across the tri-borough partnership,
regardless of their borough of origin. A detailed and succinct summary of
lessons learned is circulated on a quarterly basis to all agencies and staff to
promote awareness, and a representative of each agency is tasked to ensure its
distribution. Participation on the case review sub-committee of the learning and
development business manager helps ensure that priority is given to training
needs identified as a result of SCRs, and that adjustments to training materials
are made and cascaded to all multi-agency partners. The lead designated
officer for the tri-borough partnership uses her extensive networks with other
boroughs well, so that statutory safeguarding training reflects current practice.
of, a serious case review are still reviewed, with a number of significant lessons


learned. The board carefully reviews the criteria for SCRs and, where
necessary, will commission one even when formal thresholds are not met if it is
considered that lessons can be learnt. The impact of SCRs is evaluated through
case file auditing to check for the positive application of lessons learnt.
frontline workers, including tools to identify and assess early neglect, the
quality of intervention in domestic violence, and issues around the mobility of
abusive families. A wide range of methods is used to highlight and follow up
identified themes and issues with all partners, including a useful website,
additional community work and regular meetings with school improvement
advisers. The sub-committee has good, close relationships with the three
partnership boards, to share themes and provide advice to improve practice.
The sub-committee has clear action plans in place for each individual case
review but does not have an overall action plan to cover their ongoing work
(Recommendation).
duties across the tri-borough partnership. It is well attended and chaired.
Members are well informed and demonstrate a clear understanding of trends in
local child deaths and the reasons for these. The number of incidents across
the tri-borough partnership is relatively low, with 23 reviews last year. As a
result, there is no disaggregation of data by borough, although work is
commencing with other CDOPs across north-west London to gain a fuller
picture. Research undertaken into sudden unexplained death led to training for
professionals, and awareness-raising around issues such as co-sleeping. A clear
understanding of issues relevant to the area, such as deaths in private
hospitals, abroad and of older children has all led to further work to drill down
and understand the issues and helped to prevent further deaths. An example is
work on vulnerabilities linked to death by stabbing. Social Care Institute of
Excellence methodology has been used to undertake learning reviews, in some
cases, with lessons appropriately disseminated. This is having a positive impact
on practice.
LSCB. The most recent reports main theme is related to perinatal and neonatal
incidents and life-threatening illnesses. A review of the neonatal deaths was
undertaken and concluded that good care was provided. The report
appropriately provides a breakdown by age and ethnicity, and some analysis of
the issues.
implemented and recently reviewed by the LSCB. This has incorporated the
learning from serious case reviews, themed audits and performance monitoring
by the board. The learning and development sub-group of the LSCB undertakes
its role across the tri-borough partnership and it ensures that sufficient
mandatory safeguarding training is provided across all partner agencies, both
on a multi-agency basis and within individual partners training programmes. All


key voluntary and statutory partners are represented on the sub-group, and
they are actively engaged in delivering, as well as developing, training. The
sub-group has maintained core safeguarding training, while developing or
updating training modules in response to current, high-profile safeguarding
issues. For example, a practice-sharing conference on Prevent for schools has
been developed and is being followed up by similar events on child sexual
exploitation and neglect. The training has led to increased referrals from
schools and early years settings are also contacting Prevent teams for training.
access to safeguarding training.
need to further develop its work and continually raise awareness of the LSCB.
The sub-group has identified the need to undertake more systematic evaluation
of the impact of the extensive safeguarding training provided through the LCSB.
Currently, the sub-group primarily bases its evaluation of training on selfreporting attendee questionnaires immediately following training sessions. Plans
to develop this will require attendees to complete questionnaires three months
after the training to evaluate what difference the training has made, but these
are at an early stage. At the time of this review, there was too great a reliance
on anecdotal information and no formal analysis of the impact of training,
either across the tri-borough partnership or at borough level.
classroom or conference-type environments. For some partners, releasing staff
to attend this type of input is a challenge, and the sub-group has developed
some more flexible sessions, for instance to enable police officers to attend.
However, the provision of a wide range of e-learning modules, to improve
access to training, has been delayed by internal technology challenges.
are systematically reported to, and considered by, the board. It has been
proactive in supporting and developing a number of safeguarding services. For
example, the LSCB has supported a pilot project to tackle female genital
mutilation, an identified gap in services. As a result, 68 women have been
supported in the last year through early help, and others through child in need
or child protection plans. The board has been instrumental in the development
of the harmful practices project, which also reports to the existing violence
against women group. This tri-borough project tackles harmful practices such
as forced marriage, honour-related violence and faith-based abuse.
group, following analysis of the high prevalence of neglect as a category for
child protection plans. The multi-agency group extensively reviewed research,
SCRs and direct work tools. It then completed a case file audit and established
the most effective method of working with families to fit with existing
structures, working practices and local need. A further aim of the group is to


raise awareness among practitioners. The toolkit subsequently developed
highlights the daily experience of the neglected child and is currently being
trialled for effectiveness by early help practitioners and social workers. Early
indicators have shown that it creates a focus on the child rather than the
family, and that parents have embraced this way of working. An awarenessraising conference is currently being planned for May 2016 in partnership with
the NSPCC. This will form the start of a campaign that aims to ensure that
awareness of neglect reaches all services within the voluntary and statutory
sector. Effectiveness will be measured through various means such as: a reaudit of case files; increased consultation on neglect issues, both within partner
organisations and with social care; and a reduction in the longer term of
children on a child protection plan under neglect.
to tackle the board's priorities, and lessons from SCRs are appropriately
included. However, the report does not provide a rigorous and transparent
assessment of safeguarding across the tri-borough partnership. Each priority
has a 'what difference has it made' section, although the section is more
process- or action-based, rather than evidencing outcomes for children. The
report attempts to understand the population across the tri-borough
partnership and the differences between them, although there is little analysis
of this. No safeguarding data are presented in the report, and it does not detail
any challenges or demonstrate their impact. An attendance log shows that
some members have infrequent attendance, but there is no challenge to this
outlined in the report (Recommendation).
priorities. All actions have a lead organisation or sub-group attached, although
there are no timescales for completion of those actions. The description of the
evidence of impact is, in places, more outcome-focused than the business plan,
although this could be further improved.
board. The chairs of each partnership group meet regularly to share
information and are using individual boroughs well to trial potential new ways
of working. An example is sharing the good practice trialled in Westminster
around reducing numbers of children subject to child protection plans for more
than two years.
across the boroughs services, including adults services and a lay member who
actively seeks views from, and reports back to, the community. WPG has
identified themes and priorities that are pertinent to Westminster and, when
interviewed by inspectors, members demonstrated a good awareness of the
issues, the demographic make-up of the borough and work that has been
undertaken to tackle particular Westminster priorities. They act as a conduit of
information between frontline services and the LSCB.


priorities, especially in relation to radicalisation and serious youth violence.
Effective work by an organisation that provides services to young people at risk
of violence, combined with awareness-raising work, has helped to protect some
very vulnerable young people. For example, the group appropriately identified
an issue of self-harm in a school, which was brought to their attention by
health partners. As a result, work within the school was strengthened, a
mapping exercise was undertaken to understand the issues further, and the
curriculum was changed to include an enhanced offer around staying safe,
suspicious websites and eating disorders. As a continuation of this work, a
health website has been established which provides support and advice, and
includes an anonymised forum where young people can leave questions that
health professionals answer.
planning and influencing services has made a difference to children and young
people across the borough. For example, work has been cascaded across
schools in relation to prevention of child sexual exploitation, looking at issues
such as relationships and consent. Some proactive work has been undertaken
with schools looking at the 10 most worrying pupils and ensuring that
preventative work is carried out before risk escalates. Another identified issue
involved changes to housing benefit and the impact on families who had to
move out of the area. Preventative and supportive work was undertaken to
lessen the impact, and to ensure that, for families who had to move, services
were in place to support them.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Brenda McLaughlin
Deputy lead inspector: Marcie Taylor
Team inspectors: Andy Whippey, Anji Parker, Louise Hocking, Jon Bowman, Nick
Stacey
Shadow inspector: Joy Montgomery
Senior data analyst: Patrick Thomson
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 1231
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2016


