Bracknell Forest
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 28 April 2017 to 25 May 2017
Report published: 14 July 2017

Childrens services in Bracknell Forest are good

Good

permanence

Outstanding


Outstanding


Outstanding


Good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Children in Bracknell Forest benefit from highly aspirational, committed senior
managers and political leaders who place them firmly at the centre of their decision
making. As a result, almost every child who accesses a service receives good or
outstanding support. This determination and focus to build upon strengths and to
address shortfalls has ensured that progress has been sustained and services have
improved since the last safeguarding and children looked after inspection in 2011.
The importance of a stable, well-trained and dedicated workforce is well understood
by leaders in Bracknell Forest. A focus on strategies to achieve this has resulted in an
increasingly stable and experienced workforce. As a result, children benefit from
effective relationships with their social workers, and their needs are well understood
and planned for. The quality of direct work undertaken with children is strong, and
the voice of the child is evident throughout their assessments and reviews, informing
plans.
Performance management is well established. There is regular scrutiny of data and
consideration of progress against priorities by the Children, Young People and
Learning and Scrutiny panel, corporate parenting advisory panel and safeguarding
children monitoring meetings, and this demonstrates the authoritys clear
determination to improve outcomes for children. Action has been taken to strengthen
performance management and quality assurance processes. However, there is still
more to do to understand the effectiveness of early help.
Management oversight is regular, and inspectors saw good examples of analytical
case supervision, ensuring that childrens plans progress effectively. However, this
has not yet been effective in reducing drift and delay for a small minority of children,
in particular at the pre-proceedings stage of the Public Law Outline.
Young people who present as homeless are promptly assessed and given appropriate
support. However, the literature is not sufficiently clear to help young people to
understand their entitlements, and it was not evident from case records how their
rights had been explained to them.
Partnership working in Bracknell Forest is a strength, at both the strategic and the
operational level. Inspectors saw numerous examples of this, including the
introduction of the MASH (multi-agency safeguarding hub), which delivers timely
responses to referrals, the Life chances team which is improving placement stability
and the contribution of partners to childrens reviews. However, not all strategy
discussions involve relevant partner agencies, and this means that decisions are
made without all available information.
There is an effective response to children at risk of child sexual exploitation, and the
procedures are well understood by partner agencies that are committed to ensuring
that risk is reduced. There are well-coordinated services for children who are missing
from home or care. Return home interviews are timely and of a good quality,


informing both individual and strategic plans. Procedures to identify children missing
from education are well understood by schools and are used effectively. There were
no children missing education at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after, adopted children and young people leaving care are provided
with outstanding care and support. Dedicated, experienced staff and carers, who are
highly ambitious for children, work together to ensure that children remain safe and
achieve in life.
Independent reviewing officers (IROs) are strong and effective champions for
children. They know the children well, undertaking monitoring and visiting between
reviews, and ensure that plans progress without delay. The use of child-friendly
language in review reports ensures that children remain at the centre of planning
and explains with sensitivity why children are in care. It is entirely clear to children
what will happen next and when it will happen, and who is responsible for
progressing aspects of their plan.
The virtual school, led by a highly effective headteacher, has an embedded culture of
supporting all children to achieve their potential. The schools creative and tenacious
work leads to good attainment for the majority of children. High-quality personal
education plans (PEPs) reflect this aspirational yet realistic ambition and are well
understood by the children, and there is good engagement from relevant partners at
reviews.
Creative direct work and life appreciation days help children looked after to
understand their life histories. Foster carers engage in collecting information for lifestory work and adopters are involved in completing life-journey books, which helps
them to support their children in understanding their histories. However, the quality
of life-journey books is not consistently good.
Elected members have high aspirations for children looked after and care leavers.
Aspirations are translated into concrete action to improve children and young
peoples lives, for example exempting care leavers living in Bracknell Forest from
paying council tax.
Corporate parenting arrangements are very strong, and purposeful engagement with
children ensures that their views are well understood. The work of the Children in
Care Council, Say it loud, say it proud, is outstanding. It champions the views of all
children looked after and care leavers, and has a real influence which results in
positive change for children looked after.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home, which was judged to be
outstanding in its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
December 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
December 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services has been in post since October 2016.
 The chief executive has been in post since April 2003.
 The chair of the local safeguarding children board has been in post since
September 2011.
 The local authority uses the Signs of Safety model of social work.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 28,158 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Bracknell Forest. This is 23.7% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 10% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 8% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 7% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 13% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian at 6% and dual heritage at 5%.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 14% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 10% (the national average is 16%).

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 28 April 2017, 928 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from 839 at
 At 28 April 2017, 171 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 60.6 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 115
(41 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 28 April 2017, two children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from three at 31 March 2016.
 In the two years before inspection, three serious incident notifications were
submitted to Ofsted and one serious case review was completed. There were no
serious case reviews ongoing at the time of inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 28 April 2017, 123 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 44 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 100 (35 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016.
 Of this number, 57 (or 46%) live outside the local authority area
authority area
 One lives in a residential special school,3 which is out of the authority
area
area
 Two live with parents, and neither live out of the authority area
 Three children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been three adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Recommendations

Ensure that performance management systems support the evaluation of the
effectiveness of early help services in order to inform future planning and
commissioning arrangements.


Ensure that all relevant partner agencies contribute to strategy discussions in
order for decision making to be based on collective sharing of information.


Improve the quality of case management oversight by team managers and
child protection chairs, to reduce the drift and delay experienced by some
children.


Ensure that homeless young people have their rights and entitlements fully
explained to them so that they can make an informed choice.


Improve the quality of life-journey books so that children can better
understand their histories.

Summary for children and young people
 Children and families in Bracknell Forest receive good and sometimes excellent
services. The councillors and managers really want children to do well, and they
make decisions that put children first.
 When children and families need help, there are plenty of services available and,
in almost all cases, children receive the right help at the right time. Inspectors
found that a small number of children should have been looked after sooner in
order to keep them safe. Managers recognised this and had already made
changes to stop this happening in future.
 Social workers spend time getting to know children well. When children cant say
how they feel, for example if they are too young or have disabilities and cannot
talk very easily, social workers find really imaginative ways to make sure that
they understand childrens views.
 When children have gone missing, they are quickly seen by professionals who try
to understand why they ran away and help them so that they dont run away
again. Professionals in Bracknell Forest work hard to help children and adults to
understand the risks of sexual exploitation. Police, social workers and other adults
work together well to help children who are sexually exploited or who may be at
risk of being exploited.
 Social workers help children to live at home with their families if it is safe for
them to do so. If its not safe for children to stay with their families, they are well
looked after by foster carers or by the staff of the childrens home that they live
in. Foster carers gave inspectors plenty of examples of how they helped children
to have fun.
 Social workers and other adults listen to children and take their views into
account when they make important decisions about childrens lives. Independent


reviewing officers (IROs) visit children between their reviews and make sure that
plans for children happen when they are supposed to, so that children have the
support that they need.
 Bracknell Forests Children in Care Council, Say it loud, say it proud, has been
hugely successful in helping councillors and managers to understand what it is
like to be looked after. This has meant that some things have been changed,
because adults understand better what is important to children looked after and
care leavers.
 When children need to be adopted, Bracknell Forest works very hard to find the
right families for them. Families who adopt have plenty of helpful support so that
they can help their children to understand their past and enjoy their future.
 Young people who are leaving care receive excellent support from their personal
advisers. They put young people in touch with other people who help them to
become independent, find a job or continue their learning. Advisers are regularly
in touch with every single care leaver, and this is very good.

The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Services to safeguard children in Bracknell Forest are good. Children and their
families benefit from an extensive range of well-coordinated, multi-agency support,
including from childrens centres and targeted youth services. This is helping to
support children and families at the earliest opportunity. However, the impact of
early help needs to be more fully understood. The arrangements to escalate
childrens cases to social care when risks increase are robust.
A good understanding of the thresholds for access to childrens social care means
that most referrals are appropriate and timely. The multi-agency safeguarding hub
(MASH) ensures a prompt response to referrals, in the majority of cases. However,
the practice of undertaking visits to determine threshold has led to delays in
accessing a statutory social work intervention, for a small number of children.
Children at risk of immediate harm are responded to well. Strategy discussions
take place promptly and result in appropriate outcomes. However, the majority do
not include all relevant agencies. Child protection conferences are timely and well
attended by partner agencies. However, slow progress against actions for a small
number of children is contributing to drift and delay at the pre-proceedings stage
of the Public Law Outline (PLO).
The majority of assessments are comprehensive and analytical. They make good
use of research to inform practice, reducing risks. However, management
oversight of the common assessment framework (CAF) is not consistently leading
to sufficient focus on outcomes for children. Social workers are extremely


knowledgeable about the children whom they are working with and use a wide
range of creative, effective direct work to understand the views and circumstances
of children. The majority of plans are well focused and reviewed regularly, and
have appropriate partner agency contributions.
The response to concerns is effective where children are exposed to domestic
abuse, parental substance misuse or parental mental ill health. The arrangements
for identifying and responding to children at risk of sexual exploitation, or children
missing from home or school, are excellent and there are clear arrangements to
ensure a multi-agency response to prevent harm.
The assessment and provision for homeless 16- to 17-year-olds are appropriate,
but young people do not always receive information about their rights and
entitlements.
Inspection findings

Children and their families in Bracknell Forest receive help when their needs
and concerns are first identified, with effective escalation to statutory services
if required. Families have access to an array of well-structured and timely
early help, provided by a range of committed professionals, that includes
access to childrens centres and targeted youth services. Examples of
childrens centres services include groups for parents and children who have
experienced domestic abuse. The pathway into targeted early help provision is
clear. Fortnightly early intervention meetings coordinate packages of support
and ensure that children are receiving timely and appropriate support which
meets their assessed need.


Early help is underpinned by a coherent strategy. A range of services are
available to support parents experiencing mental ill health, domestic abuse or
substance misuse. Parenting support, delivered by the family intervention
team, and effective multi-agency partnership working result in good access to
appropriate services, improving outcomes for children. The majority of CAFs
are comprehensive, although some focus too heavily on the needs of parents,
do not include the voice of the child and provide limited analysis. The local
authority recognises that there is more to do to strengthen systems to
measure the impact of early help interventions. (Recommendation)


Thresholds are well embedded and applied consistently, in most cases,
resulting in proportionate action to protect children. When concerns for
children are raised with childrens social care, the MASH provides an effective
and timely response. Social work expertise and advice are available to support
professionals. This is highly regarded by schools. Children who are at risk or
who are in need of social work intervention are referred appropriately by
partner agencies. Consent to share information is understood and
appropriately sought. MASH processes are effective and the majority of
children who require a statutory intervention receive a prompt transfer to the


duty and assessment team. However, not all notifications of domestic abuse
involving children are received promptly, which means, for example, that
schools are not alerted in a timely way. Senior managers have taken
appropriate action to escalate this with the police. For a small number of
children, the practice of visiting to determine the threshold has led to delays in
timely social work intervention. Appropriate action was taken during the
inspection to review MASH procedures and end this practice.

Strategy discussions are timely and result in swift actions and outcomes, but
they lack the involvement of all relevant agencies. This means that the
opportunity to share valuable information to inform decision making is limited.
Child protection enquiries are of a consistently high standard. Social workers
see children alone and there is a clear analysis of risks, and this leads to safe
and proportionate decisions including child protection conferences, when
necessary. (Recommendation)


The emergency duty team provides a timely and effective response to need
outside office hours. The service is staffed by experienced social workers.
There is good communication between the daytime and out-of-hours services,
ensuring that information is shared effectively and concerns are responded to
promptly.


Social workers and family support workers provide highly effective support to
children in need of help and protection. Confident and skilled practitioners
develop meaningful relationships with children. Children are seen regularly
and alone, with practitioners undertaking a comprehensive range of direct
work, which leads to reduced risk and improved outcomes. Inspectors saw
excellent examples of imaginative ways of capturing childrens views, including
a range of tools and drawings to identify their wishes and feelings. Children
are supported effectively to participate in planning processes through a variety
of means, including a commissioned advocacy service. Arrangements for
feedback from children and families regarding the effectiveness of the help
that they have received is a real strength in Bracknell Forest. Feedback is
consistently used to inform practice and service provision.


The vast majority of statutory assessments are of good quality, leading to
clear plans. Risks and protective factors are identified and considered in the
analysis. Assessments carefully consider family history (including chronologies
and genograms), apply research, and comprehensively consider all aspects of
childrens lives, including their diverse needs.


Plans for children in need of help or protection recognise and identify the key
risks, and the critical concerns and strengths. They are outcome focused and
contain specific targeted actions and responsibilities, and most set clear
timescales. Parents are frequently engaged well in meetings and reviews, and
their views are considered and responded to respectfully. Multi-agency
reviews track and monitor outcomes effectively, for the vast majority of


children. There is good attendance by partner agencies at review meetings. As
a result, positive change is achieved and sustained for most children.

Slow progress against actions for a small number of children on child
protection plans is contributing to drift and delay at the pre-proceedings stage
of the Public Law Outline. Recent action (in January 2017) by senior managers
to address this has led to a revised process for reviewing children on plans.
(Recommendation)


The majority of child in need plans are clear, with regular multi-agency
reviews leading to good outcomes for children. The children specialist support
team works enthusiastically and creatively to ensure that childrens views are
represented in assessments, plans and reviews. Experienced and well-trained
social workers assess risk, and this results in clear plans to address the
specific and diverse needs of this group of children.


Management oversight is thorough and clearly recorded in the majority of
childrens case files. However, supervision notes are not always detailed
enough to measure progress against actions. Within the over-11s team,
reflective group supervision arrangements enhance the effectiveness of
management oversight.


The number of children subject to child protection plans (171) has increased
by 33% since March 2016. The local authority commissioned an external
review that found no specific reason for this increase. However, it continues to
monitor it in order to recognise any further patterns. In all cases seen by
inspectors, the decisions to convene child protection conferences were
appropriately balanced and carefully evidenced. There is now additional
scrutiny and evaluation by senior managers for all children who have been on
child protection plans for nine months. This is preventing delay by parallel
planning for those children for whom changes are not being sustained and
children who remain at continued risk of harm.


Social workers demonstrate a good awareness of the impact on children of
domestic abuse and have access to a range of specialist services, including the
Freedomprogramme for victims of domestic abuse and groups specifically for
children. Inspectors saw examples of effective and creative individual direct
work with children that has led to improved outcomes. A domestic abuse
perpetrator service (DAPS) delivers one-to-one interventions and is a real
strength, reducing repeat incidents of domestic abuse. Multi-agency risk
assessment conferences are effective in sharing information, identifying risks
and developing appropriate responses to protect children affected by domestic
abuse. Good attendance by childrens social care representatives at these and
at multi-agency public protection meetings means that the risks to children
are well understood and inform plans.


Collaborative work across agencies to reduce risk to children who are missing
from home is good. All children are offered a return home interview. The take-


up is improving, and there is evidence of persistent, respectful work to engage
young people effectively and help them to understand the risks involved. This
has successfully reduced the number of episodes of them going missing. The
identification, monitoring and tracking of children who go missing from school
are effective. Clear and comprehensive policy and procedures ensure that
reporting by schools is timely. At the time of this inspection, no children were
missing education. The authority maintains a vigilant approach to those
children who have previously gone missing and continues to monitor them,
demonstrating a consistent commitment to some of the local authoritys most
vulnerable children.

Children at risk of sexual exploitation or missing from home receive highly
effective, bespoke services, delivered sensitively by skilled workers who know
them well. Professionals value and use the sexual exploitation screening tool
effectively to support the identification of risk and to plan responses to meet
the individual needs of children. The risks to children are reduced when they
first emerge by targeted early help in an effective manner. The multi-agency
arrangements of the sexual exploitation and missing risk assessment
conferences (SEMRAC) ensure swift information sharing and action by all
professionals, helping to protect children and disrupt perpetrators.


There is a clear protocol among partners to identify those children who may
be at risk of radicalisation, with processes to respond to it. Workshops to raise
awareness of Prevent (WRAP) have taken place in all schools. Multi-agency
safeguarding training on Prevent, female genital mutilation (FGM), forced
marriage and honour-based violence ensures that these topics are kept live
and demonstrates the authoritys commitment to protecting all children,
despite the low incidence of these risks in Bracknell Forest.


The assessment and provision for homeless 16- and 17-year-olds are
appropriate. Young peoples needs are comprehensively assessed and they are
provided with suitable accommodation if they cannot be supported to return
to their families. However, not all young people are informed about their
rights and entitlements, and an information leaflet explaining these, including
the right to become looked after by the local authority, is not written in childfriendly language. (Recommendation)


The management of allegations against people who work with children is
effective. Responses to allegations are timely, and appropriate actions are
taken to safeguard children in Bracknell Forest. The authority has recently
reviewed and redesigned its model of tracking, monitoring and analysing data
to inform future training and awareness raising for partners.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Outstanding

Summary
Children looked after, adopted children and young people leaving care in Bracknell
Forest receive outstanding care and support. They all benefit from teams of highly
committed, ambitious and determined professionals who work extremely well
together, helping children to remain safe and achieve in life. The local authority is
dedicated to pursuing adoption for all children, including those for whom it is
considered harder to find adoptive parents. Enthusiastic, dedicated personal
advisers stay in touch with all care leavers and support them to live in safe and
suitable accommodation.
When children become looked after, decision making is timely and prompt action is
taken, ensuring that children have good-quality, stable homes if they cannot live
with their families. Social workers know children well, and most children are able
to build trusting relationships with the same worker over a period of time.
Inspectors found excellent examples of effective, sensitive and skilled direct work
that helps children to understand their experiences.
The work of the independent reviewing officers (IROs) is highly effective. IROs
bring additional rigour to the quality of planning by visiting and monitoring children
between reviews and ensuring that plans for children progress without delay. IROs
write child-friendly review reports in plain language, making sure that children fully
understand why they are in care, what will happen next and who is responsible for
carrying out the actions in their plans.
Every child and young person has a comprehensive care plan which is updated
prior to every review and is clearly linked to their assessed needs. The work of the
virtual school is outstanding. Relentless scrutiny by the virtual school headteacher
means that educational outcomes for children are consistently good. Children in
care have 100% of their health assessments and 93% of their dental checks
completed on time.
The work of the Children in Care Council, Say it loud, say it proud (SiLSiP), is
outstanding in championing the views of all children looked after and care leavers.
Children and young people at risk of sexual exploitation, or who go missing from
home or care, receive well-coordinated, bespoke services which are delivered
sensitively by skilled workers and help to reduce risks.


Inspection findings

Children looked after in Bracknell Forest benefit from excellent help and
support from highly committed, ambitious caring professionals. Staff at all
levels work tirelessly to help children to achieve in life and protect them from
further harm. Consequently, the majority (123 are in care at the time of this
inspection) are making very good progress.


Children are visited often and seen alone, with 98% of visits within expected
timescales. Social workers know children well, with most being able to build
trusting relationships with the same worker over a period of time. Inspectors
found excellent examples of effective, sensitive and skilled direct work helping
children to understand their experiences. Social workers and independent
reviewing officers (IROs) work diligently to support children to express their
views. Significant effort is made to engage with all children, including those
with additional needs. Case recording is clear and up to date, and the voice of
the child is consistently evidenced.


Assessments are updated regularly. They are child-centred, comprehensive
and analytical, and lead to children being protected from harm and receiving
appropriately focused help. When children no longer need to be looked after
by the local authority, they return home safely to their birth families with
comprehensive support plans, which are regularly monitored by relevant
professionals.


Social workers attend court having undertaken all necessary assessments to
support robust and well-resourced care packages. Judges and the Child and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) speak positively about
the good practice in Bracknell Forest. Social workers receive good training and
are credible, confident witnesses. Statements and care plans presented in
court are of a very high quality and support robust, well-considered decisions,
leading to timely legal permanence decisions for children and their families.


Permanence planning and stability for children looked after are good. Longterm plans for all children are considered by the second statutory review.
Parallel planning for those children unable to live safely with their parents was
progressed speedily in all cases seen by inspectors. Children live in safe,
stable, good-quality placements that meet their needs. Where it is
appropriate, they live with their brothers and sisters, extended family or carers
who provide them with emotional warmth and stability. Good use is made of
family group conferences and special guardians, enabling all children to live
with family members where it is assessed as suitable for them to do so. The
local authority is working proactively with external organisations to continue to
improve the sufficiency of foster homes, in particular those available for
adolescents.


Bespoke targeted work by the well-established multi-agency Life chances
team (LCT) has significantly contributed to improved placement stability. The


number of children who have had three or more placement moves is
decreasing. In responding quickly and allocating tasks to the most appropriate
worker or agency, the LCT is helping to support foster carers by increasing
their emotional resilience and practical skills in caring for vulnerable
adolescents. This is enabling children, particularly adolescents with complex
needs, to remain in the same placement.

The work of the IROs is exceptional. They are highly effective in supporting all
children looked after. They consistently participate in key meetings, ensuring
independent oversight and bringing effective challenge to planning for
children. IROs develop enduring relationships with children, regularly visiting
them in their foster or residential homes, and carry out direct work. This
provides additional independent safeguards and ensures that plans for
children progress swiftly. The timeliness of children looked after reviews and
the level of participation by children in their reviews (98%) are both very
good. The minutes of review meetings are child centred and written directly to
the child in plain language. As a result, children know why they are in care,
how they can stay in touch with their family members and who is responsible
for making sure that they remain safe.


All care plans are comprehensive and include contingency plans. Actions are
updated regularly, agreed by managers, and shared with the child and also
their parents, where appropriate. Childrens health, education, cultural and
diversity needs are sensitively considered, recorded and used to inform plans.
There is clear evidence that children have carefully assessed supported
contact with their parents, brothers and sisters and people who are important
to them. The Children in Care Council (known as Say it loud, say it proud
(SiLSiP)) has designed, illustrated and produced a child-friendly book
explaining contact. This is available to all children, their carers and
professionals.


Children looked after are listened to well, and their voice influences strategic
decisions and the development of services. The work of SiLSiP is outstanding.
Children and young people play a pivotal role in developing and improving
services, and holding senior leaders and elected members to account. SiLSiP
successfully negotiated additional resources so that children in care have
sufficient support to complete their life-story work. The Big ballot annual
event provides children with an opportunity to vote on issues that are
important to them. In 2015, young people voted to address bullying. SiLSiP
responded by creating a stop motion animation film, Just the same. This was
shown at the annual looked after children achievement awards in 2016 and
also distributed to designated looked-after children teachers. When bullying is
identified as a potential issue for children looked after, it is dealt with quickly.


Five members of SiLSiP are accredited trainers and have delivered Did you
know? workshops to over 42 professionals, helping them to understand what
it is like to be in care. These events are highly regarded by participants, and
inspectors considered that the workshop that they attended was outstanding.


The children with additional needs group, BOOM (Because our opinion
matters), is working effectively with the participation officer to improve
disability services.

Children and young people at risk of sexual exploitation or missing from care
receive well-coordinated, bespoke services that are delivered sensitively by
skilled, tenacious workers, helping to reduce risks. Effective multi-agency
arrangements and work by the specialist team guarantee early information
sharing and intelligence about risks to children, and leads to rapid action to
protect them from harm. Robust tracking and mapping of children at risk and
clear written analysis demonstrate that social workers understand the
individual children and their specific vulnerabilities. The quality of return home
interviews with missing children is good. All children are offered an interview
within 72 hours of returning home. The take-up is high, and very few young
people decline to participate. When children are reluctant to engage,
independent workers, who are allocated to specific children, are assiduous in
keeping in touch with them, and are reducing the number of episodes of going
missing effectively.


Cyber safety is prioritised in schools. The virtual school team ensures that all
children looked after who have laptops for use at home receive a support
session, together with their carers, to underline the importance of online
safety. Direct work sessions with pupils in secondary schools and tailored
sessions for those pupils with additional needs are raising the awareness of
exploitation and the risks associated with social media.


The work of the virtual school is outstanding. The education of children who
are looked after is a key priority for the council. There is strong strategic
leadership and management oversight by the virtual school headteacher. As a
result, outcomes for children are consistently good, and in some cases they
surpass expectations. An example of this is that children at key stage 1 and
key stage 2 perform better in phonics than other children of the same age in
Bracknell Forest.


Innovative approaches, enabling children to reach their full potential, start
from a very young age, and this work is followed throughout their school time
and beyond. In Year 7 and Year 8, children in care are encouraged to start to
build their emotional resilience and to broaden their thinking. Sensitive
interventions by the virtual school team and effective partnership
arrangements with a local careers company facilitate targeted activities,
increasing self-confidence, knowledge of possible career choices and the
options available to children. Tailor-made opportunities for work experience,
volunteering, careers information, and advice and guidance sessions are
offered from key stage 3 onwards to help children and young people to
prepare for work, training and higher education. As a consequence of these
creative approaches, outcomes for a growing number of children looked after
are improving.



All personal education plans (PEPs) are completed within 20 days of children
coming into care. The quality is excellent. PEPs consistently include the views
of children and their carers, inform plans and lead to improved outcomes. The
pupil premium grant is used well, successfully enhancing the educational
outcomes of children in care, for example by the purchase of music lessons,
therapeutic horse-riding sessions and one-to-one mathematics tuition,
enabling children to pursue career options and develop their skills. Attendance
at school is consistently high, currently at 96%, and this is closely monitored.
No child looked after had been permanently excluded for a number of years,
and low numbers receive fixed-term exclusions. At the time of the inspection,
better schools. Ten children looked after who are not in full-time mainstream
education attend alternative provision. Each placement provider and each
childs attainment child are monitored thoroughly by the virtual headteacher.


Effective processes in social care and work by the highly committed specialist
nurse ensure that children looked after have 100% of health assessments and
support for their emotional health, including those out of area, the local
authority commissions expert services. At the time of the inspection, 10
children were in receipt of services from a counselling psychologist.


The fostering service is extremely well managed and staffed by conscientious
and dedicated social workers. The quality of foster carer assessments and
matching reports is good. Foster carers who met with inspectors
demonstrated considerable warmth and admirable aspirations for their
children. For example, carers work closely with the virtual school so that they
are helped to access good universities. Other carers develop a bucket list for
children and ensure that children achieve their hopes and dreams while in
their care. All foster carers benefit from regular supervision which helps them
to reflect on and improve the standard of care that they provide. Accessible
specialist training is available, supporting carers to look after children with
complex behavioural and emotional needs. Foster carers told inspectors that
they feel valued and respected as professional members of the care team.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is outstanding


In Bracknell Forest, adoption is considered for all children at the earliest
indication that they cannot live with their birth families. Excellent adoption
practice has, at its roots, strong strategic vision and an understanding of
childrens need for permanence evident at every level of service provision. The
local authority is absolutely dedicated to pursuing adoption for children,
including those for whom it is considered harder to find adoptive placements.


The local authority is part of a regional dedicated adoption service across four
of the six local authorities in Berkshire. Communication between the adoption


service and the local authority is necessarily robust, with effective tracking by
senior managers of children with a plan of adoption. Firmly embedded early
family-finding and forward-planning processes, supported by a system of early
warnings sent to the adoption service, mean that children are promptly
allocated a family finder when they first become looked after.

Proactive family finding, with close collaboration between the local authority
and the adoption service, ensures that the right match is found. Family finders
are ambitious for children, whom they come to know well, and there is a
rigorous approach to matching children to their new parents, which ensures
that the risk of disruption is minimised. As a consequence of effective family
finding and the quality of post-adoption support, there have been no adoption
disruptions in the two years preceding this inspection.


There is a sufficiency and diversity of potential adopters, and this promotes
choice for Bracknell Forest children who need adoptive families. When suitable
adopters are not identified through engagement with regional arrangements,
other agencies and national processes are used in a timely way to identify
families. During the inspection the inspectors saw a good example of this in a
young child with complex needs who was matched within five months of
making the placement order.


Adopters value highly the support received during the recruitment process
from a regional social enterprise company funded by the Department for
Education innovation fund. They spoke highly of the training and support
through the peer mentoring and adopter-led training, and regarded a
bespoke, evidenced-based, therapeutic parenting programme highly.


The quality of prospective adopters reports (PARs) is excellent. They are
clear, sufficiently informative and analytical, and support the matching process
effectively. PARs also include a very helpful discussion on possible resolution
and strategies to mitigate identified vulnerabilities. Adopters told inspectors
that they found the assessment process to be transparent and appropriately
challenging, and that adoption social workers were highly professional and
knowledgeable. This ensures that prospective adopters are realistic about the
rewards and challenges of becoming parents by adoption.


The adoption service actively promotes fostering for adoption placements to
reduce delay for children. Prospective adopters are encouraged to consider
this option from the first enquiry and throughout the adoption process. There
have been two fostering for adoption placements, to date, for Bracknell
Forest children, and a third is in process.


Bracknell Forest is committed to achieving adoption for children and there is
no compromise on this, with a determination to secure adoption for all
children for whom it is the best possible option. Close monitoring and review
by senior managers are improving timeliness for most children.



A regional adoption advisory service administers the adoption panel, which
serves all of the six local authorities across Berkshire. A well-chaired adoption
panel meets twice a month, avoiding any delay and providing very effective
scrutiny and challenge of the approval of adopters and matching
recommendations. The panel chair spoke of Bracknell Forests tenacity in
seeking adoption for children as admirable and an example of good practice in
ensuring that the most appropriate plan is achieved.


The agency decision maker is knowledgeable, passionate and knows children
looked after well. She is conscientious in her role, challenges practice both
internally and externally, scrutinises plans closely, and meets children and
social workers before making her decisions.


Social workers know their children extremely well and, as a result, complete
consistently good child permanence reports (CPRs). These provide
comprehensive child and parental histories and a balanced analysis of the
reason for adoption. They are a valuable record for the child in the future and
are an effective tool for family finding and matching children to their new
family.


Children who have a plan of adoption are prepared well for the move to their
new families by both their foster carers and their social workers, and have
access to therapeutic interventions, should they need it. Inspectors saw some
very good direct work on childrens life journeys and the provision of Life
appreciation days which ensure that children and their new families
understand their story. However, while life-story work was undertaken in a
timely way, there were some inconsistencies in how well the story of the child
was conveyed in written format in life-journey books. An example of
innovative practice was seen whereby the adopter is provided with the draft of
a life-journey book to become familiar with how it is written and offer
amendments, which helps them to be comfortable with the book as an active
life-story tool for them and their child. (Recommendation)


Children and families receive excellent, easily accessible post-adoption support
which minimises the risk of breakdown. Adopters confirmed that they are
aware of the range of services that are available for therapeutic interventions.


Most notable is the services exceptional added value brought by the skills of
the post-adoption social worker. Trained in dyadic developmental
psychotherapy, she uses these skills in her direct work with adopters and their
children. The post-adoption social worker runs an under-fives group and a
group for adopted children aged eight to 12 where they can share their
experiences and talk openly about being adopted. She runs consultation
sessions for adopters jointly with a psychologist and will be developing these
forums for social workers. Post-adoption awareness raising is done in schools,
where she works alongside behaviour support staff to develop education,
health and care (EHC) plans.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is outstanding

Services for care leavers in Bracknell Forest are outstanding. Managers and
personal advisers (PAs) work tenaciously and diligently to advocate on behalf
of care leavers to ensure that they receive the best support to move safely
towards independence. The small team of personal advisers is highly skilled
and experienced. They are passionate about the young people whom they
support and talk with pride about their work. Young people were equally
enthusiastic about the team, and the help and support that they receive. One
young person said: They will always offer to visit when they know that I am
struggling. It makes me feel better and I dont feel like I am on my own.


PAs ensure that they keep abreast of key issues affecting the young people
whom they work with. They access relevant training and are very
knowledgeable about the range of services and support available, whether
locally or out of the area. Staff are ambitious for their young people and go
the extra distance to improve and enhance life chances for them. Strong
relationships formed between staff and care leavers mean that all care leavers
are in touch with the service.


Good partnership arrangements across many information services mean that
care leavers can access help and support when they need it. A significant part
of the work is to direct young people to the most relevant information and
advice that they need as they navigate towards independence. Good
arrangements are in place with Jobcentre Plus benefits advisers, and there are
strong partnerships between specialist services, such as substance misuse and
alcohol services, sexual health support and counselling services. Appropriate
access to these services ensures that the large majority of young people have
the help that they need to stay healthy, keep safe and become more
financially astute.


Care leavers redesigned the health passport, which they are encouraged to
complete, and all receive their health histories. For a number of care leavers,
knowledge about long-standing health issues has helped them to manage
their conditions and seek help more assertively. Each young person is
encouraged to register with a local doctor, dentist and optician, as
appropriate. The continued access to the looked-after childrens specialist
nurse is valued, and the co-location of the care leavers service (CLS) and the
youth offending service, with access to the specialist nurse in this team, has
improved health outcomes for many care leavers.


Care leavers with complex physical disabilities and mental health issues
receive very good, targeted support to meet their accommodation, health and
care requirements. Transition planning to adult services is highly effective.
The collaborative partnership working ensures a seamless transition to adult
services.



The quality of planning with young people is outstanding. Staff are
appropriately supporting young people to stay safe and to reflect on and take
responsibility for their actions. PAs are, as one young person said, not a soft
touch and young people know that they will be held to account, praised when
they have done well and steered back on to track when they veer off course.
Each pathway plan strongly reflects the voice of the young person, explains
the complexity of the issues that they face and outlines sensitively the
carefully explored next steps towards greater independence. Plans confirm
regular engagement with strong and open relationships. They clearly and
unequivocally expose a healthy level of challenge and discussion of the issues
that the workers are debating with their young people, such as making sure
that the rent is paid on time and job-seeking advice. In the large majority of
cases, risk is assessed well to ensure that care leavers feel safe and stay safe.
To underpin this effective practice, management oversight is robust, and
decision making is scrutinised effectively and rigorously.


Care leavers receive excellent support from the virtual schools education,
employment and training team (EET) to help them to find and sustain
purposeful work or training. Five young people are currently at university and
a further six will commence this year (approximately 20%). This demonstrates
very good performance. Staff have organised visits to universities and
delivered focused training to lecturers to ensure that care leavers receive their
full entitlement and the appropriate funding. The EET team continues to
provide ongoing support throughout their time away, which young people
spoke of highly. The local further education college provides very good
support to care leavers, which ensures that they keep on track. Currently, six
care leavers at the college are successfully working to the same standard as
other students. Two of them are unaccompanied asylum-seeking young
people who are studying English as an additional language.


The council provides a number of opportunities for care leavers to move into
employment or training placements. Five training positions have recently been
ring fenced by the council, yet there are still too few care leavers on councilsponsored apprenticeships or traineeships. Currently, only two care leavers
are in apprenticeships.


Effective joint working with the CLS team makes sure that young people fully
understand the implications of being in or out of work and the potential
consequences for their current and future life experiences. Very few care
leavers are not in education, employment or training. They include young
parents and young people with highly complex health needs. Those young
people who are able to work are engaging well with the EET team and are
actively pursuing training programmes or job opportunities.


Staying put arrangements with foster carers are used appropriately.
Additional resources have been made available when it is clear that a young
persons benefits will be adversely affected if they take on part-time work
while continuing their education.



All care leavers live in suitable accommodation. They can readily access
advice, support and guidance to help them to move towards managing their
own tenancies. If care leavers obtain tenancies in Bracknell Forest, they are
now exempt from paying council tax. The participation worker, himself an excare leaver/unaccompanied asylum seeker, was instrumental in lobbying for
this change alongside the lead member.


The main accommodation provider in Bracknell Forest offers a range of
supported housing, from 24/7 support to less intensive programmes to meet
individual needs in preparing young people for independence. One smaller
housing provider delivers a mandatory accredited programme of independent
living skills training for young people. This has been highly successful and has
led, in some instances, to care leavers securing their own tenancies. However,
the choice of accommodation, such as supported lodgings, remains limited,
and the service struggles to find more flexible provision which would offer
greater and more affordable choice for care leavers.


Achievement and progress are celebrated regularly through a range of
discrete activities and group work. Activities are generally informal and
organised collectively by care leavers, the participation worker and PAs. A
number of new initiatives to engage care leavers are well used, including a
website, a Facebook page and WhatsApp applications. Care leavers are very
aware of their rights and responsibilities. They are clear about how to
complain. Care leavers have recently produced an attractive and accessible
booklet explaining the range of services and support that care leavers can and
should expect to receive.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Children and families in Bracknell Forest benefit from good and outstanding
services. The senior leadership team and elected members have a collective
determination to provide high-quality services to improve outcomes for vulnerable
children. Their unrelenting focus has ensured that progress has been sustained
and services improved since the safeguarding and children looked after inspection
in 2011.
The local authority has a sound understanding of its strengths and weaknesses. It
fosters an open learning culture, engaging readily in internal and external reviews
and challenge. Rigorous planning, access to good-quality training and a strong
focus on innovation have led to an exceptionally stable workforce of proficient,
experienced social workers that enables good social work practice. Senior leaders
promote a strong ethos of participation and advocacy. They ensure that childrens
views are at the centre of their work and inform strategic planning.
The majority of social workers have manageable caseloads, and this ensures that
they have time to spend with children. As a result, children benefit from a wide
range of creative direct work which enables them to understand their
circumstances and improves their safety. The strategic and operational response to
child sexual exploitation and children who go missing is robust and informed by a
comprehensive analysis and problem profile, and a strong commitment to
educating the local community to be able to identify signs of abuse. As a result,
children receive well-coordinated services that reduce risk and harm.
Partnership working is mainly strong, both at a strategic and an operational level.
This is demonstrated by the introduction of the multi-agency safeguarding hub,
which is delivering prompt and appropriate responses to referrals, and the
established multi-agency Life chances team. There are clear and effective
governance arrangements across the strategic partnership. The children and young
peoples partnership board oversees the implementation of the children and young
peoples plan and prioritises the work needed to improve services for children.
However, the absence of any review of progress limits the boards ability to
demonstrate its effectiveness in improving outcomes for children.
Corporate parenting arrangements are very strong, and elected members have
high aspirations for children looked after and care leavers.


Inspection findings

Senior leaders and elected members demonstrate commitment and ambition
to improve outcomes for children and young people in Bracknell Forest. The
local authority has an open, outward-looking approach, consistently searching
for ways to improve services. Elected members and the senior leadership
team know their services well and work purposefully together to drive
improvement and implement the councils vision. Consequently, children and
families now benefit from a range of good and outstanding services.


The director of childrens services (DCS) and her senior leadership team have
been successful in creating greater transparency and a culture of learning,
support and challenge. Senior managers are connected to frontline practice
and have a good knowledge of individual children. They provide consistent
leadership, and are visible and accessible.


Links between senior leaders and the Local Safeguarding Children Board
(LSCB) are strong. The lead member for children is well informed and
effective. He attends the children young peoples partnership board and the
LSCB, and provides regular briefings to elected members. He routinely visits
frontline staff, as well as children, to ensure that he has a good understanding
of the strengths and weaknesses of the service. The lead member has been
influential in improving the quality of support for children and young people.
For example, he made it his business to experience at first hand the financial
challenges of care leavers, which led to a change in policy whereby care
leavers are now exempt from council tax until they reach the age of 21.


Corporate parenting is exceptionally strong. The corporate parenting advisory
panel campaigns for children looked after both actively and effectively.
Members are committed corporate parents. They receive regular performance
information and detailed reports, and this provides them with a clear and
detailed understanding of the quality of services provided to children who are
looked after in Bracknell Forest. There is purposeful engagement with
children, both formally through the participation officer and informally through
a range of activities. Three elected members act as mentors for children
looked after. Elected members take on specific roles on behalf of the panel
and report regularly on their progress. This enables them to challenge senior
leaders and question activity effectively.


The Children, Young People and Learning Overview and scrutiny panel
rigorously scrutinises the quality of services provided to children. Activity is
extensive, and is led by elected members who have good insight and
knowledge of their communities and the issues faced by children. Robust
challenge is achieved through a wide range of relevant reports and enquiries.
The committee has recently commissioned a comprehensive review of child
sexual exploitation, and the majority of recommendations have been acted
upon, leading to tangible improvements for children and young people.



A strong focus on performance management continuously drives
improvement. The chief executive and lead member routinely review the
directorates performance through quarterly service reports. Managers use
weekly performance information effectively in their service areas. The rigorous
culture of performance management has led to sustained improvement in the
timeliness of visits to children and of initial child protection conferences.
Senior managers recognise that they have more work to do to move to a
culture of measuring impact and outcomes, rather than processes, particularly
in respect of the effectiveness of early help. A performance scorecard is in
advanced development to further strengthen understanding of key
performance indicators.


Quality assurance activity has driven up standards across the service.
Historically, the emphasis has been on ensuring compliance with processes. A
revised outcome audit tool now supports a focus on achieving better
outcomes for children. Managers at all levels, including the DCS, chief
executive and lead member, regularly audit childrens case files to ensure the
quality of practice and services. The head of performance management and
governance ensures that there is robust follow-up on individual childrens
cases that have been judged less than good. She also plays a key role in
making sure that audit findings are translated into improvements in practice
and learning. Senior managers recognise that some audits are not always
sufficiently self-critical, and that quarterly reports on audit activity are overly
descriptive and lack robust analysis, both of which have the potential to dilute
their effectiveness.


The DCS has been instrumental in driving the council-wide transformation
plan. Strategic reviews of early help and education support services are in
place. The newly implemented family safeguarding model informs a wholesystem model of services to improve outcomes for children. Good partnership
arrangements, a high-quality workforce, and a robust system of review and
evaluation underpin the strategy.


The local authority has a range of commissioned and in-house services for
children and young people. A well-developed joint strategic needs assessment
and children looked after strategy informs strategic commissioning.
Comprehensive quality assurance of these arrangements is in place, with
regular performance reports and monitoring visits to ensure that services are
effective. Parents are actively involved in the commissioning process,
providing an extra layer of scrutiny. Plans are well advanced to involve
children in the commissioning process.


The local authority is acutely aware that its workforce is one of its most
valuable assets. The work of the childrens social care programme board,
combined with political support for additional financial resource and an
ambitious and comprehensive workforce strategy, have been highly effective
in securing a stable permanent workforce. Turnover, staff vacancies and the


use of agency social workers are low. This improves the consistency and
quality of the service.

An effective caseload weighting system supports managers to ensure that
caseloads are maintained at manageable levels. Where they are not,
additional agency staff are recruited. Staff have access to a comprehensive
package of multi-agency training and developmental opportunities, as well as
a range of information, research and materials via web-based learning and
resource sites. A well-structured pathway is in place for newly qualified social
workers to access the assessed and supported year in employment. Future
proofing of the workforce is also in place through the Step up to social work
scheme. Social workers enjoy working for Bracknell Forest. They appreciate
the training and clinical supervision that they receive, as well as the availability
and support of senior managers.


Management oversight is not yet consistently leading to improved outcomes
for all children. In a very small minority of cases, management oversight has
not been effective in driving childrens plans, and drift and delay are evident.
Independent reviewing officers provide the right level of robust critical
challenge to ensure that plans are progressed, but child protection chairs are
not as effective in providing the level of challenge that is needed. Senior
managers have a direct line of sight on vulnerable children, including those
who go missing or are at risk of sexual exploitation. Social workers have
access to regular supervision and performance appraisals. (Recommendation)


The local strategic response to child sexual exploitation and children who go
missing is informed by a comprehensive analysis and problem profile, and a
strong commitment to educating the local community to identify the signs of
abuse. The development of a specialist sexual exploitation and missing social
worker has ensured a more focused service for children. Well-attended and
managed sexual exploitation and missing risk assessment conferences
(SEMRAC) provide an effective response to children who go missing from
home/care and those vulnerable to sexual exploitation. Comprehensive and
timely return home interviews take place when children return after going
missing. Information derived from interviews informs the analysis of patterns
and trends effectively, and has led to targeted work to disrupt known localities
of concern.


The joint strategic children and young peoples plan, Creating opportunities
(201517), sets out the key priorities for children, and is overseen by the
children and young peoples partnership board. Priorities are sufficiently
aligned with the joint strategic needs assessment and the Health and
Wellbeing strategy. Despite well-attended meetings of the children and young
peoples partnership board, the board has not conducted an annual review of
progress. This limits the boards ability to understand what impact it is having
in terms of improving outcomes for children.



The local authority has strengthened the complaints process and is proactive
in seeking to resolve complaints at an early stage. Consequently, complaints
about childrens services have decreased from a high number, 67, in 201516
to 41 in the past year. A thorough analysis of complaints and compliments
informs the quality assurance process effectively. Few complaints are received
from children. The local authority recognises this and has taken action to
promote actively the complaints procedures to children through bespoke
leaflets and direct access via a dedicated complaints phone number.


The work of the multi-agency Life chances team has contributed effectively
to improving short-term placement stability, and there has been a reduction in
children looked after who have had three or more moves in a year. However,
long-term placement stability, particularly for older children, remains a
challenge. The local authority has taken action to respond to this by
commissioning a provider to recruit carers. In addition, it has implemented a
peer mentor respite service for all foster carers and a bespoke training
programme that uses restorative parenting. However, it is too early to see any
impact.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) in Bracknell Forest is good. A highly
motivated, committed group of partners is well led by a respected, influential chair
who sets high expectations and provides effective challenge to improve services.
The consistent board membership from a good range of agencies has enabled it to
become a strong and critical friend to partners. Well-established links to other
boards and partnerships, and engagement with senior leaders, ensure sufficient
oversight of safeguarding arrangements. The board extends its reach through an
effective, twice-yearly partnership forum which enables information sharing and
learning for a wider audience of board members.
The mix of pan-Berkshire and local sub-groups is effective in maintaining sufficient
scrutiny of local safeguarding arrangements while allowing collaboration,
information sharing and pooling of resources across Berkshire. Findings from a
wide range of audits, regular reports and a thorough section 11 process ensure
that the board retains sufficient oversight and challenge to local safeguarding
practice. Most audits are of good quality, contain feedback from children, families
and professionals, and result in action plans to improve services. Section 11 work
is particularly strong, and the involvement of general practitioners and the process
to strengthen school improvements are most notable.
Several priority areas in the business plan are carried over from past years,
reflecting a thorough approach by the board to assuring itself that safeguarding
arrangements are effective. The current business plan reflects local needs and
priorities, and has been directly influenced by childrens views to ensure that
children are protected from online safety risks. Broadening the engagement with
children, community and faith groups is an emerging strength of the board.
The board is not fully meeting its statutory responsibility by monitoring the
effectiveness of training. Although recognising that this area of board activity
requires increased focus, it has not yet completed a full training needs analysis and
is not fully aware of the provision, take-up or quality of single-agency training.
The performance dataset does not include information from all partners to provide
a better focus on business priorities and outcomes.


Recommendations

Ensure that a full training needs analysis is completed, and that information
regarding the availability, attendance and quality of single-agency training is
developed.


Review and strengthen the performance dataset in order for it to assist the
board to measure outcomes against its business priorities.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

A well-respected, committed independent chair leads a consistent and
motivated board that acts as a strong and critical friend to partners. The
board has well-established links with other strategic boards and partnerships,
such as the Health and Wellbeing Board, the children and young peoples
partnership and the community safety partnership, to ensure that priorities
are aligned. Quarterly safeguarding monitoring meetings between senior
leaders, such as the director of childrens services, chief executive, lead
member and the Independnet LSCB Chair, ensure that safeguarding
arrangements and practice are kept high on the agenda.


The board is well represented by senior leaders in partner agencies.
Attendance by board members at meetings is high, including two lay members
with contrasting backgrounds and experience. The lead member for childrens
services sits as a participating observer, and this strengthens political
oversight.


The board structure is regularly reviewed to ensure that it works effectively
and efficiently for Bracknell Forest. Four pan-Berkshire sub-groups provide
opportunities for collaboration, information sharing and pooled resources,
while a further five Bracknell Forest sub-groups ensure that local needs are
given sufficient focus. It is a strength of the board that, to fully assure itself of
local safeguarding arrangements and practice, it has retained its own child
sexual exploitation and section 11 sub-groups while also participating in the
pan-Berkshire arrangements.


Section 11 work carried out by the board is strong. Bracknell Forest has a subgroup to audit section 11 returns for local organisations. Panel meetings are
robust, and evidence regular and thorough auditing of childrens social care
commissioned services, schools and early years providers. The section 11
process to support school improvement has been further strengthened by
follow-up visits carried out by the lead education safeguarding officer and a
consultant. These visits include interviews with children, parents and staff to
look at strengths, the areas requiring further work and the development of
action plans. All general practitioners (GPs) in Bracknell Forest have completed
section 11 audits. They are involved in local learning events to consider
safeguarding matters and share information. The resulting increased


awareness has brought additional benefits, such as more GPs completing
reports for child protection case conferences.

The LSCB business plan is made up of core functions and targeted priorities to
ensure that it meets its statutory responsibilities while also responding to
changing local needs. Several priority areas in the business plan are carried
over from previous years, reflecting a thorough approach by the board in
assuring itself that safeguarding arrangements are working well. Child sexual
exploitation, for example, has been a priority in the past two years, and now
remains as a core function due to well-embedded arrangements, such as
sexual exploitation and missing risk assessment conferences, improved rates
of return home interviews and examples of disruption activity.


The LSCB has a good understanding of children missing and children at risk of
sexual exploitation. The Pan-Berkshire sub-group has been instrumental in
developing a coordinated response across Berkshire, for example by
implementing the sexual exploitation screening tool. Joint working across
Berkshire has also resulted in the requirement for taxi drivers to undertake
safeguarding training in order to obtain a licence. This training has to be
refreshed every three years, otherwise the licence is revoked. Work with local
hotels to raise awareness has resulted in examples of disruption activity. For
example, a hotel called the police when the staff were concerned about a
young person who turned out to be a missing girl from a neighbouring
authority.


The board receives an array of audits, reports, presentations and performance
data to monitor and evaluate frontline practice and inform its priorities. Recent
audits include those on domestic abuse, thresholds and the quality of case
conference reports. Most audits are of good quality and result in action plans
that are monitored by an audit tracker that shows outcomes and impact.
Audits identify service strengths and areas for improvement, and contain the
views of children, families and professionals. Learning from audits is
disseminated to partners through notifications that include key messages, the
views of children and families, and recommendations for improved practice.


A number of audits, reports and presentations have assisted the board to
monitor the effectiveness of early help. These have included an audit on
thresholds, which reported positive findings on the step up/step down
process, and an audit considering the early help services that are available to
support primary schoolchildren who have been excluded from school. In
addition, the board receives annual reports on oversight by the early
intervention hub and the common assessment framework (CAF). The dataset
complements this information, for example with the numbers of step up/down
arrangements. It also identifies emerging trends, such as higher numbers of
children from secondary schools being referred.


Although the dataset provides some useful data, it does not include
information from all partners. This would provide the board with a clearer


view of the difference that agencies are making and give further weight to the
board when holding partners to account. For example, the dataset is weighted
towards childrens social care yet lacks some essential information, such as
the frequency of social work visits to the children on plans. The board could
also strengthen its monitoring of the effectiveness of early help if it regularly
had a breakdown of agencies completing CAFs. Moreover, the dataset does
not indicate the number of staff who do not undertake multi-agency training.
A more explicit link between the dataset and business priorities would assist
the board to show how progress is being achieved. (Recommendation)

A risks and challenges log highlights the determination of the board to
improve safeguarding services for children. Examples include a challenge to
childrens social care regarding the number of missing children who have been
screened for sexual exploitation. This led to a review of these children and
provided a benchmark for further audits. The log also records repeated
concern about the loss of a therapeutic service for children who have
experienced domestic abuse. This resulted in the LSCB instigating an audit
regarding domestic abuse and support services and, due to this continued
challenge, additional services are now in place.


A thorough quality assurance learning and improvement framework sets out
how the board will identify and embed learning from a range of sources such
as audits, performance data, serious case reviews (SCRs) and feedback from
children, families and practitioners. The most recent SCR (C) was published in
The LSCB requested follow-up reports from six agencies after 12 months to
show what differences had been made to practice. Learning from this SCR
was disseminated prior to publication and, most significantly, resulted in a
multi-agency protocol regarding bruising/suspicious marks on nonindependently mobile babies and children. An audit of cases in 2015 showed
the positive impact of this protocol, with cases referred by the Royal Berkshire
Hospital and appropriately followed up by other agencies.


Most social workers spoken with during the inspection had some knowledge of
the LSCB and the most recent SCR. Findings from SCRs, both locally and
nationally, are incorporated into safeguarding training, and information on
SCRs and audit findings are disseminated to staff through LSCB notifications.
In addition, a comprehensive LSCB website provides information on
safeguarding for professionals, parents, carers and young people, and links to
other sites and publications, including training, threshold documents, the LSCB
report and the business plan. The communication and community
engagement sub-group is developing further ways to disseminate information.
This has already led to the production of an animated version of the threshold
document, and a Take5 campaign is being developed to provide the key
safeguarding messages in just five minutes.


Following an evaluation of the previous Pan Berkshire arrangements for
training in June 2016, the LSCB established a local Training and Professional


Development Sub Group to meet the specific training needs of Bracknell
Forest staff. Although the LSCB training website evidences a range of multiagency safeguarding training, learning and improvement workshops, and links
to relevant publications, the LSCB is not fully monitoring the effectiveness of
training. It does not have a comprehensive training needs analysis for all
partners and is not able to identify the availability, quality or numbers
attending single-agency training. In recognition that more needs to be done,
the LSCB has introduced a charging policy for training and is using the funds
to secure a consultant to develop the training needs analysis and further
strengthen the process to evaluate training courses. (Recommendation)

The LSCB extends its reach to partners effectively through a twice-yearly
partnership forum. The forum is made up of a wide range of board members,
including from the voluntary and community sectors, who come together to
consider reports, audit findings and presentations. This is highly valued by
partners, who see it as an effective means of networking, sharing information
and learning. Members report that it is a concrete way to test awareness, such
as learning from SCRs, and whether agencies are undertaking training.


Work to engage further with children and families, faith, voluntary and
community groups is an emerging strength. The communication and
community engagement sub-group, led by one of the lay members, has
planned an event this summer for children from 10 local secondary schools to
discuss safeguarding issues and concerns. Childrens concerns regarding
online safety and the fragmented response have directly influenced the board
to set it as one of its priorities for this year.


The Pan-Berkshire policies and procedures sub-group ensures that policies
and procedures remain up to date and are effective. The threshold document
was refreshed in 2016 and clearly sets out the core principles, levels and
indicators of need, and the services available. A threshold audit in 2016 tested
the effectiveness and understanding of thresholds by considering 13 case files
of children receiving early help or childrens social care. This was followed up
with feedback from the children and their families. Staff attended workshops
on the findings and shared their own views on multi-agency working. The
audit concluded that there was effective multi-agency working at all levels.


The LSCB annual report 201516 provides a detailed overview of the work of
the board, learning from audits and reports, progress against the business
plan and how these have shaped future priorities. Although the report
demonstrates the boards scrutiny in a wide range of service areas, it is not
always clear whether the work described has made a difference to services or
what still needs to be done. The board has recognised that it needs to do
more to show the impact of its work across services and has taken steps to
address this.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector:

Anne Waterman

Deputy lead inspector:

Linda Steele

Team inspectors:

Mandy Nightingale, Brenda McLaughlin, Jan
Edwards, Stella Butler, Karen Wareing

Senior data analyst:

Neil Powling

Quality assurance manager:

Janet Fraser


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2017


