Cambridgeshire County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 3 June 2014 - 25 June 2014
Report published: 8 August 2014
The overall judgement is that childrens services are good
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires
improvement
Good


Good


Good


Good

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is
good
The LSCB coordinates the activity of statutory partners and has
mechanisms in place to monitor the effectiveness of local arrangements.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
Section 1: the local authority - summary of findings


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority - summary of findings
The local authority is good because:

Council leaders and senior managers have responded purposefully and
systematically to the improvement agenda. Monthly improvement board
meetings have ensured a sustained focus on improving practice quality and
learning within the workforce and on developing effective multi-agency
partnership arrangements.


The model of social work practice in Cambridgeshire provides opportunities for
social workers and clinicians to work together to manage risk and share
responsibility to achieve good outcomes for children and families. Social
workers report feeling safe, secure and valued in an environment where good
social work practice can flourish.


A quality assurance framework is establishing an effective and regular overview
of case work with an increasing number of cases audited by the local authority
graded as good. Inspectors agreed that significant improvements in social work
practice could be seen in more recent case work. Where shortfalls are
identified, workshops are used well to support the improvement programme.


The local authority recognises that there needs to be a continued focus on
improvement to ensure that all children are appropriately safeguarded and the
remaining variability and inconsistency in the quality of some case work is
addressed.


A strong emphasis on direct work with children means that most children,
young people and care leavers enjoy meaningful relationships with their social
workers and personal advisers. Children and young people are seen and seen
alone, and their wishes and feeling contribute significantly to their assessments
and care planning arrangements.


Through Locality Teams and intensive, specialist family support programmes
such as the Multi Systemic Therapy (MST) programme and the family
intervention project, children and families are being helped at an early stage to
reduce the need for statutory intervention.


The local authority has established a domestic abuse governance board in
response to the prevalence of domestic abuse in the lives of children subject of
child protection plans. Raising awareness across the partnership of the impact
of domestic abuse on children and families has seen an increase in referrals and
more families being helped.


Volunteers in Child Protection, a voluntary service commissioned by the local
authority, provide a service to match volunteers to families with children on a
child protection plan. They provide support and practical help and work with


families to build their confidence and resilience and reduce the need for longterm statutory intervention through the child protection process.

Strong corporate parenting arrangements with cross-party political support are
manifested primarily through a well-constituted, multi-agency corporate
parenting board which is performance driven and focuses on improving services
and social work practice. Lead members and senior officers demonstrate a good
knowledge of the needs of all children in Cambridgeshire. Their understanding
is strengthened by the influence of an enthusiastic and energetic Children in
Care Council.

leavers to meet regularly and share their experiences. The participation teams
coordinate a range of activities to support them and ensure that they lead
healthy and well balanced lives.
those children where a return home is not an option can be seen in the local
authoritys approach to securing positive and stable experiences for children
and young people. A no detriment policy to support foster carers continuing to
provide long-term care to young people is having a beneficial impact and the
number of children in staying put arrangements is rising.
are illustrative of the range and quality of the support provided by the local
authority in ensuring placement stability for children is given high priority.


What does the local authority need to improve?
discussions and section 47 enquiries leading to a comprehensive assessment of
risk and effective information sharing.
measurable, focus on key needs and risks and include robust contingency
arrangements that are understood by parents as well as professionals.
and needs, in particular evidencing meaningful consideration of the childs
religious, ethnic or cultural needs and how these are going to be addressed.
by a robust assessment and that any identified need has led to a direct offer of
support.
enable social workers to recognise the cumulative impact of abuse on children,
including the impact of neglect.
order to better understand their experiences and ensure their wishes and
feelings are reflected in child protection plans made for them.
and timely planning, concentrating particularly on engaging young people in
education, employment and training where they are disengaged. Update
pathway plans at least every six months.
together with childrens social care to support vulnerable young people when
they present as homeless.
explored and translated into individual professional development plans.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who have
needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and young
people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and starting
their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, inspectors considered what
the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well it is doing and
what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help, protect and look
after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.

The inspection team
Lead inspector: Helen Cawston HMI.
Team inspectors: Tracey Metcalfe HMI, Steven Gauntley HMI, Adesua Osime HMI,
Nick Stacey Contracted Inspector, Marianick Ellender-Gele HMI, Cathy Blair Seconded
Inspector.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 127,680 children and young people under the age of 18
years live in Cambridgeshire. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 13% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 12% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 10% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 10% of
all children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are Asian or Asian British and Mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 11% (the national average is 18 %)
 in secondary schools is 8% (the national average is 14%).
 A large traveller and Eastern European population seeks seasonal work in
the agricultural parts of the county.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 2,515 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a
reduction from 2,631 at March 2013.
 At 31 March 2014, 395 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is an increase from 211 at March 2013.
 At 31 March 2014, 37 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from 28 at 31 March 2013.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 501 children are being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 39.3 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 465 (36.3 per


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


authority area
authority area
area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 31 adoptions
subsequently returned to be looked after
moved on to independent living
now living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates 3 childrens homes. 2 were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Cambridgeshires arrangements for the protection
of children was in September 2012. The local authority was judged to be
inadequate.
 The previous inspection of Cambridgeshires services for looked after
children was in September 2009. The local authority was judged to be
adequate.
Other information about this area
 The Executive Director of Children, Families and Adult Services has been in
post since July 2010.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since September 2009.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
Key Judgement

Judgement Grade

The experiences and progress of children who Requires Improvement
need help and protection
and showing positive impact. However, there is still improvement required to
ensure that services to children in need and those in need of protection are
consistent and effective. Areas for improvement include strategy discussions
and section 47 enquiries; the quality of child protection and child in need plans,
assessments and chronologies.
delivers a good range of support services for children and young people as soon
as needs are identified. Fourteen multi-disciplinary locality teams, based around
clusters of schools, are central to the success of prevention and early
intervention programmes. Staff in schools and childrens centres know how and
when to refer children and families for support and, if in doubt, help and advice
are readily available from professionals based in the locality teams.
including those with a disability, are well established and enable effective
sharing of local intelligence, including information from health and police
partners. This ensures that children are helped from a very young age.
health and their personal development. Inspectors observed well-chaired
meetings leading to positive outcomes for children and young people living in
households where parents have mental health or substance misuse problems or
where, in a high number of cases, domestic abuse is a factor. When cases need
to be escalated to childrens social care, prompt action is taken following this
decision.
are focused on the needs of the child, taking into account the whole familys
context and levels of need. Parents who spoke to inspectors praised the staff
for their knowledge and understanding. They said that the Family Intervention
Programme (FIP), an intensive support programme for families with complex
needs, and other parenting courses had helped them greatly to develop their
resilience and confidence at times of crisis. The targeted approach to early
help, including a multi-systemic therapy programme, is seeing more children
helped earlier. The local authority has seen a decrease in the number of rereferrals from 20.6% in 2013 to 16.6% in April 2014, compared to the England


average of 24.9%. The local authoritys approach to targeting early help is
having a positive impact on changing entrenched patterns of behaviour in some
families and reducing the need for longer term statutory intervention.
other local authorities, but recent public awareness raising across the country
about child protection and the outcome of some high profile serious case
reviews has seen a recent and unprecedented increase in the number of child
protection cases between July 2013 and March 2014 from 230 to over 380. A
plan to increase targeted support to families is in place in order to reduce
pressure on statutory services.
most cases is a short-term intervention when families are in crisis. There are
low numbers of child protection plans lasting over 12 months which reflect the
local authoritys overarching aim of ensuring that children receive timely help
and support and that they are not subjected to formal child protection
interventions unnecessarily.
where they are most needed and ambitious targets are set for the involvement
of vulnerable groups. Six childrens centres provide specialist support for
children with disabilities as well as the core early help offer. Parents using one
of these centres told inspectors that staff provide excellent advice on the
specific needs of their children.
to use drugs or alcohol and those in treatment are supported well, with easy
access to the Child and Adolescent Substance Use Service (CASUS). Through
effective training opportunities, staff receive regular updates on legal highs
and other new substances to help inform their practice. In the past twelve
months the number of young people in treatment, at 223, has reduced by 3%,
waiting times for treatment are lower than national and exit figures at 89% of
young people completing treatment are better than the national average of
in Years 8 and 10 reported feeling afraid to go to school at least sometimes
because of bullying. In response to this issue, the local authority has
encouraged schools to use a self-assessment tool to review the effectiveness of
their safeguarding practices and approaches to bullying, including cyberbullying. The most recent data show that 87% of schools had completed this
audit at the time of the inspection. Schools advisers challenge schools where
the audit has not been undertaken. The Personal, Social and Health Education
team provides a range of support to schools, and surveys are conducted to
check whether children and young people feel safe. The Together for Families


programme is showing positive impact, with better attendance at school and
reduction of both police calls-out and incidents of anti-social behaviour.
framework and are well known and understood across all agencies. As a result,
childrens early help needs are identified quickly and practitioners respond with
the right level of support at the earliest opportunity. Decisions taken to escalate
to childrens social care are informed by the threshold document.
contact requests, which are then passed to the Integrated Access Team (IAT),
where all referrals are screened to ensure effective information sharing leading
to a timely offer of assessment and help. Consent is sought where appropriate
and is well evidenced in records. Social work expertise is available to
professionals and families from the Multiagency Access and Referral Unit
(MARU), which is staffed with partners from health, education and the police.
Together, these staff provide specialist advice to professionals about actions to
take when they identify safeguarding concerns for children.
experienced social workers with good management oversight. No examples
were seen by inspectors where children and families were subject to
unnecessary child protection investigations.
between key partners but a small number of strategy meetings sampled
involved the police and social care only, leading to decisions about
investigations being made without full background information and the
involvements of other significant partner agencies, in particular, health
professionals.
children concerned being seen and spoken to alone. Risks are usually fully
explored and analysed, establishing a clear rationale for decisions being made.
However, a small number of strategy discussions did not fully assess the risks
and there were also some delays noted in the recording of outcomes of child
protection enquiries. This hindered the provision for robust multi-agency
planning and action, leaving children vulnerable to risk for longer than
necessary.
teams, each of which is led by a consultant social worker supported by two
qualified social workers. This unit model has been developed to ensure a more
systemic approach to assessing and planning for children and families. Social
workers report that the reflective nature of the model has sharpened their
practice, enabling them to achieve more timely interventions for children and
families. Team clinicians bring fresh perspectives and challenge around
interventions and methods of engaging families. This approach has


strengthened assessments and reduced the need to commission specialist
assessments, particularly where care proceedings are being initiated.
Some assessments seen by inspectors were of a good quality, timely,
comprehensive and proportionate to risk, with strong oversight by managers.
However, some were seen to be overly long and descriptive, and a small
number focused on siblings, losing sight of the individual childs needs and
experiences.
analysis of childrens circumstances leading to clear recommendations about the
type of support required to meet their needs. In many cases inspectors saw
little consideration being given to race, religion, culture and language in many
cases assessments. However, some good examples of childrens cultural needs
being addressed well were noted. Chronologies that record significant events in
a childs life are not being routinely used to inform assessment and planning. In
a small number of cases seen, inspectors saw cases being closed without
sufficient analysis or consideration to family history and presenting risk, leaving
some children vulnerable.
making and oversight of case work. Weekly unit case discussion meetings
demonstrate good levels of reflective practice and challenge with effective
monitoring of outcomes. However, this is not routinely captured in recording
and assessments.
approaches to better understand the childs experience. Resourceful use of
iPads helps social workers to identify the wishes and feelings of children and
young people and their families through a range of on-line games and activities,
including the three houses and the happiness scale. Direct work with children is
generally captured well in case records.
with evidence in case recording of their experiences, wishes and feelings. The
majority of recordings are detailed and analytical with good attention to
progress made against the plan, followed by clear actions.
workers recognise the importance of using imaginative communication methods
when interacting with disabled children. As a result, disabled children and
children who have communication difficulties develop meaningful relationships
with their social workers. Those who are subject to a plan are supported and
protected well by the children with disabilities units.
conferences, with 100% now being held within the required timescales.


Chairing of conferences is good and children are placed firmly at their centre,
with a strong emphasis on their ongoing needs. Insightful use of the
strengthening families based approach promotes reflective consideration of
risk, progress made and outcomes achieved. The enthusiastic approach to
conferences facilitates the successful engagement and participation of
professionals and parents, helping to ensure that initial planning is effective.
One parent reported that the support offered to him had been excellent and
improved his parenting and relationship with his child.
of a good quality and are usually shared with parents well in advance of the
conference. Core groups take place regularly, with good attendance and
engagement from professionals and parents. Parents who spoke with inspectors
understood the reasons why their children were subject to local authority
interventions and understood the changes that they needed to make to improve
outcomes.
childs experiences, wishes and feelings are better understood and reflected in
planning. The use of advocacy is increasing and, in the three months prior to
the inspection, 196 children were actively supported by the National Youth
Advocacy Service (NYAS). The services annual report demonstrates a
significant increase in the past year from 246 to 330 children either supported
by an advocate to attend, or to have their views represented at conference.
children in need cases. This variability means that not all plans for children are
sufficiently specific, achievable and with measurable goals. Some plans seen by
inspectors lack focus on risk and the timely completion of agreed tasks. In
these cases, it is difficult to see how the parent and child know what needs to
change and how they will be supported to make the changes necessary.
extended family involvement for children subject to the PLO. Authoritative
action is usually taken when help and protection provided for children do not
achieve the desired outcomes or when concerns escalate.
(CAM), where threshold discussions and higher level interventions such as
Public Law Outline (PLO) and care proceedings are considered and agreed.
However, the recording and tracking of decisions made at CAM need to be
reviewed. Inspectors saw evidence of delay in actions being progressed and of
decisions changed following the CAM meeting.
communication between EDT and daytime colleagues, leading to effective
transferring of information. However, the local authority acknowledges that
there is insufficient capacity within the team to meet demand. This means that,


at times of pressure, additional resources have to be secured at short notice.
This undermines the quality and consistency of practice.
to be addressed but the vulnerability of privately fostered children is recognised
by the local authority as a priority. There were 37 ongoing private fostering
arrangements at 31 March 2014. The authority accepts that this is likely to be
an under-representation and it has recently introduced an action plan to raise
awareness of private fostering across the county, with advertisements in the
local press. The authority has also worked with local language schools to raise
awareness, resulting in a significant increase in the number of notifications from
the sector. Private fostering arrangements have been strengthened by a
dedicated post.
effective Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conferences (MARAC). These are well
established, with good representation and input from partner agencies.
Effective information sharing and well-coordinated actions and interventions
ensure that risk is robustly managed for children in these families.
through the locality teams. Officers across the fourteen localities liaise closely
with schools, health professionals and the police and are active in raising
awareness of children missing from education. This includes training for staff in
independent schools. When a child is reported as missing education, officers
swiftly contact a range of organisations, such as previous schools, siblings
education settings, RAF bases, border control and the traveller community, to
ensure information is shared and missing children are found quickly.
with the local authority and provision has been assessed as suitable. When
potential risks are identified, education welfare officers conduct a home visit.
However, in two cases sampled, where children were home educated and on a
child protection plan, they were not receiving a suitable education. The local
authority recognises the need to develop the relationships with families who
refuse a visit, so that all children are properly safeguarded.
In response to this service gap, the Childrens Trust has influenced
commissioners across the partnership to review provision and put additional
services in place to address the shortfall, including the commissioning of a
counselling charity, Centre 33.
risk of being missing from home or care and vulnerable to child sexual
exploitation (CSE) are robust. In April 2014, 17 children were reported missing,
accounting for 39 instances. The local authority is working with this group of
children and young people to reduce the risk they pose to themselves.


have facilitated a better understanding of any potential activity in the county
that may place children and young people at risk. All referrals about children
missing are progressed by IAT, which undertakes return interviews within 72
hours for children who are not looked after. Children who go missing from care
have a return home interview conducted by an independent voluntary agency.
Interviews are well recorded and address issues of safety and vulnerability.
identify any patterns and trends in activity, known cohorts of children and
young people at risk and hot spots of activity. The targeting of support and
resources in this way has led to a number of police arrests and convictions of
adults who posed a risk to missing young people at risk. Cambridgeshire's
comprehensive protocol for the identification and risk assessment of CSE cases
has been implemented across the multi-agency safeguarding network, with 231
members of staff across the agencies trained and made aware of its use. This
led to 56 CSE cases being referred to MARU between December 2013 and
March 2014, using the agreed risk assessment tool.
reporting and investigative processes are in place to respond to allegations of
abuse, mistreatment or poor practice by professionals and carers. Case
examples seen show timely responses to enquiries, with good multi-agency
attendance at strategy meetings ensuring that information is shared
appropriately and effective and coordinated action is taken.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and
achieving permanence
Key Judgement

Judgement Grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Good

threshold assessments and ratified by multi-disciplinary Childrens Allocation
Meetings (CAM) chaired by the Principal Social Worker. This ensures that these
decisions are in childrens best interests and that all other options have been
thoroughly explored. The panel also determines the type of placement children
need. In emergency cases, the Head of Service approves decisions with an
equally rigorous process.
be seen in the application of thresholds for access to childrens social care and
the delivery of early help and prevention services. Significant attention has
been given to the development of effective support services for children and
young people on the edge of care. Clinicians within social work units engage
creatively, flexibly and intensively with families to understand them better and
reduce the need for care wherever possible. Family Group Meetings (FGM) are
used effectively to explore support and strengths within families and, as part of
parallel planning processes, to secure the right outcomes for children. This
means that only those children who need to become looked after do so.
reviewing officers scrutinise care planning arrangements. Plans are unhurried,
child focused and carefully thought through and childrens wishes and feelings
are considered. Robust assessments evidence parents capacity to sustain
change, and additional support from unit clinicians helps to ensure that children
can stay safely at home and the risk of a return to care is minimised.
law outline is used effectively. All pre-proceedings work is considered by the
CAM panel. When the threshold is met for application to court, the panel ratifies
the decision. Letters before proceedings are well written and set out clear
expectations of parents and carers, together with stringent timescales for
change to be achieved. Support provided in these cases is well evidenced.
However, this process could be further strengthened with better tracking of
applications that meet the threshold to progress to court, to avoid any drift and
delay if childrens situations deteriorate further.
timely permanence planning for children and young people. The average length
of care proceedings has reduced significantly, and Cafcass reports that
applications are appropriate and that sustained improvement in the quality of


assessments and reports have gained the confidence of the court and reduced
the need for independent expert assessments.
to progress childrens plans for permanence. Family group meetings are used
effectively to explore extended family members and connected persons when
thinking about long-term options for children of all ages. This means that
children who cannot remain with their parents are given the best possible
chance to live permanently with a family member or someone they know well.
Special Guardianship Orders (SGOs) are increasingly being used with packages
of practical and financial support provided, although the authority recognises
that there is further work to do to fully embed special guardianship as a
permanency option for children and young people.
significant family members has to be supervised, are carefully assessed and
supported. Direct work with children and young people by unit clinicians help
them to understand the reasons for their separation from family and friends
who are important to them, and where brothers and sisters have a different
plan to them. Children are seen regularly by social workers who know them
well. Statutory visits to children meet requirements and in some cases social
workers visit more often. Case records show that children are seen and seen
alone and the purpose of visits is clear. Not all recording is up to date and there
is some variation in recording across the units supporting looked after children.
Management oversight is clearly recorded on childrens files. Unit meeting notes
very effectively record case discussions with managers and unit clinicians which
explore the success of interventions and next steps.
after children and young people. Unit clinicians work closely with health
partners to assess and respond to children and young peoples emotional wellbeing needs. Clinicians contribute significantly to single assessments and
provide direct therapeutic responses to children who have emerging or low
level needs. Where more intensive support is required the clinicians input and
the quality of their assessments expedites referrals in to child and adolescent
mental health services (CAMHS).
placements, with good social work support provided by three specialist children
with disability units. Individual workers are skilled at communicating effectively
with children who are non-verbal. There are good transitional arrangements
with adult services, with examples seen of their involvement with some children
and young people from the age of 14. The authority is currently working with
parents and providers to increase the range of placement options closer to
home for children with complex needs who are currently cared for outside the
county.


improvement is required in some areas. In 2013, based on a small cohort of 23
pupils, the proportion making the expected progress in reading at key stage 2,
at 78%, was slightly above the most recently reported national figure for
looked after children. However, only 54% of pupils made the expected progress
in writing and 65% in mathematics, lower than national averages.
children achieving five good GCSEs has risen from 22% in 2011 to 39% in
GCSEs including English and mathematics. The attainment gap between
students who are looked after and their peers is not narrowing because these
improvements have not kept pace with the rising trend for all students in
Cambridgeshire.
statement of special educational needs; six pupils are educated in special
schools; 16 are not accessing GCSEs or equivalent qualifications. While 18
pupils are currently in satisfactory alternative provision, almost all are receiving
the minimum requirement of 25 hours of education each week.
social workers supported by a team of Education Support for Looked after
Children (ESLAC) teachers mean that changes of school are only made when
they are in childrens interests. Of the 108 children who experienced a change
of care placement last year, only thirteen had to move school and four of these
were from the same family. One looked after pupil was permanently excluded
from a primary school in October 2013 before moving to a special school. Six
looked after pupils are in the County School, a pupil referral unit judged good
at its last inspection. As of October 2013, 83% of looked after children who left
year 11 last summer were in education or training. The proportion of
Cambridgeshires care leavers at 19 years of age who are engaged in
education, employment or training has been consistently below that of its
statistical neighbours throughout 2013, although Cambridgeshires latest figures
in April 2014 show a significant improvement at 71.4% (a small cohort of seven
care leavers). Officers recognise that there is more to do to sustain the
participation of young people post-16. Eleven young people are currently in
higher education.
ESLAC team, especially when pupils are transferring from primary to secondary
schools. Every looked after child, including those placed out of county, has a
named link ESLAC teacher who knows them well. The pupil premium funding is
now managed centrally and schools are challenged to demonstrate their impact
on raising achievement. Most childrens personal education plans (PEPs) show
how this funding is used, for example to provide one-to-one tuition, but the
difference this is making to childrens progress is not always clearly recorded.
Good practice is developing in supporting very young looked after children in


early years settings. The ESLAC service also provides support to adopted
children, young people and their families. Performance is reported to a
management board and to the corporate parenting panel, ensuring effective
oversight of childrens achievement.
safely from care are effective. A dedicated looked after childrens permanency
unit focuses specifically on securing permanent family placements within
childrens timescales and on family finding for large sibling groups. Five
concurrency placements have been achieved so far, with the children involved
benefiting from decisions to secure their futures being taken without delay; the
longest care proceedings in these cases took just 17 weeks.
authority makes significant use of private residential care providers and
independent fostering agencies, despite the overall number of looked after
children reducing. 67% of all looked after children live with foster carers. 10%
live in residential childrens home. Most children are living in provision that is
judged to be good or better. Where the Ofsted judgement changes at an
inspection and is less than good, robust action is taken by the social worker and
commissioning officers to satisfy them that the placement remains appropriate
for the child. They establish with the provider an action plan to address the
shortfalls identified. Recognising the limited choice of in-house placements
available, particularly for older children for whom adoption is not an option, the
authority is taking effective action to recruit additional foster carers. Robust
safeguarding checks are undertaken and formal supervision is satisfactory but
not always frequent. Foster carers from independent agencies receive the same
good quality support and scrutiny as in-house carers, and they speak very
positively about the high quality training and support provided from the
fostering service.
young people they care for. They are passionate about improving outcomes
and strengthening the attachments they have to the children they care for.
They are well supported by family placement workers. Formal supervision of
foster carers is of a satisfactory quality but does not always take place
regularly.
more than 20 miles from their family home, with 35% placed in specialist
residential provision. Whilst effective work is currently being undertaken with
providers to identify new provision in-county, monitoring visits by the
commissioning team and regular visits by their social workers ensure that
children and young people placed outside the county are safe and well cared
for. Two young people living in childrens homes outside the county were
visited during the inspection. Both placements were of high quality and staff
were well supported by skilled social workers who know the children well. One
young person told inspectors that his social worker was the best he had ever


had and that she really cared about him. 23 children are matched to an
independent visitor provided through the National Youth Advisory Service to
ensure that they have independent support and that their views are considered.
reviewed by independent reviewing officers. Permanence is considered early
and is high on their scrutiny agenda. Care plans are consistently clear about
achieving permanency arrangements as soon as is possible. With this in mind,
senior managers track plans through monthly monitoring meetings, taking
decisive action where children are waiting too long to be matched with
permanent carers. The added value of unit clinicians supporting assessments
can be seen in improving care plans, helping social workers to focus on key
areas of childrens lives and experiences. More work needs to be done to
ensure that childrens diverse needs are explicitly stated and addressed. Also,
the format of care plans could be improved to make them easier for younger
children to understand.
reviewing officers seeing children before their reviews, to ensure that their
views are taken into account. Children and families benefit from interpreting
and translation services to ensure that they understand and feel able to
participate in discussions and meetings that affect them. Independent
reviewing officers have strong links with social work units and dispute
resolution processes are well embedded. A protocol with Cafcass to transfer
cases back to independent reviewing officers after final court hearings helps to
prevent drift and sustain progress made in the course of proceedings.
to the Children in Care Council section within the Youthoria website, which has
information to help them understand their entitlements and how to complain.
The website also provides good information to help children and young people
protect themselves from all forms of bullying. Social workers, foster carers and
residential staff have been specifically trained to help children and young
people use the site and understand how to access any support they need. The
authority commissions the National Youth Advisory Service to provide an
advocacy and independent visitor service for children and young people. This
assures them of independent support should they wish to make a complaint.
people in the Voices Matter and Just Us groups routinely influence the shape
of services, helping to improve outcomes for children across the county. They
are regularly involved in recruiting staff and in training social workers and foster
carers. These groups are highly effective in influencing change across the
council. Looked after children, young people and care leavers told inspectors
that their wishes and feelings are taken seriously by the adults who care for
them and they consider that senior managers and leaders are genuinely
interested in their experiences. Dedicated participation officers support young
people to be inspired through strong links with further education colleges and


Cambridge University, which are developing a range of vocational courses and
learning opportunities. The children in care council has been instrumental in the
development of the Youthoria website which provides information to looked
after children and care leavers about their entitlements, social events and how
to access support.
film called Finding My Way, to support care leavers making the transition from
being looked after to independence. An animated film, My name is Joe, about
a childs experience of becoming looked after for the first time, is another
example of the achievements of the children in care council. This work provides
invaluable resources and information for children, young people and social
workers nationally to help understand the experience of a childs journey
through the care of a local authority.
voluntary sector agencies commissioned by the authority directly support 290
young carers. An enthusiastic group of 12 young carers meets regularly and is
helping to raise awareness about their situations in caring for family members.
However, there is need for elected members and senior managers to
strengthen the impact and effectiveness of this group and raise awareness in
order to identify young carers in the community.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is
good
when adoption is in their best interests. Adoption is considered within a broader
context of securing the most suitable permanence options for children,
encompassing long-term fostering and special guardianship order applications.
senior management oversight and scrutiny. Permanency is considered from an
early stage, with careful monitoring by childrens independent reviewing officers
from their second review. Children awaiting permanency are closely tracked
and any delays are identified and purposefully addressed.
two children with placement orders are awaiting adoptive families; active family
finding is underway and all of these children have clear plans which are closely
monitored, with 13 children having dates set for presentation at the adoption
panel.
convincing together or apart decisions being made to inform family finding. A
small minority of children awaiting matches have serious learning and physical


disabilities and all opportunities are taken to advertise these children as widely
as possible.
range of national and local recruitment opportunities, including adoption activity
days, eastern region consortium adoption exchange days, referrals to other
local authority and voluntary adoption agencies and the national adoption
register. Annual numbers of enquiries about adoption have substantially
increased from 200 in 20112012 to 343 in 201314. Careful profiling of
children is given particular attention to enable good quality matches to be
made. To further strengthen family finding activities, staff have attended a
recent consortium event as part of the local authoritys drive to attract more
same sex couples and single gay applicants and adopters from ethnic minority
groups.
is in the top quarter of local authorities and on an upward trajectory, with the
percentage of looked after children adopted increasing year on year to 17% in
average time between children entering care and being placed with their
adoptive families, and the average time between a placement order and an
adoptive match. The authoritys scorecard performance on children who wait
less than 20 months between entering care and moving in with their adoptive
families is less strong, with 51% waiting longer than 20 months against a
national average of 55%. The authority recognises the need to respond to the
increasing demand for adoptive families. As a result, they have taken the
initiative and established Coram Cambridgeshire Adoption (CCA) as a voluntary
adoption agency, building on an existing partnership arrangement. This new
initiative has secured significant investment from the DfE and is likely to further
develop the effectiveness, efficiency and pace of adoption activities in
Cambridgeshire, further accelerating progress for the benefit of children and
adopters.
training offered. Staff training is similarly comprehensive, and recent courses
have focused on disruptions, the two stage adopter assessment process and
the national adoption reform agenda. Further specific training and development
work is planned to support life story work and later life work, sibling work and
assessments and child permanence. These programmes are planned in
conjunction with the workforce development team and clinical services. Some
adopters have particularly welcomed training and support from unit clinicians
on both attachment and the impact on early childhood development of
neglectful and abusive parenting.
close scrutiny of child permanency reports and prospective adopter reports. The
panel chair is effective in her leadership role. The panel carefully considers


placement matching, an important contributory factor to low post-adoption
disruption rates. There are two panels, meeting a total of three times a month,
illustrating the importance provided to timely matching and permanency
planning. Panel members are effective and experienced; they receive annual
appraisals and attend regular training. New members have a structured
induction programme.
good, with the recent two-stage process embedding well. 80% of assessments
are completed within timescales and, where there is potential for delay,
appropriate tracking procedures are in place to ensure a timely conclusion to
adopters approvals. The level of analysis could be more developed in a
minority of assessments seen, but recent training on assessment by BAAF and
Coram, alongside the input of unit clinicians, is gradually improving the
analytical component of assessments. The quality of child permanence reports
is reported by the adoption panel to be less consistent, with some containing
insufficient evidence of parents views and post-adoption support plans.
Safeguarding checks on prospective adopters are particularly thorough and
comprehensive.
Support is timely, considered and comprehensive and adopters spoken to
clearly value the support packages they and their children receive. Support
plans seen encompassed practical, financial, clinical and therapeutic elements.
The latter were particularly beneficial in addressing underlying attachment
difficulties presenting at key chronological transition stages in the form of
challenging behaviours both at home and school. There were no adoption
breakdowns in 20132014, which is illustrative of the quality and range of
support provided. A specialist adoption support team also provides support for
carers with special guardianship orders, further exemplifying Cambridgeshires
commitment to successful permanency for children for whom adoption is not a
feasible option.
permanence reports require some improvements and the planned joint agency
with Coram is not yet operational, so its impact is yet to be demonstrated.
However, some elements of the service, particularly adoption support, are
bordering on exceptional performance. The local authority expects the new
partnership to quickly bring current good performance to an outstanding level.

The graded judgement about the experiences and progress of
care leavers is good
are prepared well and supported by their personal advisers in navigating
effective transitions to adulthood. Young people spoken to by inspectors value


the availability and support of their personal advisers. Direct practice observed
with young people, and case files audited and sampled by inspectors,
demonstrated that personal advisers have a good understanding of young
peoples strengths and vulnerabilities and develop purposeful and trusting
professional relationships with them.
wishes and concerns are explicit in the majority of case records. Group
supervision meetings are held weekly and some records of these meetings
show evidence of reflection and alternative hypotheses being explored. A
clinician is providing interim cover to the 18 to 25 team, with permanent
recruitment planned to strengthen the same systemic practice model deployed
across other operational teams in childrens services.
will contain information for young people on health, accommodation options,
entitlements and benefits. Young people will be able to update their passports
incrementally, to reduce the need to repeat key information, for example to add
new housing or health providers.
health support, work and post-16 learning has been further strengthened by a
lively section for looked after children and care leavers on a Youthoria
website. Young people designed this interactive section on the website,
reflecting the care taken by the authority to promote the meaningful
involvement and participation of looked after young people and care leavers in
improving services.
engagement in Voices Matter, Cambridgeshires Children in Care Council. This
is a highly effective, innovative and creative forum for the active participation of
care leavers in describing their experiences of care, manifested partly through
the production of two award winning videos. Voices Matter attempts to engage
all care leavers, as well as the highly motivated, to ensure a representative
cross section of the cohort. Care leavers are involved in officer recruitment
processes and routinely engage in commissioning programmes. The local
authority highly values the contribution of their care leavers in the routine
development of service provision, and regularly seeks their feedback on
services provided.
enhancing the quality and range of its accommodation for care leavers. 245
places have been made available in supported accommodation settings through
a recent commissioning exercise in which young people have been involved.
Further semi-independent placements are being commissioned to increase
capacity in this type of accommodation. Regular visits are undertaken by the
Access to Resources Team to monitor the quality of provision.


regarding care leavers entitlements to housing. This has been adopted by
housing departments in district and city councils. There is clear management
information about the 10% of care leavers who are known not to be living in
suitable accommodation. The authority has recently surveyed care leavers,
noting that a small minority do not feel safe in their accommodation. This
survey included young people known to be living in unsuitable accommodation
and arrangements. Young people for example, who are living with friends and
sofa surfing, a small number who have completely disengaged from the
service, and a small number of care leavers who are held in youth offending
institutions. The local authority understands the considerable challenges
involved in securing a sufficiently varied and suitable range of accommodation
for care leavers aged over 18 years in a large, diverse shire county, and is
actively pursuing plans to continue developing its provision.
placements being reviewed on a weekly basis by senior managers. There were
no young people in bed and breakfast accommodation during the inspection,
although six young people have been accommodated in bed and breakfast for
short periods earlier in 2014. All of these young people were aged over 16
years.
in securing longer term suitable arrangements for care leavers. The financial
package offered to foster carers adheres to the no detriment principle, and it is
expected that numbers will gradually rise. Staying Put arrangements and
expectations are addressed in commissioning agreements with the large
percentage of looked after children placed with independent fostering agencies,
to ensure this option is open to all young people on the verge of leaving care.
requires further improvement. Training has been recently provided to social
workers and personal advisers. The needs assessments elements of pathway
plans are comprehensive, showing a good understanding of young peoples
histories, strengths, vulnerabilities and aspirations. The plans themselves,
however, are not always succinct, outcome focused or measurable and are not,
in the majority of those seen by inspectors, meaningful guides for young
people. Pathway plans should be more reliably updated at a minimum of every
six months.
training (NEET) is significantly higher than both statistical neighbour and
England averages. The gap with the non-looked after cohort of young people in
Cambridgeshire is very marked where a relatively low 4.3% are NEET. In March
average of 42%. Currently, 30 care leavers are young mothers. The proportion
of young people who are engaged in education, employment and training is
higher at age 21 and has increased in the last few months.


Cambridgeshire care leavers, and the imminent addition of a specialist EET
personal adviser post in the 18 to 25 service will strengthen help for young
people into education, training and employment.
apprenticeship programmes and Care 2 Work. The corporate parenting board
has a dedicated work stream on improving education, employment and training
levels but this is not yet delivering an improvement in performance. Tracking is
being developed to identify and target support to 16 to 18 year olds who are at
greater risk of disengaging from education, employment and training.
attainment levels of young people aged 16 and 17 years would both prepare for
the raising of the participation age in 2014/15 and could assist in reducing the
number of young people who disengage from employment, education and
training in the three years following their eighteenth birthdays. A relatively low
number of Cambridgeshire care leavers, currently 11, attend university.
help available from the looked after children nurse who regularly attends 18-25
team meetings. Care leavers are effectively supported and signposted to sexual
health and substance misuse services as required. The local authority has put in
place a plan to improve access to good quality emotional and mental health
services for care leavers. As part of this approach, there is increasing evidence
that clinicians are having a positive impact in facilitating transitions for 12 care
leavers to adult mental health services.
provision for young people living outside the authoritys boundaries. They are
auditing care leavers use of mental health services, to establish a baseline to
expand the range of provision moving forward.
support them effectively in developing independent living skills. The authority
acknowledges that there is more to do to ensure that all young people and care
leavers can get help with budgeting, cooking, maintaining a tenancy and other
aspects of preparing for independence. Older looked after young people
resident in the authoritys own childrens homes benefit from a social pedagogy
model which features independence preparation.
robust. Senior managers have set out clear strategies and plans for addressing
priorities. Relevant data are regularly scrutinised and targets set where
improvements are needed.


Leadership, management and governance
Key Judgement

Judgement Grade

Leadership, management and governance

Good

Cambridgeshire to be inadequate. This led to an improvement notice being
served by the Department for Education (DfE). By February 2013 the authority
had acted upon all of the recommendations of the Ofsted inspection and
developed a further improvement plan that extended beyond the requirements
of the improvement notice.
the opportunity to robustly challenge itself about the quality of its services and
front line practice for children and their families. It recognises the strengthens
within its service, in particular the targeted support to children and families, the
model of social work practice in Cambridgeshire which provides opportunities
for social workers and clinicians to work together to manage risk, the voice of
the children and young people captured in their assessments and plans, and
the significant contribution that children and young people, and care leavers
make to service delivery. Areas of weakness are known and robust action is
being taken to support service improvement including improving the quality of
case recording and achieving a more analytical approach to assessments and
care planning and ensuring a greater focus on the wider impact of equality and
diversity issues for children, young people and their families.
leaders of the council who are strong advocates for children and young people.
The Chief Executive has regular meetings with the Director of Childrens
Services (DCS). He has not however, undertaken a formal annual test of
assurance of the Director in his role leading both adults and childrens services
to formally assure himself of his capacity to focus effectively on childrens social
care.
strategic partners. As a result, senior leaders have a clear understanding of
operational practice, service demands and any gaps in provision. Positive and
effective strategic links have been made with Cafcass, the courts and the Local
Family Justice Board and with the Local Safeguarding Childrens Board. This
ensures robust governance of the wider role of the council in the planning and
delivery of services and helps to promote strategic synergy, holding partners to
account in safeguarding children and young people and driving forward
improvement.


strategic needs assessment and through effective partnership arrangements.
These include the Childrens Trust and voluntary and community sector
organisations. Priorities are translated well through strategic planning across
the partnership.
and internal review and challenge. A DCS from another authority, who is a
member of the Improvement Board, provides independent scrutiny of progress
against the plan and communicates directly with the DfE to triangulate findings
against the authoritys self-assessment. Two local peer reviews have provided
additional external challenge.
needs analysis. Contracts with providers meet stringent safeguarding standards,
are subject to ongoing scrutiny and are expected to demonstrate improving and
positive outcomes for children and young people. Service user feedback
influences strategic planning. A recent example has seen children and young
people actively involved in interviews with providers tendering for
accommodation contracts for care leavers. Children and young people told
inspectors that this made them feel valued by senior managers, and they
believe the authority respects that they are experts in their own situations.
followed the childs journey in their improvement planning. Early help has been
reconstructed and the co-location of locality teams based around clusters of
schools has been central to the success of prevention and early intervention.
Moving the Integrated Access Team into the multi-agency referral unit (MARU)
and appointing a senior health professional based in the MARU has brought
together key professionals to provide a more efficient risk assessment and
referral process. These changes have also improved information sharing
between partner agencies. This closer joint working ensures that there is an
appropriate response given to children and young people in need of help and
protection.
to reduce and understand the reasons for children going missing and being at
risk of child sexual exploitation. Multi-agency governance arrangements have
been developed to deliver a new domestic violence partnership, which is
improving the quality and reach of services to children and adults affected by
domestic violence.
taking forward priorities identified within the improvement plan. The strategy
includes plans to use the authoritys 30 agency social workers in a positive and
constructive way to back fill vacancies, cover maternity leave and support newly
qualified social workers until they have sufficient experience to carry more
complex cases and in ensuring that they have a safe place to start to practice.


are supported through a wide range of internal and external training
programmes. The authority has taken steps to retain experienced social
workers by ensuring that the salary scale of consultant social workers is on par
with team manager roles in recognition of them holding complex cases. In
addition, incremental pay increases are offered for newly qualified social
workers completing their post-qualifying year. This demonstrates the authoritys
on-going commitment to resourcing frontline services.
audits and thematic reviews to identify areas for improvement. Children and
young people are supported to feed back their experience of interventions
through NYAS and a childrens participation officer supports looked after
children to have a voice. The authority also offers opportunities for staff to give
feedback through their tell us website. This enables everyone in the
organisation to think about what they are doing, what impact this is having on
children, young people and their families and how things could be done better.
improvement in services. The rigorous culture of performance management has
demonstrated sustained improvement in the quality and frequency of visits to
children and 100% of child protection conferences are held within timescales.
Monthly performance information is set against challenging targets for
improvement in a way that is transparent and clearly shows where
improvement is taking place and where it is not.
oversight and support for work in most teams, including practice scrutiny by
senior managers who regularly chair legal and accommodation panels. This is
providing direct management scrutiny and shared decision making on high-risk,
complex work.
mostly effective and timely. Reflective discussion takes place largely within
social work units. There is success in the unit model in promoting reflective
discussion; however, this can divert managers from discussing childrens cases
within direct supervision with social workers. As a result, individual social
workers skills and development needs may not be sufficiently explored or
translated into individual professional development plans.
high expectations of their social workers in terms of performance and quality
standards. Social workers have told inspectors that they are proud to work in
Cambridgeshire because of the sustained support they receive from skilled,
experienced and accessible managers. This means social workers feel safe,
secured and valued, which allows good safeguarding social work to flourish.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is good
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
good.

Areas for improvement
understand performance across all services and to identify and challenge areas
where improvements in practice are required.
protection training undertaken by different professional groups across all
partner agencies.
approach to the provision of child protection medicals in acute cases.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
(LSCB) and the Local Authority are effective. The independent Chair of the
LSCB has regular meetings with the DCS, Chief Executive and the Lead Member
to ensure that the local authority is fulfilling its safeguarding duties.
Wellbeing Board but it is too early to evaluate their effectiveness. The Health
and Wellbeing Board has received the LSCB Annual Report.
presented the Annual Report to the board. The LSCB Chair is also a member of
the local authority Improvement Board.
and the LSCB receives regular reports from the Improvement Board about
progress being made against the improvement plan.
Strengthening Families approach to child protection conferences and oversight
of audits to support practice development. The Chair recognises that social
work practice requires improvement to be good and to ensure that all children
receive a quality service. The variability in the quality of some social work


practice remains a focus for the LSCB through practice scrutiny and training
opportunities for practitioners.
LSCB is a strong partnership and is well constituted with members at the
correct level of seniority to enable the key priorities identified in the annual
report and business plan to be driven forward. The contribution of lay members
is positive and they use their knowledge, skills and understanding of the local
communities to influence the priorities, seeking explanations and ensuring that
actions are followed through.
energetic and resourceful in their commitment and actions to improve practice.
Although it has been difficult to secure a consistent representative from
secondary schools, the Board has ensured that secondary schools are involved
and that information is shared appropriately through the education sub-group.
Partners financially support the work of the LSCB.
uses a range of multi-agency sub-committees and task and finish groups to
progress the work plan. Four Local Practice Groups provide a critical forum for
disseminating learning from audits and management reviews, providing training
and hearing directly from front line practitioners. This is an effective mechanism
for communication both to and from the Board. Practitioners across a range of
agencies who spoke with inspectors had a good understanding of the LSCBs
priorities and the learning from serious case reviews and audits.
the safety and protection of young people in the area and the LSCB has been
effective in determining priorities which are relevant to the local area and has
overseen progress as plans have been implemented. There is evidence of
positive impact from the Boards work in co-ordinating services in protecting
children from child sexual exploitation and domestic abuse
monitored by the Board. The LSCB Annual Report is compliant with statutory
requirements, assessing the performance and effectiveness of local services. It
contains evidence of challenge with examples of positive impact and areas
where work is still needed. It reports on achievements, challenges and progress
against strategic priorities. The report shows that the Board has scrutinised
pertinent areas, including private fostering, allegations against staff, child
sexual exploitation (CSE) and missing children. The report includes lessons from
serious case reviews and child death and management reviews. It also provides
evidence that the LSCB is fulfilling its statutory functions and having a positive
impact on improving safeguarding services to local children.
of the development of the Multi Agency Referral Unit (MARU) and the


implementation of the Model of Staged Intervention (MOSI) which clearly
outline thresholds for intervention. There is evidence that both are operating
effectively.
partnership. There is an embedded approach to both single and multi-agency
audits, and management reviews. The LSCB maintains a risk register to record
and monitor risks which have been identified by the partnership. The Chair has
effectively challenged the lack of strategic ownership of Domestic Abuse; with
the result that a Domestic Abuse governance board has been established which
is driving clear improvements, including a review of CAADA/DASH risk
assessments. This initiative has led to more families being helped, with a 30%
increase in referrals and the need to increase MARAC to fortnightly meetings,
for which the police have allocated additional resourcing.
monitors the effectiveness of Common Assessment Framework (CAF) outcomes.
effectiveness of front line practice to safeguard children. These have been
conducted to a good standard with multi-agency involvement in the process
and sound recommendations for improvement. Areas audited recently include
pre-mobile babies, sexual exploitation and domestic abuse. The findings from
audit work are used to inform practice and service developments.
shared learning across the partnership. 31 organisations carried out a section
and integrity. Analysis of each standard indicated high levels of compliance.
Areas for development were followed up by the LSCB business manager, with
action plans monitored by the Quality and Effectiveness sub-committee.
does not sufficiently represent all agencies contribution to safeguarding
practice and does not yet fully support an understanding of effective practice
across the whole partnership. For example, there has been no regular reporting
on attendance at child protection case conferences, which the Board identified
as an area for improvement for some agencies last November. Whilst there is
some progress in reporting parental attendance there is no understanding of
how well fathers in particular are engaging with the child protection process.
task and finish group chaired by the police has been particularly energetic and
resourceful in developing the interagency CSE strategy and action plan, using
learning and research from other areas. The strategy has focused on raising
awareness among young people, schools and professionals, for example
through creative media presented to all year nine pupils, including those in the


YOS (youth offending service), looked after children and those in other
education settings. The partnership has identified 80 children at risk of CSE,
and there is evidence of increased awareness amongst most groups of staff.
However, the group rightly believe that more children are at risk than have so
far been identified, and has plans to implement a more proactive approach. To
meet the anticipated increase in demand, the police have increased their
resourcing for CSE.
interviews are conducted for children who go missing from home or care.
Children who are missing out on education and those who are home educated
are also considered.
is robust in its examination of issues and its members are committed to
identifying learning in a way which positively engages front line staff and
ensures that changes are made to practice for the benefit of Cambridgeshire
children.
Ofsted resulting in three SCRs, with plans for a review arising from three recent
suicide cases. A range of methods have been used to review cases and these
are evaluated for their effectiveness. Helpful summaries have been produced
and disseminated, and staff are able to demonstrate how they have used this
to influence their practice.
attend the meetings involved. In response to local child deaths, the LSCB has
launched a safe sleeping campaign.
Board. The LSCB is considering ways in which it can strengthen its role in
relation to children in care and provide oversight of those children who live
outside the county.
is well attended by all agencies. There is a pool of multi-agency trainers and
training is accredited to ensure that it is of a good standard. LSCB trainers have
worked hard to ensure that the voice of children is heard through training and
this is a strong theme in the Boards work.
provided by pupils at a local senior school and which supports young people
who are bullied, including those who are self-harming. Young people provide
on-line mentoring on a monitored site and can refer to adult life mentors or
counsellors should concerns escalate. The Cyber Mentors presented to over 200
delegates at the recent LSCB conference.


need in Cambridgeshire or the training undertaken by different professional
groups across all partner agencies. Health agencies and schools, early years
and education settings are able to report on the level of training within their
workforce, but this does not yet extend to other agencies.
receive their core safeguarding training in multi-agency groups, although it is
delivered by an inter-professional group of trainers. This approach reduces the
opportunity for interagency understanding and learning.
uses evidence from delegates self-reports and the reports of their managers to
evidence improvement in knowledge, skills and confidence. The LSCB is
working with the NSPCC and the Tavistock clinic to develop its approach to
embedding learning. The LSCB has developed a learning and improvement
framework which, although helpful, does not yet use learning from complaints
to influence service developments.


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


