London Borough of Camden
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 September 2017 to 5 October 2017
Report published: 24 November 2017
Childrens services in Camden are good

Good

permanence

Good


Outstanding


Good


Outstanding

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Leaders and managers in Camden think deeply and creatively about how to
continually improve the lives of disadvantaged and vulnerable children and families
while ensuring effectively that children at risk are safeguarded. They do this through
thoughtful, highly evolved strategic partnerships that lead to effective and innovative
integrated services. Children and families receive good services across the entire
spectrum, from early help through to adoption and leaving care. The local authority
successfully helps a large number of families at an early stage of their difficulties,
safely reducing the need for many families to receive subsequent statutory
involvements. Childrens experiences of daily life are carefully portrayed through
strong direct work, ensuring that their voices are prominent and are not
overshadowed by the complex needs of their adult carers. A small number of
children become looked after too late, when intensive support has not improved their
circumstances. Senior managers plan to address this through a recent successful
innovation bid.
Childrens and young peoples participation in and influence of service development
are deeply ingrained. The young inspectors programme, Children in Care Council
(CiCC) and other forums demonstrate important improvements and changes to
services, directly attributable to young peoples proposals, supported by a highly
committed participation worker.
The director of childrens services (DCS) and the leadership team have formed a
dynamic, professionally fertile environment for social workers at all levels of
experience to engage with children and families. A learning culture is well supported
by the use of a systemic model of practice. This enables social workers and other
frontline workers to gradually increase their skills and knowledge through a
continuous training and development framework. Social workers enjoy working in
Camden and benefit from manageable caseloads and analytical, reflective group
supervision. This is underpinned by systemically trained senior practitioners, working
cohesively with highly skilled child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS)
staff who are integrally located across frontline services. This allows social workers to
explore and implement imaginative and bold approaches to assess and support
families. The widespread use of family group conferences is central to a highly
participative approach to engaging families, enabling the recovery of fragmented,
damaged relationships and building resilience in families, and this is at the heart of
the Camden model of social work.
Comprehensive, integrated early help and family support services provide families
with an accessible range of universal, targeted and specialist services. These are
strengthened by close partnerships with schools and health, alongside a range of
needs-led commissioned services. Thresholds for services are understood and
supported by consistent decision-making in an effective multi-agency safeguarding
hub (MASH). This enables swift access to early help services and prompt responses
to safeguarding concerns.


Children who go missing and are, or are likely to be, at risk of sexual exploitation,
serious youth violence or gang affiliation are protected through highly effective multiagency strategic arrangements. This results in flexible, nimble operational frontline
responses. Intelligence is quickly gathered and analysed, and the information is
shared across a broad spectrum of services. There is extensive awareness of multiple
and overlapping risks to all children, including domestic abuse, radicalisation, online
grooming and county lines drug running. Multi-agency panels stringently evaluate
and track the progress of interventions. The multi-agency public protection panel
(MAPPA) and the multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC) are both
effective, though not all recommendations transfer to childrens records.
The positive influence of the systemic approach is evident in consistently child-centred,
comprehensive and analytical assessments. Most child protection and children in need
plans are outcome focused, with specific and measurable goals, but the review of
previous actions and timescales is not always thorough for some children.
Children who become looked after in Camden are considerably older, on average,
than elsewhere. This means that their needs as teenagers are particularly complex,
creating additional challenges in finding suitable placements. Nevertheless, careful
planning is evident in finding the right placements, resulting in relatively few
unplanned placement moves. The use of the Public Law Outline and the subsequent
care order applications demonstrate timely and coherent preparation of evidence
that is well regarded by the family court. Detailed assessments inform return home
plans, meaning that very few children experience the instability of repeat episodes in
care. Advocacy and independent visitor services for children looked after require
strengthening, and initial health assessments for some children take too long. The
services for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children and the large number of
refugee families that are hosted by Camden are of the highest calibre.
Most relevant children are provided with permanent placements promptly, and these
children are closely tracked, including those awaiting an adoptive placement.
Adoption performance is outstanding, although further work is required to establish
foster to adopt placements in planning and practice.
Services to care leavers are good. They live in safe, good-quality accommodation and
value highly the support from their social workers and personal advisers. They are
well supported towards independent living and to engage in education, employment
and training. A significant percentage of care leavers attend university.
The quality of frontline practice is regularly assured by established auditing work,
leading to targeted learning and improvement. This work is led by a longstanding and
highly skilled principal social worker. The detail of case recording and management
oversight does not always capture the frequent reflective discussions and high-quality
direct work, but social workers prioritise contact time with families. More narrative
analysis of data and regular monitoring of the timeliness of visits to children would
further enhance the analysis of trends in an effective performance framework.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority does not operate any childrens homes.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in April
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
April 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since February 2014.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services and housing support.
 The chief executive has been in post since January 2012.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since
January 2011.
 The local authority uses a systemic model of social work.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 48,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live in
Camden. This is 19% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 31% of the local authoritys children are living in low income
families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:


in primary schools is 27% (the national average is 15%)



in secondary schools is 26% (the national average is 13%).

 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 50% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British (18%) and Black or Black British (15%).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:


in primary schools is 61% (the national average is 20%)

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.




in secondary schools is 51% (the national average is 16%). (Source: LAIS)

Child protection in this area
 At 11 September 2017, 1,716 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a slight reduction
from 1,756 at 31 March 2017.
 At 11 September 2017, 248 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 52 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 255
(55 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 11 September 2017, no children were living in a privately arranged fostering
placement.
 In the two years before the inspection, four serious incident notifications have
been submitted to Ofsted and no serious case reviews have been undertaken.
 There are two serious case reviews ongoing at the time of this inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 11 September 2017, 194 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 41 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 200 (42 per





area



five live in residential special schools,3 all of whom live out of the authority
area






five live with parents




 In the last 12 months:




there have been nine adoptions



nine children became the subject of special guardianship orders



be looked after



no children and young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to
independent living



no children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in
houses in multiple occupation.

These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Recommendations

The local authority should carefully and continually evaluate whether service
provision for a small minority of children receiving statutory social work
support is improving their adverse circumstances and reducing risks
sufficiently quickly. Decisive management steps to consider the issue of care
proceedings should be taken, where this is not demonstrated.


Ensure that records of frontline management oversight and case directions
are timely and of a consistently high quality.


Ensure that performance information includes regular monitoring of the
timeliness of visits to children who are the subject of early help referrals and
child in need plans.


Ensure that children, including those who are looked after, and their parents
who receive social work services are able to readily access independent
advocacy support.


Ensure that all children who are looked after have the opportunity to access
an independent visitor if they wish.


Ensure that managers and social workers prioritise conducting initial health
assessments for children who become looked after, so that childrens health
needs are understood and addressed at an earlier stage.


Ensure that all care leavers are clear about their own health histories, and are
also aware of any family health issues that may affect them as they go
through life.


Strengthen communication between the multi-agency public protection panel
(MAPPA) and the multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC) and
social work teams, to ensure that relevant recommendations and actions from
the panels are recorded and pursued.


Summary for children and young people
 Children and their families are helped before problems become too bad, through
very good early help services.
 For a small number of children, the help that is provided does not always resolve
their family difficulties, and the local authority waits too long to take them into
care.
 A number of agencies and services in Camden, led by the local authority and the
police, work really well together to protect children from harm. This includes
complicated risks such as gangs, knife crime, drugs and sexual exploitation.
 Social workers have time to spend with children. They do some very good work
with children to understand their lives, and with their parents and carers to help
to improve things at home. This allows children to focus on school, to enjoy their
lives at home and to feel safe.
 The work of the Children in Care Council and young inspectors is very good, and
this has changed the way that some things are done. Managers in Camden work
really hard to listen to and involve children in decisions about them.
 The local authority should provide more independent help and advice for the
children whom they look after to improve this work even more.
 Managers have worked well to reduce the number of changes in social workers
that children have. Social workers in Camden are highly qualified, experienced,
very well trained and supported. This attracts good social workers who want to
work there, meaning that children and families receive highly skilled help.
 Camden has very good services for the large number of refugee families that it
supports and unaccompanied asylum-seeking children. This means that they are
given the right support not just when they arrive but for a long time afterwards,
until they feel more settled and comfortable.
 Camden pays close attention to older children needing help, including care
leavers, disabled young people and those with mental health problems, before
they reach their 18th birthdays. This means that young people continue to
receive effective help after they turn 18.
 Senior managers know what they need to do to help more children and their
families, and they do this through careful research and planning. This means that
the help provided is continually improving and uses the best evidence of what
works well.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Children in Camden have easy access to good-quality universal and targeted
services. These services are strengthened by effective partnerships, enabling
children to quickly receive the right services to meet their needs, avoiding an
escalation of difficulties from early help to statutory services.
The MASH responds effectively to all contacts and referrals. Actions taken to
safeguard children are timely and appropriate.
Children are regularly seen by social workers, who consistently try to come to
know them well. Some non-urgent visits to children do not always take place
within the local authoritys expected timescales.
Assessments, including early help assessments and plans, are comprehensive and
capture childrens views well, leading to effective help and support. Direct work
with children is thoughtful, using a range of tools and methods. This ensures that
their views are clearly evident in assessments and plans.
Disabled children and those with complex health needs are well supported,
alongside their brothers and sisters, through high-quality services. Effective social
work practice is fortified by increasingly integrated partnership working. Tenacious
collaborative work ensures that children are safeguarded, when necessary, and
the quality of their lives improved.
Highly developed partnership working enables children who are subjects of child in
need or child protection plans to obtain help and support from schools, health
services and other professionals. Some child in need and core group meetings do
not always take place at the required frequency, meaning that the progress of
agreed actions for these children can be unclear. Independent advocacy support is
not used often enough to support children or parents in meetings.
Children who go missing and are exposed to risks of child sexual exploitation
receive highly effective responses. Social workers make determined efforts to
engage and build positive relationships with them. A continuum of multi-agency
interventions and services actively engages with and addresses risks for these
children and their families, including those at risk of gang affiliation.
The multi-agency public protection panel (MAPPA) and the multi-agency risk
assessment conference (MARAC) multi-agency forums are used effectively to
discuss risks to children. Recommendations do not always transfer to childrens
records, although this does not delay implementation.


Management direction and social work intervention for children is effective.
However, the reasons for decisions and challenge regarding incomplete work are
not always recorded in case files to provide a clear audit trail of decision-making.
Inspection findings

Vulnerable children and families in Camden benefit from a broad spectrum of
services that offer a diverse network of help and support, improving their
circumstances. Highly developed partnership arrangements and shared
priorities enable children and their families to access the right help at the
right time. The local authoritys enhanced universal services offer,
prominently featuring schools and health services, supports children
effectively within their own families and networks. When more help is
required, an extensive range of early help and family support services
complement and broaden the provision of universal services. Consequently,
many childrens circumstances improve, avoiding the need for statutory
interventions.


An integrated MASH provides an accessible front door to all requests for help
and support from families and partners. The service facilitates families and
professionals to make referrals, reflecting the councils no wrong door
principle. Referrals for early help and targeted support receive the same level
of attention and management oversight as referrals for safeguarding services.
This ensures early and easy access for children and their families to the right
level of support.


Partners complete common assessment framework (CAFs) and e-CAF
documentation to make referrals requesting services for children to the MASH.
Those that result in early help assessments undertaken by the early help and
family support teams are of a high quality. These assessments are
comprehensive, focusing on the needs of each individual child, while capturing
the circumstances of the whole family. Childrens views are clearly evident,
providing important insights into their lived experiences, strengths and
worries. This enables professionals to tailor and provide support services that
address childrens needs. Despite the high quality of these early help
assessments, children are not always seen quickly enough. In a limited
number of cases, there are delays in commencing assessments. While some
assessments take too long to complete, help for children and their families is
not delayed.


Workers in the MASH ensure timely and proportionate responses to risk and
childrens identified needs. Thresholds for intervention are balanced and well
understood by partners. If professionals are unclear about the
appropriateness of potential referrals, they can access helpful telephone
advice from qualified social workers in the MASH. Social workers carefully
consider parental consent in their initial management of referrals, unless there
are overriding safeguarding issues. Well-established integrated partnerships in


the MASH cohesively manage risks, ensuring that action is quickly taken to
safeguard and protect children. Management oversight in the MASH is highly
visible, and decisions are based on careful consideration of all available
information, ensuring that childrens immediate safety is prioritised.
Management decisions are clearly recorded in case records.

Experienced, highly qualified emergency duty social work practitioners provide
an effective, responsive out-of-hours service for children, adults and families.
They respond quickly to emergencies, liaising effectively with other out-ofhours services. Childrens case records clearly reflect the involvement of the
emergency duty team, and follow-up actions are responded to appropriately
in the MASH or social work teams on the next working day.


Children who require immediate protection receive urgent attention. Strategy
discussions are held promptly, usually within hours of a referral, but these are
largely telephone discussions. Review strategy meetings are often convened,
involving the wider partnership and enabling a fuller review of the risks and
follow up of actions from the initial telephone discussion. Decisions to start
child protection enquiries are proportionate, and social workers are
immediately allocated to see children quickly.


Most childrens social work assessments are timely, comprehensive and
analytical. They incorporate family histories and consider cultural and diversity
issues, leading to focused help and interventions. Children are the primary
focus of assessments, and careful direct work clearly identifies their
experiences and views. Respectful and sensitive relationships with parents,
including fathers, enable social workers to write rounded assessments, which
may include dissenting views, while remaining child focused. Decisions made
following assessments, either to escalate from child in need plans to initial
child protection conferences or to step down to early help services, are
balanced and appropriate. However, while management directions are soundly
based, the supporting rationale for decisions is not always clearly evident in
childrens case records.


Social workers conduct initial urgent visits to see children. Less urgent visits,
for some children, do not consistently meet the local authority expected
timescales. While this does not have a negative impact on progressing
childrens assessments, managers are closely monitoring performance, and
signs of improvement are emerging.


The co-location and increasing integration of services with health and CAMHS
further strengthen the effectiveness of social work responses to disabled
children and young people. The needs of their brothers and sisters are also
capably considered. Comprehensive, tripartite-funded support arrangements
provide flexible packages of care to meet complex needs, improving the
quality of childrens lives. Social work is of a consistently high standard, fully
meeting relevant responsibilities and requirements, whether disabled children


are supported under early help, child in need, child protection or looked after
children arrangements. Social workers actively advocate on childrens behalf,
making determined efforts to understand the experiences of children who
have limited or no verbal communication. Services support disabled young
people up to the age of 25 years, and are highly effective in ensuring that
transitions to adult services take place at a time that is right for the individual
young people.

Child protection conferences are well managed, and are well attended by
most partner agencies. Conference chairs are considerate and careful in
supporting children and parents attending the meetings, helping them to
participate more widely and understand the process. A visual tool used during
conferences helps families to understand the developing analysis of strengths,
risks, grey areas and decision-making. Decisions made in child protection
conferences are well considered, and the chairs ensure that professionals are
fully engaged in forming or reviewing protection plans. Not all child protection
review conferences consistently evaluate whether childrens plans are having
sufficient impact on improving their circumstances. In a few conferences,
there was little evidence of challenge when the work stipulated in the plans
was not completed. This means that there is slower progress in improving the
circumstances of children who have been on child protection plans for over a
year.


The majority of plans to support children under child protection and child in
need arrangements are of a good quality. Most focus appropriately on the
needs of children, demonstrating determined efforts to involve absent or nonresident fathers. Strong partnership engagement in plans is evident, and
families are offered support and challenge by a large range of targeted family
support services. Family group conferences (FGC) are used extensively and
skilfully, complementing plans and drawing in support for children and their
carers from their extended family, friendship and community networks. An
increasingly restorative approach is evident in these meetings, repairing
damaged or fractured relationships, thereby adding resilience to struggling
families. Dove FGCs are being introduced to support children living in families
where there has been domestic abuse. This has resulted in no domestic abuse
incidents recurring following these restorative meetings.


Children benefit from initial child in need meetings, chaired by an independent
reviewing officer or senior practitioner, to help to develop their plans and
provide additional management oversight. However, the timescales of some
actions are too vague, and their follow up at subsequent child in need and
child protection core group meetings is not always clearly evident as minutes
are not consistently uploaded to childrens records. When plans are not
working effectively or change is not happening quickly enough for children,
thinking together meetings are used to consider alternative plans to meet
childrens needs.



Children and parents are supported to give their views throughout the child
protection process, and a few have the benefit of advocacy support. However,
advocacy support for parents and children subject to child protection plans is
underdeveloped and not all families have the opportunity to benefit from this
service. Too few children under 16 years of age take up the support service
offered by the council.


Social workers are proactive, alongside a range of other partner agencies, in
responding to risks to children arising as a result of domestic abuse, parental
mental health and substance misuse within households. Social workers work
hard to understand childrens experiences and to assess the impact of their
parents or other adults behaviours. Proportionate action is taken to manage
and reduce risks. An extensive range of community support services, including
adult services, address parental behaviours, illnesses and addictions. This
allows many children to live safer and more fulfilling lives in their family
homes.


Common associations and factors seen across gang memberships, drug
misuse, radicalisation, serious youth violence, and child sexual exploitation
and going missing are understood well in a constructive, multi-agency
environment. Emerging information and intelligence is continually and quickly
evaluated. Partners, led by the expertise and guidance of the police and local
authority, recognise that the victim and offender status of these young people
are often entwined. This mature approach has led to the development of a
continuum of multi-agency interventions, adapted to and targeted at the
particular profiles and risks of young people identified, and extends to
effective cross-borough coordination of intelligence. Child sexual exploitation
screening tools are used effectively and risks are recognised. Strategy
meetings about child sexual exploitation coordinate strong partnership work
and prioritise well-formulated safety plans. More serious concerns for
childrens safety are promptly escalated for regular senior management review
and direction.


Appropriate referrals are made to a multi-agency sexual exploitation panel
which closely scrutinises and actively reviews the impact of multi-agency plans
to reduce risks to young people experiencing, or at high risk of, sexual
exploitation. Return home interviews are offered to all young people who go
missing. Persistent efforts are made to speak to these young people, and a
variety of engagement approaches are used to secure a meaningful
conversation. Some young people, despite the best efforts of agencies,
decline return home interviews. Where undertaken, return interview reports
are highly informative, giving a clear picture of the childs circumstances while
missing and their potential exposure to multiple risks. Swift plans are devised
and actions pursued to reduce risks for the majority of these children. For a
minority of children at high risk of sexual exploitation and associated risks,
stringent efforts to engage and support them are not always successful and,


for this small number of young people, care proceedings should have been
considered sooner.

Parents who wish to educate their children at home are able to access
appropriate support to provide their children with a suitable education. Efforts
to ensure that children are safe are pursued and managed appropriately.


The missing education team uses well-established links with local partners,
including other local authorities, general practitioners, housing services,
schools and admission teams, to identify children who are not on a school roll.
Where such children are identified, appropriate contact with parents is
initiated to work with them to ensure that children are enrolled at school.
Where cases remain unresolved, they are passed to the MASH for escalation.
Appropriate provision is provided for permanently excluded pupils.


The local authority appropriately discharges duties to privately fostered
children, undertaking assessments and providing advice and information to
partners and family members. At the time of the inspection, no children were
in private fostering arrangements. Under the close oversight of the Camden
Safeguarding Childrens Board (CSCB), the local authority continues to
promote targeted, widespread and regular awareness-raising activities and
campaigns to encourage appropriate notifications.


Designated officer arrangements ensure that all allegations and concerns
about adults working or in contact with children are managed carefully,
effectively and quickly. Joint-working arrangements with the police, schools
and other agencies are well established and there is widespread
understanding of the role throughout Camden agencies. Appropriate scrutiny
and oversight are undertaken by the LSCB.


Assessments undertaken for young people aged 16 and 17 presenting as
homeless are timely and, when necessary, emergency accommodation is
provided. Support and mediation services work intensively with young people
and their families, successfully supporting many safe and enduring returns to
family homes. For those young people for whom returning home is not
feasible, appropriate accommodation is offered, under section 17 or section


MAPPA and MARAC are effective forums for managing the significant risks to
children presented by domestic abuse and serious offending committed by
young people and adults. Relevant agencies work effectively together,
through sharing information and devising risk and support management plans.
Whole-family working is evident, with risks of harm to brothers and sisters
and other family members considered. Information exchange between social
work teams is more structured and consistent for MARAC than for MAPPA.
However, both forums should strengthen systems to ensure that information,
actions and decisions from the panels are recorded in social work records and
promptly followed up, as necessary.



The complexity of work and additional risk considerations to children extend
to those when concerns of radicalisation, modern slavery and female genital
mutilation are identified. Social workers receive training and support that
enable them to be knowledgeable, confident and skilled in working with
children with high-level risks to their safety and welfare. The identification and
support offered to children and their families faced with risks of forced
marriage or female genital mutilation are timely and effective in substantially
reducing risks.


Strong strategic partnerships identify risks and gather intelligence to identify
young people who may be linked to or at risk of radicalisation. The Channel
panel considers a wide range of additional, interlocking risks to children,
including domestic abuse and online grooming, with a wider community
awareness. Trained social workers are well supported by a Prevent duty
coordinator. They work skilfully and confidently in partnership with agencies
to assess risk and support families. Camden has been successful in a Home
Office innovation funding bid for a project to train voluntary sector
professionals to work with parents on safer internet use at home, to identify
risks of online radicalisation.


Children and their families who arrive as refugees receive a sensitive, quick
and effective response to meet their needs. They are promptly supported with
their practical and emotional needs, and children receive health, education
and therapeutic support to begin their recovery.


The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Good

Summary
Children looked after in Camden benefit from a consistently high-quality service.
While social workers are determined to achieve the best outcomes for the children
in their care and most children make good progress, not enough children have the
opportunity to access advocacy and independent visitors.
Camdens strong resolve to avoid children entering public care ensures that most
children become looked after only when it is in their best interests, although a
small minority of children come into care too late. Children return home only when
careful and thorough work has secured the necessary changes. Where a child is
unable to return home, there is a clear focus on the actions necessary to achieve
permanent living arrangements.
Assessments to identify childrens needs are of the highest quality, and almost all
children live in good, stable homes that meet their individual needs. Children living
in Camden access comprehensive health services, although too few children
receive timely initial assessments of their health needs.
Children who live outside Camden continue to receive appropriate healthcare and
other services, and move to good schools that meet their needs effectively.
Risks for children who experience child sexual exploitation or gang activity or who
go missing are recognised and mitigated by effective whole-system activity.
Senior managers and council leaders genuinely care about the children whom they
look after. The CiCC and young inspectors are influential in improving and
designing services.
Teachers, social workers and virtual school staff ensure that children continue in
education and training when they leave school. Schools report positive
relationships with the virtual school and how its support helps them to improve
outcomes for children. However, persistent school absence remains too high and
attainment is variable.
Adoption services are strong. Children from a diverse range of backgrounds
achieve permanence quickly. Matching is effective, and both children and their
adoptive families are well prepared for their transition. Adopters are extremely
positive about the level of support that they receive throughout their adoption
journeys.
Care leavers live in safe and secure accommodation, and most participate in
education and employment. Consequently, a large majority make a successful
transition to adulthood. However, a minority do not engage in education or
employment and few are helped to understand their family health history, which
may prevent them from receiving appropriate services as they go through life.


Inspection findings

Children become looked after only when it is in their best interests. Children
remain in their families for as long as it is safe to do so, because of the local
authoritys determination to avoid care until all other options have been
carefully analysed and exhausted. Decisions to look after children arise from
analytical assessments which take into account historical and current risks,
protective factors and the likelihood of positive change. Family group
conferences and comprehensive viability assessments take place at the
earliest stage, informing well-considered decisions about whether children can
safely live with extended family members.


Social workers and managers use reflective thinking together discussions to
understand childrens needs so that children receive the best help. Managers
oversee detailed care pathways planning, which often features bold and
skilled approaches. Although comprehensive, this approach is not always
sufficiently decisive for a few children, and a small minority of children have
not come into care quickly enough. This means that they have remained in
emotionally neglectful circumstances longer than necessary. Managers have
recognised this, and a recent successful innovation funding bid will focus on
the impact of interventions for children in need aged 10 to 13 years of age to
help to identify those at risk neglect earlier, but this is not yet in place.


Pre-proceedings work with families is effective and timely, featuring meetings
with parents that clearly set out the changes that are required. Families are
encouraged and receive help to access legal advice. Care proceedings are
progressed within the 26-week threshold. Camden has a solid reputation with
both the Child and Family Court Advisory and Support Service and the
judiciary for producing timely and coherent court work. This ensures that
children achieve permanency as quickly as possible.


Children return home only when it is safe to do so, after purposeful direct
work has achieved the necessary changes. Following a childs return home,
the child and family continue to receive careful support. Social workers reduce
the level of intervention only when careful and considered assessment
evidences that positive change is firmly rooted. For this reason, fewer children
are experiencing the instability of repeat episodes in care.


Plans to find permanent homes for children are closely tracked. Regular
permanence planning meetings take place, ensuring a clear focus on the
actions necessary to achieve permanence. In a small number of cases, greater
clarity relating to the timescales for completion of actions would enable even
tighter tracking of planning meeting outcomes.


Tenacious and enthusiastic social workers visit children regularly and talk with
them about what is happening in their lives, so that children understand their


circumstances and the plans for their future. Well-recorded summaries clearly
detail the purpose of the visits, the impact of direct work and childrens
wishes and feelings. Social workers listen carefully to children and know them
well. Almost every child spoken to during the inspection was complimentary
about the quality of relationship that they have with their current social
worker. Camden has changed the structure of services for children looked
after because of what children have told them, and this means that children
keep the same social worker for longer.

Advocacy services are available for children to access by themselves. Many
children are aware that advocacy is available and find it helpful when they use
it. However, not all children are aware of it, and managers do not promote
advocacy provision effectively across the service. Only 23 children looked after
accessed advocacy services last year. More work is also needed to ensure that
all children looked after understand their rights and entitlements, and have
access to independent help whenever they have concerns.


Children looked after do not have independent visitors and, although this
service is commissioned as required, it is not a readily available or wellestablished offer for children. Easier access to independent visitors would
further enhance the experiences of many children looked after in Camden.


Work to reduce the risks to children and young people who go missing, are
sexually or gang exploited or vulnerable to multiple harm is highly effective.
Efficient, well-coordinated and integrated whole-system activity with the
police, health and other partners across the local authority demonstrates a
confident and knowledgeable response to mitigating risks. Although work with
this group of complex and more independent older children is not always able
to remove risk altogether, the persistence and intensity of efforts send a clear
and important message to them that their social workers care about what
happens to them. Return home interviews are exceptionally detailed and, by
listening carefully to children, they accurately identify and aid an
understanding of the reasons why children go missing and the level and type
of risks that they encounter.


The emotional and physical health needs of children looked after are
monitored and overseen effectively by a dedicated health team. Healthcare
provision in Camden is extensive and well integrated. A comprehensive array
of easily accessible services meets the needs of children, including the
specialist needs of children who are unaccompanied minors. A comparatively
large population of unaccompanied minors benefit from an assessment by a
psychotherapist at their initial health assessment, which identifies trauma at
the earliest opportunity. A small team of CAMHS staff is co-located with the
children looked after, care leavers and fostering and adoption teams. A
complex needs service maintains scrupulous oversight of assessments and
ensures the right placements for disabled children who are looked after.



However, the poor timeliness of initial health assessments is a continuing and
long-standing concern. Social workers do not always prioritise referrals to the
looked after children health service, and they are slow to obtain the necessary
consent from parents. A well-developed and effective pathway enables
unaccompanied minors and asylum seeking families to quickly access a wide
range of emotional and physical health services. A health improvement
practitioner tracks all referrals and is proactive in chasing up a significant
number of young people who miss appointments.


Teachers, social workers and virtual school staff work well to promote the
progress of all children looked after. The consequence of the relatively high
numbers of older children becoming looked after is that some have significant
barriers to learning. Despite subsequent relentless work by professionals, their
attainment is variable. The rate of persistent school absence remains too high,
and this is a priority of the virtual schools current work.


Workers consider carefully the educational needs of children when they enter
care, particularly when they move from primary to secondary school or have a
change of placement that makes it difficult for them to remain in their current
school. When these circumstances arise, staff ensure that children are placed
in a good or outstanding school that can cater for their particular needs.


Staff compile and review personal educational plans at appropriate intervals.
However, the quality of these is mixed. Although there are a number of
extremely thorough examples that consider childrens needs carefully, others
lack clear evidence of the views of children, have insufficient analysis of their
needs or lack clear action plans with measurable outcomes. Although the
virtual school allocates pupil premium plus funding appropriately, staff do not
always fully evaluate its impact.


Virtual school staff provide well-regarded training, advice and guidance for
school staff on such topics as attachment theory. They also provide termly
networking meetings for designated teachers and a half-termly bulletin
providing useful information that helps teachers to support children looked
after. This supports effective communication between professionals and
ensures that they have a clear and consistent focus on improvement in
childrens outcomes.


Most children looked after continue in education and training until they are at
least 18. Staff identify young people who are at risk of dropping out of
education as they leave school. They meet frequently to consider how they
can best support these young people to remain in education, training or
employment. They produce clear action plans, monitor their impact and
intervene quickly when problems arise.


The voices of the CiCC and young inspectors are strong and influential in the
local authority. The perspectives of children looked after are given prominence


and are brought to life in corporate parenting board meetings and other
council forums. Children are rightly proud of the impact that they have had,
and continue to exert, in the design, review and planning of services. They
value highly the relationships that they have with senior managers and
members, and regard Camden as an active, responsive and committed
corporate parent.

The vast majority of children live in suitable, stable homes that meet their
individual needs well. This includes a sizeable and increasing number of
unaccompanied minors, older children with high levels of vulnerability and
some young people who pose a risk to others. Older teenage children
continue to benefit from a young peoples pathway, which keeps the majority
of children living in the local authority or reasonably close to Camden in
adjacent boroughs. They are able to continue easily accessing the consistently
good services provided by Camden social workers and partners. Children
receive good support to manage placement moves when they are
unavoidable.


Children who move out of the local authority area receive the same support as
those moving school within the borough. On the rare occasions when staff
cannot immediately secure a school place, the virtual school provides interim
individual tuition. Social workers visit children looked after regularly and
ensure that they continue accessing the services that they need. The CAMHS
and looked after childrens health teams maintain close oversight of Camden
children, ensuring that the small minority of children living more than 20 miles
away continue to have their physical and emotional health needs met.


Children have carefully assessed and well-supervised contact with their
families. These arrangements provide children with the best possible chance
of maintaining important relationships. When sustaining these relationships is
not in their best interests, social workers help children to understand why.


The quality of childrens care plans is consistently good, and independent
reviewing officers (IROs) regularly and effectively review them. Timely and
specific actions ensure that progress for children is measured, and slow
progress is recognised and challenged. IROs are co-located with the looked
after children teams, which facilitates ongoing informal information exchange
and oversight. Childrens plans change when their circumstances alter, and
their carefully recorded diverse identity profiles are well considered through
careful planning and matching.


Although IROs have realistic numbers of children on their caseloads, the CiCC
was unaware that children could speak to IROs outside the formal review
process. There is more work to be done to raise the profile of the IRO role
with all children looked after.


The local authority is working hard, through targeted advertising and
recruitment activity, to increase the number of foster placements for children,


although the impact is modest. A specialist foster carers scheme supports
children with additional support needs, but there has been no increase in the
number of foster placements over the past two years. Foster carers speak
very positively about the service that they receive from the well-managed
fostering service. Foster carers particularly cite the availability and quality of
support that they receive from their social workers. A thorough training offer
is available, and a large number of carers complete the training, support and
development standards programme in their first year of fostering. Foster
carers and social workers understand delegated authority well. Clear
delegated authority agreements are in place which enable foster carers to
make important, routine day-to-day decisions for children placed with them.

Children receive help to live in good-quality homes with carers who can meet
their needs. The local authority recognises that this is a continual challenge,
particularly to identify homes for children with very complex needs. There is
intensive and committed work by staff to find the right homes for children.
For example, a specialist foster carer is available for children at risk of sexual
exploitation. A further example of effective corporate parenting is the local
authority allocating 10 larger, two- to four-bedroom properties for fostering
households. Camden foster carers also receive a council tax exemption, which
has increased the number of enquiries about fostering.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is Outstanding

Camden demonstrates a sense of urgency in its adoption work. Adoption is
considered for all children who are thought to be unable to return to their
birth parents. The local authority has recognised the importance of ensuring
that adoption, when appropriate, happens at the earliest opportunity and
achieves it for most children. Any changes of plan away from adoption are the
result of either court decisions or well-evidenced analytical assessments based
on changes of circumstances.


Careful management oversight of childrens progress towards adoption or
other permanent placements is achieved through a range of effective
processes, including trackers and effective caseload management. A clear
understanding of childrens need for timely permanence is embedded in
service provision. An increasing number of special guardianship orders means
that permanence is appropriately achieved for some children through this
route. Thorough, timely, analytical assessments ensure that the capacity of
special guardianship carers to provide permanence for children is well
understood and that any risks are clearly identified. Support plans are
thorough, and the needs of carers and children are well met through various
means of provision.



Children in Camden receive a highly effective service from a well-established
and experienced team of social workers, led by committed and knowledgeable
managers. Social workers know their children well and closely track those
awaiting permanence. Early planning and permanence meetings involve both
childrens social workers and adoption social workers, where information is
shared about childrens needs and individual circumstances. As a result, the
adoption team is fully informed about children for whom the plan may be
adoption. The adoption team is able to evaluate potential matches at an early
stage, considering both approved adopters and those being assessed.


All children waiting for adoption have potential links with adopters or are the
subject of rigorous family-finding activity. Information is shared promptly
across the north London adoption consortium, in which proactive family
finding occurs. In some cases, this is in advance of placement orders being
secured. These proactive efforts, together with good use of national links,
help to ensure that permanence is quickly achieved for children in Camden.
There is appropriate early consideration of in-house adopters, while
understanding that a suitable match may not be available, taking into account
the particular needs of children. Family finders are tenacious and,
consequently, over the past two years, the local authority has been successful
in achieving adoption for brothers and sisters together, and for children from
Black and Mixed heritage backgrounds. A determined focus on improving
timescales is leading to children being placed with their adoptive families more
promptly. The time taken between a child entering care and moving in with
their adopters has shown a significant recent improvement.


Parallel planning routinely takes place to minimise delay. Foster to adopt
arrangements are in place, and two children in the past two years have been
placed through this pathway. Foster to adopt is routinely discussed with
prospective adopters. Inspectors saw examples where foster to adopt
placements were considered for children. However, the local authority
recognises the need to further develop foster to adopt arrangements to
ensure that the potential benefits for children are more widely understood.


Child permanence reports are of a consistently high standard. They are
comprehensive and analytical, describing clearly why children are not able to
live with their birth parents. They demonstrate a thorough understanding of
childrens lived experiences and their specific needs in relation to their age,
health, development, any disability and their identity. This helps to achieve
successful matches with potential adopters.


Assessments to consider whether brothers and sisters should be adopted
together are of a good quality. The rationale for decisions about children
being separated or staying together is well founded. The views of adults who
know children well are capably illustrated.


Children are prepared sensitively and thoroughly for adoption through
gradual, phased introductions, proceeding at their pace. Life-story work is of a


high quality. It is clear, colourful and jargon free, enhanced by the use of
childrens own words and drawings. In a small number, more information
explaining why children could not live with their birth parents would help
childrens understanding. Social workers are skilled in undertaking direct work
with children, helping them to understand their histories and enabling them to
establish attachments to their new families. This work helps most children to
settle quickly. Selection meetings demonstrate vigorous oversight to evaluate
whether potential adopters can meet the needs of children. Foster carers
assist with introductions, helping children who are adopted to form
attachments to their new parents. Effective matching preparation and support
have contributed to stable adoptive placements. There have been no
placement breakdowns, either before or after adoption orders have been
granted, for the past two years.

Assessments of potential adopters, while small in number, are thorough and
timely, enabling the adoption panel and agency decision maker (ADM) to
make well-informed recommendations and decisions about approval. When
assessments are delayed, the reasons are carefully recorded. The rationale for
ADM decisions is very detailed, including clear analyses of why adoption is the
right permanence plan for children. Adopters speak very positively about their
experience of assessments and the training provided, giving them confidence
and a thorough understanding of the needs of children with adoption plans.
Adopters from a wide range of backgrounds are approved, reflecting
appropriately the diverse communities in Camden.


An experienced, knowledgeable panel chair with a professional background in
adoption work chairs the adoption panel. Panel members closely examine
reports prior to meetings, devising incisive and pertinent questions for social
workers and potential adopters concerning matches and approvals. Panel
minutes evidence regular scrutiny and challenge. The panel comprises an
experienced blend of professional and lay members. All panel members are
appraised annually by the adoption panel chair, and attend training and
development events.


Children benefit from meaningful contact with those important to them.
Assessments clearly identify what contact, and with whom, is in childrens
best interests following their adoption. Both direct and indirect contact is
effectively supported. Consequently, children benefit from maintaining contact
with members of their birth families when appropriate, and from receiving
letters that will help them to understand their identities as they grow up.


Later-life letters are comprehensive and sensitively written to help children to
understand how and why they were adopted. They are compassionate,
sympathetic, yet realistic accounts of the experiences and limitations of
childrens birth parents. Adopters report that they receive later-life letters and
life-story books promptly after children come to live with them, meaning that
they are prepared for any questions that children may have about their


journey to adoption. Birth parents are actively encouraged to access
counselling and support through the consortium arrangements. Social workers
in the adoption team help birth parents to write letters to children, and offer
them support when they receive letters from adoptive parents.

A substantial range of effective adoption support services are available.
Arrangements to support children and adopters before and after adoption are
timely and responsive. Adoption support assessments identify individual
needs, and design customised support packages. Adopters speak highly about
the support that they receive from their social workers throughout their
adoption journeys. A particular strength identified by adopters is the
availability of the agency medical adviser to help them to understand the
health histories of children and their birth parents. Good use is made of the
adoption support fund and a significant number of applications have been
made, resulting in families receiving the specialist support that they need.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good

Local authority staff work hard to remain in contact with care leavers and,
consequently, are in touch with almost all of them. For the very few with
whom they have lost touch, workers are persistent in their attempts to reestablish contact.


Workers actively encourage young people to remain looked after until it is
appropriate for them to become more independent. As a result, only nine of
number of young people remain with their foster carers in staying put
placements. However, this option is not available for the comparatively larger
number of young people in Camden who are in residential placements when
they become 18 years of age. There have been no recent cases of homeless
independently, workers assess their readiness and discuss options with them.


The vast majority of young people who move into independent or semiindependent accommodation live in suitable and safe properties. The local
authority provides access to a good range of supported accommodation and
gives assistance to young people living in private housing. Staff prioritise care
leavers access to the local authoritys own housing stock, and will make an
offer of a property to care leavers before it becomes more generally available.
Houses in multiple occupancy are used only where this is the young persons
preferred option, and then only after its suitability is fully assessed. Young
people feel safe and supported, and have accommodation and support
tailored to their needs.



Local authority staff provide good support that helps care leavers to maintain
successful tenancies. Where tenancies do break down, personal advisers help
young people to secure safe alternative accommodation, with access to 30
emergency beds commissioned through a partner.


Care leavers receive appropriate support to help them to develop the skills
that they need to live independently. Those who move into supported
accommodation receive help to develop skills such as cooking, cleaning and
managing their own finances. Where young people remain in a foster
placement, personal advisers support and encourage their carers to help them
to develop independence skills.


Personal advisers understand how to access a range of support services,
including drug and alcohol misuse interventions, for the young people whom
they support. In the small number of cases where drug misuse has been a
problem, appropriate support was provided that resulted in substantial
improvements in the young persons well-being. Personal advisers are also
knowledgeable about the potential risks of sexual exploitation for vulnerable
young adults, and take appropriate action where this is a concern.


Personal advisers review care leavers pathway plans on time and at
appropriate intervals. Almost all pathway plans are clear and detailed,
focusing appropriately on the themes most likely to have a positive impact on
each young persons life, including their health, education and relationships
with others. Care leavers describe how reviews of their plan help them to
focus on the things that they need to improve, although they find the plans
themselves of limited value. In a few cases, young people choose not to
participate fully in their reviews, although personal advisers work tenaciously
to engage them and revisit important topics that will help them to have a
positive future.


Personal advisers understand the health needs of their young people and
usually document them clearly in pathway plans. Almost all care leavers
register with medical services such as doctors and dentists and, where
necessary, their personal adviser ensures that they access services when they
need to. Personal advisers provide effective support for young people who
need specific help with, for example, their mental health. Inspectors saw
examples of personal advisers advocating for them when the service that they
have received has not been good enough. Disabled young people receive a
good standard of care and support.


The proportion of care leavers who participate in education, employment and
training has risen and, at 64.6%, is higher than in England as a whole. Most
participate on a full-time basis. Around half of children looked after access
additional careers advice and guidance during Year 11, and this helps them to
make appropriate post-16 choices. Relationships with local post-16 providers


are good, and enable local authority staff to successfully support both the
young person and the provider when difficulties arise.

Staff provide training sessions to help care leavers who are not in education
or employment to prepare for work and find suitable opportunities. The local
authority has begun to prioritise care leavers for its own apprenticeship
vacancies through a guaranteed interview scheme. It currently employs four
care leavers as apprentices, two of whom joined through the authoritys
traineeship programme. One care leaver, who has successfully completed an
apprenticeship, now works for the authority on a permanent basis. There are
currently two care leavers undertaking a traineeship programme with a view
to moving into an apprenticeship. Overall, the local authority explores a wide
range of opportunities to assist young people with their education and
learning needs.


Care leavers receive the documents that they need to begin their adult lives,
including birth certificates, national insurance numbers and bank account
details. Care leavers are provided with their health histories, including relevant
family health conditions. However, some care leavers advised inspectors that
they were unaware of receiving these documents, indicating that the local
authority should ensure that all care leavers have received them.


Care leavers receive appropriate advice that helps them to understand the
support and benefits to which they are entitled. The local authority has
worked with care leavers to produce a guide that is available both in print and
online. Personal advisers explain entitlements to young people during pathway
plan reviews and when they become eligible for, or in need of, a particular
benefit.


Most care leavers spoken to by inspectors feel good about themselves. They
state that their personal advisers genuinely care about them, and they are
proud of their successes. The local authority holds events to celebrate their
achievements, such as a recent event in which care leavers were presented
with certificates recognising the progress that they had made in various
aspects of their lives, such as living independently, educational attainment,
and improving their health and well-being.


Leadership, management and
governance

Outstanding

Summary
Ambitious senior leaders and managers in Camden provide good and effective
services for vulnerable children, and these both protect them and improve their
outcomes. Strong governance arrangements and a shared partnership vision and
priorities have resulted in considerably increased levels of investment in early help
and targeted support services.
Significant investment in, and a planned transformation towards, a systemic model
of social work practice create a positive environment in which social workers want
to work, feel safe, confident and empowered. Visible and approachable senior
managers, co-located with staff who have manageable caseloads, give social
workers permission to be bold and innovative. Managers ensure that social workers
spend time with children, yet recognise that further work is needed on the
consistency of recording of management oversight.
Dedicated, committed and intelligent partnerships understand the thresholds for
intervention and share a whole-family approach. A few children become looked
after too late, and managers have plans in place to more effectively target
emerging adolescent neglect through successful innovation funding. Managers
have purposefully restructured services and changed procedures and workflows to
give children a more flexible service response. This has reduced the number of
changes of social workers experienced by children, to ensure that their support is
right from the start.
Senior leaders have both significant knowledge and an intelligent understanding of
the issue of child sexual exploitation. This enables them to respond quickly to
protect children at risk. They recognise the complexities and interdependencies
that create additional risks to children, demonstrated by outstanding partnership
work with children susceptible to gang affiliation and risk of radicalisation.
Children have an active, continuous and meaningful voice in Camden. The CiCC
has a close and important relationship with the corporate parenting board, and
young inspectors complete high-quality and complex inspections of operational
practice.
Senior managers have a good understanding of frontline practice through
appropriate use of performance information. While regular quality assurance
activity is intelligently used to improve frontline practice, there remain areas for
improvement. These include increasing the timeliness of initial health assessments
for children looked after, increasing their access to independent visitors and all
care leavers understanding their health histories.


Inspection findings

The executive director for supporting people (the director of childrens
services) in Camden passionately champions and determinedly pursues highquality social work practice to help and protect children. He successfully
encourages collaboration and innovation with partners, and has a professional
background as a social worker, bringing a strong knowledge foundation to
childrens services. The chief executive has total confidence in the director of
childrens services (DCS), who has an enlarged portfolio for children, adult
and housing services. A test of assurance was completed as a consequence of
a major departmental restructure implemented in April 2016. The DCS, with
senior managers and politicians, models a genuine commitment to a wholefamily approach. This is gradually permeating each layer of local authority
services, from early help to specialist intervention, resulting in tangible
improvements to childrens lives.


Children and their families benefit from a comprehensive, increasingly
integrated multi-agency early help offer. An extensive range of universal and
targeted support services, co-located with health and other partners, underpin
a resilient families programme. This is intelligently informed by the joint
strategic needs analysis (JSNA) and detailed socio-economic profiling of local
communities at ward level. Diligent oversight from the Childrens Trust
partnership board supplies strong cross-partner commitment and investment
in this shared vision and culture, purposefully continuing a gradual
rebalancing of services towards effective earlier prevention. A committed and
impressive management team is evident across early help services, focusing
on enabling families to increase their resilience and find their own solutions. A
positive result of this rapidly developing integrated delivery model features
significant improvements in many public health indicators for all young
children in Camden.


Partnership working is strong. Through transparent governance
arrangements, partners share accountability equally with senior local authority
managers. They fulfil their statutory duties to safeguard children from harm
and promote their welfare to a consistently high standard. This approach
pervades throughout childrens services, with excellent partnership work
evidenced, for example, in the co-located and highly effective multi-agency
safeguarding hub. The chief executive, DCS and lead member for childrens
services have regular meetings with the Local Safeguarding Children Board
(LSCB) independent chair, and present themed safeguarding reports to the
children, schools and family scrutiny panel. This enables senior leaders and
partners to support and interrogate each other, fulfilling their aspiration that
no child is left behind.


A remarkable CiCC has a high regard for managers and leaders in Camden,
reporting a respectful and highly constructive relationship with the corporate
parenting board and members. A dedicated and committed lead member cochairs the board with the elected member who also sits on the permanency


panel. Senior managers meet with the CiCC prior to every meeting to help to
prepare themselves. The CiCC has a meaningful voice in Camden, and senior
managers and leaders closely listen to and pursue their actions and
recommendations. Children looked after, for example, reported that they did
not like changing social workers at the age of 16, when they transfer to the
children to remain allocated to their current social workers if they chose.

Senior managers continue to promote and sustain long-term investment in the
work of young inspectors. Their work is outstanding and exceptional in its
range and quality. Young inspectors scrutinise areas across the service that
are complex and emotionally challenging. They engage children and seek their
views, informing subsequent recommendations and plans. Inspections include
an investigation into the effectiveness of responses to children at risk of child
sexual exploitation and into support for teenagers, which informed a targeted
service offer and, more recently, services for disabled children. Senior
managers take all recommendations seriously and, where possible, implement
them. Effective governance of these inspections includes review by the
childrens scrutiny panel, the LSCB and the corporate parenting board.
Relevant findings are shared across the local authority to inform learning and
improvements.


Children receive a quick and efficient response when they are identified as
being at risk of, or having been exposed to, child sexual exploitation. This
involves very strong strategic and operational arrangements. Police, local
authority managers and other partners have developed significant knowledge
and expertise to manage and reduce the risks to children. The DCS co-chairs
the strategy group on child sexual exploitation with a senior police officer, and
an analyst of child sexual exploitation sits within the multi-agency
safeguarding hub, enabling the timely sharing of useful and incisive
intelligence across the partnership. Camden is rightly proud of its innovation
and achievements in keeping children safe. Strategic and operational planning
informs highly effective, nimble operational practices to identify, respond and
disrupt a range of dangers and cross-cutting exploitation of children, including
serious youth violence, knife crime, drug running and gang affiliations.
Creative examples of this include live daily sharing of intelligence on drug
and gang activity and close liaison with British Transport Police, who speak to
vulnerable young people seen travelling alone at major railway stations in
Camden. The borough has also developed helpful relationships with social
media providers to monitor childrens safety online.


Senior managers anticipate and demonstrate an understanding of the
complexity and interdependencies of multiple risks for children. Extensive
multi-agency partnerships, including the police, childrens social work, youth
offending service, CAHMS, public health, clinical commissioning group (CCG)
and the voluntary sector, coherently respond to intervene and protect children
involved with gangs and serious youth violence. Overarching strategic


partnerships, including the LSCB and the community safety partnership board
(CSPB), promote collaborative joint work through well-designed operational
frameworks. These deliver a range of intelligence-led, preventative, targeted
and enforcement activities.

Children and adults vulnerable to radicalisation receive proactive multi-agency
interventions to reduce risks and share intelligence. Strong strategic
governance arrangements include regular briefings between the CSPB, LSCB,
the childrens senior management team and cabinet members. This
collaboration is reflected in strong operational practice, demonstrated in the
identification and assessment of childrens individual needs and vulnerabilities,
informing their intervention plans. Senior managers effectively discharge their
Prevent duty, assisted by wide partner representation on the Channel panel,
using intelligence to identify additional risks to children, including domestic
abuse, online grooming and wider community safety concerns.


Partnership investment and integrated commissioning with health partners are
highly developed and interwoven through childrens services. Children in need
of emotional and mental health support receive effective, timely and
accessible interventions from CAHMS, both in early help and in childrens
social care. The Health and Wellbeing Board (HWB), suitably informed by the
JSNA, is purposefully progressing the transformation of mental health
services, including the exemplary Minding the Gap programme, which
supports young people aged 16 to 24 years to prepare and plan their
transitions into adult mental health services. This initiative, supported by
inbuilt consultation with young people, led to the creation of The Hive, a safe
place for young people to receive a wide range of mental health support,
including outreach services and parent support groups run in parallel for their
carers. This is helping to improve mental health outcomes for young people in
Camden by identifying their needs earlier, reducing hospital admissions and
social isolation. This investment has also reduced clinic non-attendance rates
from 17% in 201516 to 8% in 201617, demonstrating the increasingly
successful engagement of young people.


This strong strategic work has not transferred into consistently effective
operational practice for some children looked after and care leavers. Managers
know that they need to improve both the timeliness of initial health
assessments for children looked after and their opportunities to access
independent visitors. In addition, more work is required to ensure that care
leavers have all the information on their familys health history that they need.


Senior leaders understand and provide excellent services to meet the diverse
needs of children within their community. Integrated partnership
arrangements support the extensive and complex needs of refugees. The local
authority has resettled a significant number of refugees, in addition to an
extensive offer of support for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children. This
resettlement programme illustrates the highly evolved capacity of the council,
working with a range of other partners to plan for and meet the needs of the


most vulnerable and traumatised children and families over both short- and
longer-term periods.

Social workers want to work in Camden, and all staff who shared their views
with inspectors passionately reported that it is a great place to work. Senior
managers have created an environment in which social workers feel safe, are
confident and receive good frontline management and peer support. The DCS
directive of giving social workers freedom within a framework empowers
them to try new ideas to improve their practice during a phased transition to a
systemic model of social work practice. This gives social workers increased
autonomy, enabling them to be innovative in their decision-making, as is
clearly seen in the Camden model of social work.


The head of childrens quality assurance is a highly active and visible principal
social worker (PSW). Her work has been pivotal to the success of the phased
implementation of the systemic practice model. The PSW proactively
participates in frontline operational practice, for example regularly attending
child protection conferences and supporting multi-agency complex panel
meetings. The PSW also chairs the systemic champions group and participates
in audit activity and serious case review learning in the LSCB. This provides
far-reaching oversight across frontline practice, strengthening quality
assurance arrangements.


Senior managers thoughtfully support social workers to be part of the
systemic transformation of services and organisational culture. They have a
direct voice to senior managers, resulting in high standards of
professionalism, ownership and pride in their practice. Regular, reflective
group supervision and the use of a range of direct work tools with children
bring constructive analyses of risks and respectful challenges to social
workers assessments. They willingly share expertise and knowledge with each
other. A commitment to manageable caseloads gives social workers time to
build strong and nurturing professional relationships with children.


Supplementing this is a continuous and embedded culture of learning and a
strong intent to continually improve frontline practice. Managers actively
encourage and support social workers to pursue further short- and longerterm academic studies to enhance their professional knowledge, skills and
development. Additionally, staff can readily access a comprehensive training
and development programme. This includes total respect training, facilitated
by young people in care for foster carers and all staff working with children
and their families. Social workers speak highly of the generous range of
training opportunities that they are encouraged to pursue. Consequently, at
the time of inspection, a third of social workers held a relevant masters-level
qualification, illustrating the learning culture and the importance attached to
it.



Local authority managers work hard to retain their talented permanent staff
and, while the use of agency staff has recently increased to 18%, this remains
within national averages and below that of some statistical neighbours. There
is some success with agency workers who remain for longer periods
transitioning into permanent posts. Managers promote the growing your own
recruitment of social workers, and encourage more experienced social workers
to undertake practice educators training. There are 35 qualified practice
educators, supporting a comprehensive assessed and supported year in
employment (ASYE) programme.


Senior managers and leaders receive a wealth of performance management
information, congruent with an up-to-date quality assurance framework. This
informs service planning and targeted auditing work effectively. One example
of this is a successful Department for Education innovation funding bid, aimed
at improving evidence-led interventions and addressed particularly at the
long-term neglect of children in need aged 10 to 13 years. This follows a
cogent analysis of performance information on the high numbers of teenagers
becoming looked after. Consistent use of quality assurance tools across all
social work teams enables managers to measure tangible improvements in
frontline practice and tackle stubborn areas that need improvement. This
includes consistent recording of frontline management supervision, the
rationale for decisions, the quality and frequency of recording in some
childrens records, and the visible transfer of MARAC and MAPPA
recommendations. Quality audits demonstrate some improvements in these
areas, but they are not yet sufficiently widespread.


Monthly performance information, cascaded to social workers and team
managers, has a limited narrative that explores trends and variations. This is
not always helpful for frontline managers in specifically identifying necessary
practice improvements. During the inspection, performance management
information did not report on how quickly workers in the early help or social
work teams visit children following referrals. At the time of the inspection,
audits of initial children in need visits reported that only 56% of children were
seen in seven days, meeting stipulated timescales, and 77.8% within 10 days.
This illustrates that the information is easily accessible, and thus it is a missed
opportunity for senior managers to monitor and improve this important area
of operational practice.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is outstanding
Executive summary
Camdens Local Safeguarding Childrens Board (LSCB) is outstanding. It has wellestablished and highly effective arrangements in place to hold partner agencies to
account for safeguarding children. An exceptional commitment to continuously
improve frontline practice is both evident and demonstrable.
Led by an experienced, effective chair, the culture of the board and its sub-groups
is one of openness and constructive challenge. Partners are both engaged and
highly committed to monitoring the effectiveness of safeguarding services for all
children in Camden.
Strategic priorities are informed by a comprehensive analysis of local need that is
reflected accurately in the business plan of the board and its sub-groups. For this
reason, actions are identified and taken that lead to demonstrable improvements in
the safeguarding of children and young people.
The sub-groups that support the board are a real strength. An effective focus on
engaging the community in safeguarding has resulted in a heightened profile and
understanding of some specific risks that children face, such as female genital
mutilation and potential risks of abuse from family beliefs about spirit possession.
The online safety sub-group has raised the profile of the risks that children can
face when using the internet, and provided useful resources and training to help to
tackle this issue.
Learning from audits and serious case reviews (SCRs) is a well-established culture
of the board. The LSCBs multi-agency and single-agency audit activity is reviewed
and scrutinised. Learning is widely shared and actions closely monitored to ensure
that recommended changes to practice are made and sustained. Learning from
SCRs is a strength that is evident across all of the boards activities.
A clear understanding of priorities and local issues informs the boards multiagency training programme, and its impact on subsequent practice is evaluated
well to inform future need. There is a wide-ranging programme of highly effective
and targeted multi-agency training for partners. Expertise from local professionals
is willingly shared through workshops to enhance the training provided.


Recommendations
Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

An experienced chair leads the Camden Local Safeguarding Childrens Board
(LSCB). He is highly respected by all partners, who value his relentless focus
on safeguarding the children of Camden through effective challenge. The
culture of the board and its sub-groups is one of constructive openness and
vibrant and focused debate, demonstrating mature relationships. This
collective resolve to work together, continually reviewing practice and
appropriately challenging that of other agencies, is evident in every aspect of
the boards work.


Governance arrangements are highly effective, with clear lines of
communication between the chair, executive director (the director of
childrens services), lead member and the chief executive. Senior leaders
actively represent their agencies on the board, including chairing many of its
sub-groups. Attendance at meetings is consistently good and includes two lay
members. The lead member attends as a participating observer. Safeguarding
is highly integrated within the partnerships across Camden, with wellestablished links between strategic boards and a clear alignment of priorities.
For example, the 1001-day project, seeking to identify and address
vulnerabilities early in a childs life, is a work stream of the Health and
Wellbeing Board (HWB). It fits well and appropriately with the priority area of
parental mental health of the LSCB, and is also aligned with the councils
resilient families programme. The LSCB chair attends the HWB and the
Childrens Trust partnership board, presenting both the annual report and
business plan. These are also presented to the councils scrutiny committee.
This strong commitment of partnerships to safeguard children is evident
throughout strategies and everyday operational working relationships, from
senior managers to frontline staff. Links are slowly developing between the
safeguarding adults partnership board (SAPB) and the LSCB, through joint
work on shared priority areas concerning domestic abuse, parental mental
health and modern slavery.


The boards priorities are clear and arise from a thorough analysis of local
needs, also reflecting learning from serious case reviews, both locally and
nationally. All board partners are able to explain the priorities of the board
and give examples of how they work collaboratively to deliver them. Business
and work plans are dynamic, and the maturity of partnership arrangements,
alongside the depth of understanding, means that the board can be flexible
when new issues emerge. Some priorities were appropriately carried over
from the previous year, such as the issue of child sexual exploitation, now
aligned with vulnerable adolescents. This demonstrates the boards
understanding of the cross-cutting, multiple risks facing the young people of


Camden. Other priorities include countering domestic abuse and preventing
radicalisation, extremism and neglect.

Attendance at the majority of the boards sub-groups is high, showing a
strong commitment from partners to the priority of safeguarding children.
Furthermore, there is good engagement, wide membership and appropriate
challenge at meetings. When there is a need for a specific piece of work to be
undertaken, partners willingly contribute to task and finish groups. Partners
spoke with passion about Camden, and all valued the work of the board.


Camdens highly diverse population is well understood, and the board seeks to
ensure that all members of the community understand safeguarding. This
emphasis is demonstrated through the boards community engagement subgroup. Various training and awareness-raising events have been held,
including, for example, those pertaining to female genital mutilation and the
possible risks of abuse to children arising from family beliefs about spirit
possession. In conjunction with the Metropolitan Police Limelight initiative,
were spoken to about female genital mutilation and harmful behaviours. In
recognition that smaller organisations and community groups may not have
the capacity to attend meetings, every effort is made to ensure that they are
part of the local safeguarding network, with sub-group meetings held in the
community. Networks share information appropriately to safeguard children.
Links were made, for example, when there was a high incidence of hate crime
near a particular school, enabling the board to give swift and clear messages
to parents and advice on how to access support.


A regular programme of section 11 safeguarding audits is set out in the
learning and improvement framework, overseen by the quality assurance subgroup. Where findings from audits indicate that an area of practice requires
improvement, it is escalated within the partner agency for action and
monitored by the sub-group. A challenge panel provides an additional layer of
scrutiny, comprising managers from different partner agencies, a lay board
member, and the board chair. Good practice is shared and constructive
challenge is given to those areas needing improvement. For example, named
professionals within the health sub-group reported that they were held to
account to follow up actions to ensure stronger compliance with training. As a
result of audits completed during 201617, the board ratified 22 safeguarding
policies of voluntary and community organisations to ensure that they met the
required standards.


The strong commitment to the board by partners is also demonstrated by
their continuing financial contributions, despite the challenging fiscal situation
across the spectrum of partner agencies. Budget contributions have remained
at a broadly similar level, the largest contributors being the local authority and
the clinical commissioning group (CCG). In addition, partner agencies willingly
contribute resources through their commitment of time to the board. The


CCGs designated safeguarding nurse, for example, chairs the learning and
development sub-group and attends two other sub-groups in addition to main
board meetings.

The board receives a broad range of relevant information that is pertinent to
its priority areas. A regular suite of performance information from partner
agencies is received within a common board dataset. Additionally, narrative
commentaries accompany recent data reports, enabling the board to focus on
significant trend variations. Partners and lay members of the board reported
that this enabled them to understand and critically challenge some
information presented. Following the integration of the MASH and early help
front door, for example, the board has maintained a strong interest in
receiving reports and data to ensure its continuing understanding of the
effective application of thresholds and the impact of early help. This
demonstrates the boards determination to test the effectiveness of these
arrangements and ensure that children are safeguarded through them.


Child sexual exploitation and missing children are a continued priority area for
the board, expanded recently to a broader focus on troubled adolescents. The
board ensures that it has an informed understanding of the nature and extent
of local issues, in relation to children missing and at risk of sexual exploitation,
through its child sexual exploitation strategy group and its operational multiagency sexual exploitation group. Regular reports are scrutinised and
rigorously challenged. The emphasis and understanding that partners
demonstrate in safeguarding vulnerable children are further evidenced in
strong links between the sub-groups. This results in avoiding duplicating work
and in effective information sharing. Furthermore, partners can respond
quickly, and meetings are seen as focused and purposeful. Recent work by
the online safety sub-group, for example on its survey of schools in Camden,
will shortly be used to inform the child sexual exploitation strategy regarding
online grooming. Similarly, when it became evident from a high number of
referrals from a specific school that child sexual exploitation was a particularly
prominent issue, resources were promptly mobilised to target additional
training for school staff.


A regularly updated challenge log captures the actions taken and their
subsequent impact as a result of challenges registered. The board is highly
diligent in following through the outcomes of challenges. The contribution of
general practitioners (GPs) at case conferences, for example, increased from
further increased to 90%. A challenge concerning the relatively low
attendance of police at multi-agency training led to a police representative
sitting on the learning and development sub-group and more police officers
subsequently being booked onto training programmes. This demonstrates the
willingness of partners to purposefully and positively act on challenges.


A regular programme of multi-agency audits has been undertaken over the past
two years. Topics have included young people who self-harm, the impact of


parental mental illness, and the MASH and child sexual exploitation. Learning
from audits is evident, and helpful thematic recommendations are produced.
An actions document, overseen by the quality assurance sub-group, monitors
the implementation of recommendations and the impact of them. Twentyseven schools, for example, attended training on mental health and first aid
following an audit regarding self-harm. A workshop was held to strengthen
joint working between adult mental health services and childrens services,
following a parental mental illness audit. Partners, through their
understanding of current practice issues alongside learning from local and
national trends, inform decisions of what is prioritised in audit programmes.
The board noticed, for example, a clear correlation between children who selfharm and parents with mental health problems, resulting in a further multiagency audit on parental mental illness. This is now a priority work area for the
board.

Board partners also undertake single agency audits and share pertinent
learning. A recent audit undertaken on the voice of the child during medical
safeguarding examinations identified the need to make changes. Following
revisions to practice, a subsequent audit has demonstrated improvements.
Partners enthusiastically reported how they disseminate their learning,
demonstrating a genuine shared commitment to the safeguarding of children.


The LSCB website features up-to-date policies and procedures, including those
adopted through pan-London arrangements, which are regularly reviewed by
the quality assurance sub-group. The LSCB threshold document is clear and,
as evidenced elsewhere in this report, well implemented and understood by
agencies.


Learning from SCRs is deeply established in the boards business and work
plans. Three SCRs and one local learning review have been undertaken over
the past five years, and all recommendations were purposefully progressed in
a clear action plan. Briefings, workshops and key messages have been
included in safeguarding training. The majority of social workers spoken to
during the inspection were aware of important messages from the SCRs. The
board ensures that changes are embedded, through updated reports
requested from partners to demonstrate this. Single-agency audits have been
undertaken within health, for example, evaluating the effectiveness of
communication between various health professionals. Multi-agency training
has subsequently included more GPs, leading to increased referral rates.
Frequent attention is paid to learning from other SCRs. The fostering team,
for example, undertook a could it happen in Camden? exercise following an
SCR report from another local authority, and presented their findings to the
quality assurance sub-group.


Learning from child deaths is evident. Effective links between partners, the
board and its sub-groups result in identified actions being swiftly pursued.
Coroner reports and SCRs often take a considerable time, but this does not


delay learning points being applied as soon as they are recognised. The
implementation of advice on obtaining window locks and increasing
preparations for participation in parenting groups at childrens centres are two
examples of prompt impact. Similarly, following a neonatal child death
overview report, an audit is in progress to establish how reliably antenatal risk
is identified across the two hospitals which provide antenatal care. This
constant willingness to learn from frontline practice at every opportunity and
to introduce subsequent improvements to safeguarding practices is a real
strength of the board.

The board ensures that there is sufficient high-quality training available and
has adopted the pan-London method of evaluation. Returns at stage three,
the impact on practice, are high at 50%. This provides important feedback to
the board on the impact of training. The reports prepared for the board lack
narrative and analysis that could further inform the evaluation of impact on
subsequent practice. However, despite this shortcoming, partner agencies
respond promptly to the findings of training evaluations. Additional learning
from the section 11 audit process, multi-agency and single-agency audits all
feed into the planning cycle for future learning and development events.
Furthermore, a training needs analysis and a comprehensive understanding of
the boards priority areas result in the effective targeting and prioritisation of
safeguarding training. Additionally, a high number of workshops and training
events are arranged through sub-groups, task and finish groups and through
agencies inviting other partners to join their training events. Members who
are experts in their field are willing to share their expertise, illustrated for
example, in training concerning female genital mutilation. This is a real
strength of the board.


The board demonstrates a relentless focus on emerging safeguarding issues
which are impacting on children. An online safety sub-group has been
instrumental in supporting professionals to access relevant resources.
Collaborative and effective working relationships ensure that the work plan for
this group is purposefully progressed. Cross-membership with the child sexual
exploitation strategy group ensures that links are made to the issue of online
grooming. Foster carers and their supervising social workers are provided with
information and training on the latest technology, apps and privacy settings.
This ensures that children hear consistent messages from their carers and
schools. Following an online safety conference held in February 2017, partners
recognised that clearer links were needed between personal, social, health
and economic education teachers and information, technology and
communication leads in schools. As a result, a pilot in five primary schools,
with children who are online behaviour stars, is scheduled to start
imminently.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the differences adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Nick Stacey
Deputy lead inspector: Julie Knight
Team inspectors: Margaret Burke, Kate Malleson, Andy Whippey, Russell Henry,
Anne Waterman
Senior data analyst: Patrick Thomson
Quality assurance manager: Sean Tarpey


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance, Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


