Central Bedfordshire
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 12 June 2017  6 July 2017
Report published: 25 August 2017

Childrens services in Central Bedfordshire are good

Good

permanence

Requires improvement to
be good


Good


Good


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Central Bedfordshire provides good services for children who need help or protection.
Senior managers and elected members have created and modelled an open learning
culture, engaging staff successfully to drive and sustain service improvement. They
have addressed the key areas for improvement from the last inspection and, with
strong support from key partners, they lead effective services for children and their
families. However, there is more to do to ensure that all children looked after receive
a consistently good service.
The director of childrens services (DCS) has strengthened her senior leadership team
and built a resilient workforce, creating the right conditions to support effective,
child-centred practice. Leaders and managers have focused practitioners attention
on working collaboratively with families. Social workers are tenacious in building
positive relationships with children, and children speak positively about their workers.
Morale across the workforce is good, supported by manageable caseloads.
The senior leadership team has concentrated on improving services linked to key
performance targets. As a result, performance in some areas matches or exceeds
top-performing local authorities in England. Leaders and managers have not
maintained the same level of focus on measuring impact. Quality assurance systems,
while established, are less effective, as they focus largely on compliance and not
enough on the effectiveness of interventions and impact on childrens progress and
experience.
The local authoritys investment in early help services has been effective in ensuring
that children receive support quickly before their needs escalate. The creative use of
family meetings across the service at every level, including early help services,
ensures that children are supported to remain in their families wherever possible.
When families require statutory intervention, the response from the multi-agency
safeguarding hub (MASH) is effective. Partners understand thresholds for services
and identify concerns effectively. They work collaboratively with social workers,
attending and contributing to child protection meetings in order to keep children
safe. Timely, high-quality assessments lead to effective interventions. However, not
all assessments and plans are routinely updated in response to childrens changing
circumstances.
The vast majority of children in need of help and protection receive effective support
and their situation improves. However, for a small minority of children, the local
authority is not proactive enough in taking decisive action to ensure that timely
progress is made. Systems in place to drive pre-proceedings are not yet effective
enough in preventing drift or progressing plans for all children.
Most children looked after live with carers who meet their needs well. Placement
stability is strong, and many children remain with their carers long term. However,
managers have not been effective in ensuring rigorous oversight of permanence


planning for all children and, as a result, some have experienced drift and delay in
being formally matched with their carers and securing permanence.
Health assessments and emotional support for most children looked after are well
supported. However, for children who are placed at a distance from home, these
needs are not sufficiently prioritised. While social workers support children looked
after to access education, many personal educational plans lack sufficient detail and
are not updated often enough. Supervision and management oversight, though
evident on case files, are not always effective in ensuring timely progression of
childrens plans. Intervention by independent reviewing officers (IROs) and child
protection chairs has not been effective in preventing drift or ensuring permanence
for all children.
Adoption and fostering services are good, and effective recruitment, training and
support arrangements are in place. The majority of children receive the support they
need to do well. Effective matching ensures that children with a plan for adoption
move to live with their adoptive families in timescales that meet their needs.
However, the agency decision-maker does not always evidence the rationale for
decisions made.
Support for young people aged 16 and 17 at risk of homelessness is rapid and
effective, with stringent efforts to engage family and friends in assessments.
Alternative accommodation is immediately secured when required. Social workers
advocate well on their behalf. However, their entitlement to request accommodation
under section 20 of the 1989 Children Act is not always made clear to them.
Most children at risk of sexual exploitation receive timely, effective support that
keeps them safe. Partnership working in this area is strong, led by the local authority
chief executive officer and the DCS. Extensive work has taken place across the local
authority and the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) to improve the response
to the risks associated with child sexual exploitation. However, there is more work to
do to ensure that intelligence from risk assessments and screening tools informs the
problem profile. The response to children who go missing is inconsistently recorded.
Collated records of missing incidents do not account for every episode; this results in
missed opportunities to aggregate intelligence and fully understand potential risk.
Care leavers, including unaccompanied asylum-seeking children, receive a good
service. They live in good-quality accommodation and receive effective support from
their social workers and personal advisers to help them to feel safe and to make
good progress.
Senior leaders demonstrate a strong commitment to engaging children and hearing
their views. The impressive and influential Children in Care Council (CiCC)
meaningfully participates in service developments and actively supports the work of
the corporate parenting panel. The corporate parenting panel is ambitious in
championing childrens progress but needs to strengthen its challenge and better
hold senior managers to account in driving improvements in services for children.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two childrens homes. One was judged to be
outstanding, the other good, in their most recent Ofsted inspections.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements for
children was published in April 2012. The local authority was judged to be
good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked
after was published in April 2012. The local authority was judged to be
adequate.
Local leadership
 The DCS has been in post since September 2014.
 The chief executive has been in post since October 2009.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since June 2014.
 The local authority uses a model of social work that is strengths-based and
relationship-focused and includes motivational interviewing, family group
conferencing and restorative practice.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 59,614 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Central Bedfordshire. This is 22% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 13% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years old
are living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 8% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 8% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 9% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an
additional language:


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 in primary schools is 8% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 4% (the national average is 16%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2017, 1,344 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction
from 1,518 at 31 March 2016.
 At 31 March 2017, 161 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 27 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 225
children (38 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 31 March 2017, three children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is the same as at 31 March 2016.
 In the last two years prior to inspection, two serious incident notifications
have been submitted to Ofsted.
 Three serious case reviews have been completed in the last two years.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2017, 304 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 51 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 285 (48 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 27 adoptions
 seven children became subject of special guardianship orders (SGOs)
returned to be looked after
living
 nine young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in houses
in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Improve the effectiveness of frontline managers, IROs and child protection
chairs in ensuring that childrens assessments are updated in response to
changes, plans are progressed and drift is prevented.


Ensure that pre-proceedings work is initiated promptly when childrens
circumstances do not improve and, as part of this, that thorough and holistic
assessments are carried out to inform future planning.


Provide rigorous oversight and tracking of childrens plans when children
become looked after, to ensure that permanence is formally approved and
achieved in a timely manner for all children.


Ensure that the performance management and quality assurance framework is
strengthened to provide managers with a clear line of sight to practice and
quality in all key areas, including the offer and completion of return home
interviews and the use of child sexual exploitation screening and risk
assessment tools.


Make sure that the corporate parenting panel is routinely informed about
issues and areas for improvement, so that it is able to act as a critical friend,
challenging and holding to account senior managers and driving
improvements in outcomes for children in care and care leavers.


Improve the quality of personal education plans by ensuring that actions are
based on a clear analysis of need and that targets are precise, detailed and
time-bound.


Ensure that childrens physical and emotional health needs are considered
earlier when plans are being made for them to be placed at a distance from
the authority, so that they can access any services they need in a timely
manner.


Ensure that 16- and 17-year-old homeless children are provided with clear
information about their entitlements to accommodation and support under
section 20 of the Children Act 1989.


Ensure the agency decision-maker provides a coherent rationale for all
adoption decisions and that this is recorded on childrens files.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children and families in Central Bedfordshire are good. Leaders and
managers have built a strong service, where social workers are well trained and
supported.
 Children have a strong voice. Their views are heard, and managers take action
when they are told that things need to be different.
 When children and families need help, they get it quickly. Social workers try hard
to find ways to support families to sort out their problems. Family meetings help
children stay with their families whenever this is possible.
 When support does not improve childrens situations, decisions are not always
made early enough to prevent them becoming looked after in a crisis.
 Social workers visit children regularly. They know the children they work with well
and work hard to build positive and lasting relationships.
 Professionals work well together to share information to make sure that they
know when children may be vulnerable to sexual exploitation. For most of these
vulnerable children, the help and support they receive makes them safer.
However, senior managers have more work to do to ensure that all information is
shared and that all children who have been missing receive return home
interviews when they should.
 When children need to be looked after away from their families, they live with
carers who look after them well and help them to succeed. Whenever possible,
they live with their brothers and sisters, but sometimes decisions are not made
quickly enough about how long they will stay with their carers.
 Children get good support to stay healthy and do well in school. However, when
they live further away from home, health support is not provided quickly enough
for some children.
 When children need to be adopted, this happens quickly and children live with
families that support and care for them well.
 The remarkable CiCC works hard to make sure that senior managers and elected
council members hear childrens voices and understand their experiences.
Because of their work, many services that children receive have improved.
 When young people leave care, their personal advisers keep in touch and help
them to live independently. Most young people feel safe and are happy with
where they live.
 The local authority has taken action to strengthen advice and support to children,
but there is still more work to do to ensure that children are clear about all of the
support that they are entitled to.


The experiences and progress of
Good
children who need help and protection
Summary
Central Bedfordshire is providing a good service to children and their families who
need help or protection. Children are offered extensive and effective early help
services at the right time to support them within their family networks. There is a
clear understanding among local professionals about thresholds for access to social
care intervention. A well-established integrated safeguarding and early help hub
provides good access to support and a safe and timely response to risk.
The response to domestic abuse referrals by childrens social care is rigorous and
timely. Social workers demonstrate a good understanding of the impact of
domestic abuse on children.
Social workers are persistent. They visit children regularly and develop meaningful
relationships with them. There is a strong focus on working collaboratively with
parents and carers. Good use is made of family meetings to help children remain in
their families where possible and to strengthen the support available. Good-quality
assessments and plans are evident and provide a strong sense of the child, but
they are not consistently updated in response to the childs changing
circumstances. Vulnerabilities, such as parental mental health and substance
misuse, are well considered. Pre-birth assessments are a particular strength. Risks
are well managed and effective work to safeguard children is evident. However,
opportunities to intervene more formally through the use of pre-proceedings are
not always taken early enough.
When children are at risk of child sexual exploitation, risk assessments for most
children lead to effective interventions that ensure that children are safeguarded.
Most children who go missing are offered return home interviews, which are
comprehensive, with risk well identified and mitigated. However, recording of
missing episodes is inconsistent and return home interviews are not always timely.
While supervision of social workers is regular, it is not always sufficiently
challenging to progress plans and outcomes for children in a timely manner. Clear
and coherent processes for managing allegations against professionals ensure that
children are safeguarded well.
Children who are privately fostered receive an effective service.
The local authority provides effective preventative support services for young
people aged 16 and 17 who present as homeless. However, their rights and
entitlements in respect of accommodation under section 20 of the Children Act


Inspection findings

Children in Central Bedfordshire benefit from an effective and extensive range
of targeted early help services. Clear pathways established through the
integrated MASH and early help hub ensure that families who need support
can get it quickly and easily.


Timely early help assessments are of good quality and contain relevant and
proportionate information. Early help plans are specific, measurable and
responsive to childrens identified needs. Lead professionals are skilled and
competent, identifying need early and providing effective support. Partner
agencies own their responsibilities as part of the multi-agency team around
the family. When childrens needs escalate and require intervention to be
stepped-up from early help to statutory services, or when childrens needs
have reduced and it is appropriate to step down to early help, transitions are
well managed.


Feedback from parents in receipt of early help support shows that intervention
makes a real difference for their children. Through tenacious, sensitive and
patient work, skilled early help staff succeed in engaging children and parents,
and they support their progress well. Families appreciate the time and
investment made.


For the vast majority of children supported at this level, good early
intervention support prevents the need for escalation to statutory services.
Family meetings help to identify support from within family networks and
enable children to remain in their families.


The integrated MASH and early help hub provide a timely and safely managed
response when risk is identified for children. Referral pathways are clear and
unambiguous. The vast majority of referrals are dealt with quickly and
appropriately. Senior practitioners provide effective oversight of the work,
parental consent is sought and managers provide the right level of direction.
Children who are at immediate risk of significant harm receive an effective,
timely response.


Issues in police capacity result in delays in progressing some domestic abuse
risk assessments. Although high-risk domestic abuse assessments are
progressed urgently to the MASH, and the children concerned are safeguarded
effectively, a backlog of lower-level risk assessments from the police was
causing delays in referrals for some children at the time of the inspection. The
multi-agency risk assessment conference chair has been proactive in
challenging police partners, seeking assurance that these issues will be
resolved. The local authority and police are taking action, but there is further
work to do to eradicate these delays.


The response by the MASH to domestic abuse referrals is robust and timely.
Social workers have in-depth understanding of the impact of domestic abuse


on children. The local authority shares information about domestic abuse
incidents with schools as part of a successful project, ensuring that schools
are able to offer children timely and necessary support. Social workers and
school professionals undertake sensitive direct work to support the emotional
needs of children exposed to domestic abuse.

Assessments undertaken are commensurate with need and carried out within
the childs timeframe, although they are not routinely updated in response to
the childs changing circumstances. While the quality of chronologies is
variable, most assessments set out an explicit analysis of risk and protective
factors, informed by historical information. Inspectors were able to gain a
strong sense of the childs lived experience and the views of parents. Agencies
contribute to assessments and particular vulnerabilities, such as domestic
abuse, parental mental health and substance misuse, are well considered. Prebirth assessments are a particular strength, with sensitive and comprehensive
analysis evident.


When children are at risk of significant harm, social workers take decisive
action to safeguard them. The majority of child protection and child in need
plans are outcome-focused, clearly setting out responsibilities and timescales
for professionals to action. The local authority has recently implemented a
strengths-based approach to child protection work, with a clear focus on what
needs to change. Core group meetings are held regularly, and there is
appropriate multi-agency attendance. In the large majority of childrens cases,
child protection reviews and core groups are effective in driving plans, and
intervention successfully improves their circumstances. However, practice in
respect of children living at home whose circumstances do not improve
through the child protection process is not consistently robust. The council has
a range of effective edge-of-care services in place, and there is a strong
emphasis on supporting children in their families. In a small number of
childrens cases, however, this has been over-emphasised, so that preproceedings are not used proactively to try to prevent further escalation and
to support early assessment and planning. Consequently, when concerns
escalate to the point that a child is considered to be at risk of significant harm,
the council is having, in some cases, to make urgent applications to the court,
with insufficient pre-loading of key assessments to inform critical decisionmaking. (Recommendation)


Social care services provided for children who are disabled are effective across
the range of need, and there are clear and agreed transition pathways to
adult services. These services are child-focused and good at securing the
views of parents and dealing with their concerns. Comprehensive assessments
of childrens needs inform funding arrangements, which are agreed at a joint
allocation panel. A stable workforce ensures continuity of childrens
relationships with their social workers and is strengthened by a visible and
active service leader.



Authoritative action is taken to ensure that children who are privately fostered
are safe. Assessments are timely and consider risk and protective factors,
childrens needs for education and contact with brothers and sisters. However,
contingencies are not considered. Support to private foster carers is creative
and sensitive, and most placements meet the childs needs. The local authority
has in place a range of measures to raise the profile of private fostering,
alongside a dedicated coordinator who provides advice and guidance to
professionals.


An experienced, specialist social worker provides comprehensive support for
all childrens cases seen by inspectors, with good liaison with a range of other
agencies within and beyond Central Bedfordshire to secure appropriate
immediate accommodation with family or friends. However, childrens rights
and entitlements in respect of accommodation under section 20 of the
Children Act 1989 are not always made clear. In response to inspectors
feedback, the local authority took immediate action to address this and to
ensure that managers and staff are clear about their responsibilities going
forward.


There are effective arrangements for safeguarding children when allegations
are made against professionals and carers. The designated officer provides
appropriate advice and proportionate follow up. When concerns progress to
referral, the management of allegations is robust and children are kept safe.


An effective out-of-hours duty service shared with two neighbouring
authorities helps to ensure that children are well supported. Childrens social
care teams only transfer cases to the out-of-hours service in exceptional
circumstances. For the most part, social workers continue to work intensively
at evenings and weekends, visiting as required to ensure that children can
remain safely in their families.


Children are safeguarded well through multi-agency public protection
arrangements, which ensure good inter-agency risk analysis and timely
information-sharing. Although local authority staff provide the necessary
information to support effective decision-making, their attendance at meetings
is not consistent.


In most instances, steps are taken promptly to safeguard children who are at
risk of sexual exploitation. Child sexual exploitation risk assessments inform
effective and appropriate responses. Consultation and information-sharing
with the child sexual exploitation coordinator help professionals to share
intelligence and identify linked children and risky adults. In a very small
minority of childrens cases, a delay in undertaking risk assessments meant
that the response they received was not sufficiently rigorous.


Return home interviews for children who go missing are not always timely,
although when completed they are mostly comprehensive, with risk identified


and mitigated well. Not all missing incidents are recorded, making it difficult
for senior managers to have a full picture of the prevalence of these incidents.
(Recommendation)

At the time of inspection, 334 children were being home educated. Staff carry
out home visits and provide a detailed information pack for families, helping
parents to ensure that the home education is a broad experience for their
children.


Well-established, thorough procedures ensure clarity regarding any action
required for children who are missing from education. At the time of the
inspection, the authority had identified 46 such children. Childrens records are
clear and the key issues understood. Work is conducted by a range of internal
and external agencies to bring these children back into education or to
establish that they are no longer in the local authoritys area. Many of those
missing education are from a traveller background, and staff work well with
their community to provide tuition for these children.


The local authority and its partners have appropriate procedures in place for
children who may be at risk of radicalisation. A programme of training has
been used to raise awareness of the Prevent duty, and good use is made of
train-the-trainer programmes to maximise impact and take-up. Staff work well
together and with a wide range of other agencies to share information and
support good practice.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement
to be good

Summary
Most children looked after live in stable, good-quality placements with carers who
meet their needs well. However, in its efforts to support children to remain with
their families, the local authority does not consider pre-proceedings early enough
when care might be required. Once initiated, care proceedings are timely,
concluding on average within 27 weeks. When children return home in a planned
way, risk assessments ensure that this is safe for them.
Some children experience delays in having their plans for matching with
permanent carers formally approved. Performance management systems have not
been effective in reducing this delay or identifying where drift is occurring.
Effective foster carer recruitment, together with good support and training for
carers, is leading to an increase in in-house fostering households, although there is
a lack of parent and child placements.
When a plan for adoption is agreed, children move quickly to live with their
adoptive parents. Adoptive parents and birth families benefit from good-quality
adoption support.
Stable teams of permanent social workers provide continuity of support to children.
Social workers receive regular supervision, although managers do not sufficiently
identify or challenge where childrens plans are drifting or when childrens records
are not updated or accurate. Childrens plans are regularly reviewed and their IROs
make every effort to keep in touch with them before their reviews. While reviews
are timely, IROs do not always identify where drift and delay are occurring or
challenge the quality of the reports that social workers provide.
Childrens education needs are well met, although personal education plans do not
reflect childrens needs or the ways in which desired outcomes are to be achieved
clearly enough. Childrens health outcomes are good. However, access to physical
and emotional health assessments and support is more challenging when children
live at a distance. When children go missing or are at risk of child sexual
exploitation, risk assessments are undertaken, but return home interviews are not
always timely. The CiCC is a highly enthusiastic and committed group of children
who have directly influenced the improvement of services.
Care leavers live in safe, good-quality accommodation. Their physical and
emotional needs are well met and they receive good support to access
employment, education and training.


Inspection findings

The local authority takes decisive action to respond to immediate risk of harm,
and decisions to take children into care are appropriate. However, a lack of
consistent use of pre-proceedings results in some children becoming looked
after in a crisis, without key assessments carried out in sufficient depth to fully
inform initial decisions by the court about whether children should be removed
from their parents care. (Recommendation)


Despite delays in initiating pre-proceedings in some childrens cases, care
proceedings are timely and well managed. In the last 12 months, the vast
majority of childrens cases have concluded on average within 27 weeks, and
the court has agreed the local authoritys final care plan for most of these
children. This demonstrates that the local authoritys interim plan for removal
was correct, but not well enough evidenced at the interim stage.


When children return home in a planned way, risk-based assessments are
undertaken to ensure that it is safe for them to do so, and purposeful visits
and ongoing support are provided for as long as necessary.


There are delays in progressing permanence plans for some children. In these
circumstances, children are uncertain about their futures, although the impact
of this is lessened for those who experience stability by remaining with the
same carer. Processes for ensuring management oversight and regular review
have not been systematically effective for children in short-term
arrangements, including those in residential care. Spreadsheets currently used
are inaccurate, and they do not evidence where drift and delay are occurring.
Senior managers responded swiftly to these concerns during the inspection
and took decisive action to strengthen oversight for children who do not yet
have a permanence decision. (Recommendation)


Children benefit from consistent relationships with their IROs. Childrens plans
are regularly reviewed, and their IROs make every effort to see them before
their review. Although reviews are timely, IROs do not always identify where
drift and delay are occurring or challenge the quality of the reports that social
workers provide. Not all reports provide sufficient information about childrens
progress or consider where their needs have changed. Resultant plans do not
consistently focus on the outcomes to be achieved or the timescale for the
child. Children are encouraged through a variety of methods to participate in
their reviews. A newly commissioned advocacy and independent visitor service
is available to children. Although the number of children accessing these
services is increasing, overall numbers are still low.


Short- and long-term placement stability is good. This enables children to
remain at their schools whenever possible, and maintain contact with family
and friends when appropriate. Children experience regular contact with their
families, supported by an effective commissioned service that manages risk
well and is responsive to childrens needs. A large majority of children are


placed with foster families and live either locally or within 20 miles from home.
The use of independent fostering agencies increases the pool of available
foster carers, increasing choice and avoiding delay for children.

Good use of family meetings helps to identify family placements. Viability and
connected persons assessments are very thorough, and fostering team social
workers are skilled in supporting prospective carers to prepare for their roles.
Childrens social workers and fostering social workers jointly write connected
persons assessments. This ensures rigorous consideration of the carers ability
to meet the childs current and future needs. Although special guardianship
arrangements are supported, family carers are not consistently encouraged to
apply for SGOs to provide legal permanence for children.


The local authority has developed its use of in-house and independent agency
carers, to ensure that effective placement choice is available to match current
and future demand. This includes placements for unaccompanied asylumseeking children, brothers and sisters and disabled children.


Foster carers value the stability and support of their supervising social
workers, who always do what they say they will do. Assessments of foster
carers are timely and thorough. Supervising social workers visit carers
regularly and work closely with childrens social workers to promote placement
stability. A dedicated group of foster carers routinely provides other carers
with respite care. This has been effective in promoting the stability of
placements in very challenging situations. Foster carers receive good training
to help them to understand attachment theory and the impact of trauma. The
number of placement disruptions is low, and learning is used to improve
practice. The independently chaired fostering panel is effective. It has a
dedicated panel adviser, who ensures that all reports are of a suitable
standard. The central list of panel members includes experienced individuals
from a range of diverse backgrounds. The panel is consistently curious and
uses penetrating questions to assure members about the quality of the work.


Most children benefit from good relationships with social workers who know
them well. Statutory visits to children are regular, but recording of these
important visits does not always comply with visiting guidelines, or fully
evidence the extent of the direct work that takes place with children.
Caseloads are appropriate and provide opportunities for relationship-based
work, including social workers accompanying children in activities, such as
horse-riding and ice-skating. Much care and thought goes into celebrating
childrens birthdays and their achievements.


Social workers receive regular supervision and value the support they receive
from their managers. However, some supervision records are compliance-led,
emphasising key performance indicators without sufficient focus on the quality
of social work interventions and on the difference they are making for
children. Supervision does not consistently drive childrens plans or challenge


a lack of progression of key actions. This contributes to drift and delay in
some childrens plans. (Recommendation)

Most childrens health needs are well met. Initial and annual health
assessments are timely for the vast majority of children. A small number of
children placed at a distance have experienced delays in having their health
needs assessed or met. The designated children looked after nursing team
continues to challenge these delays, but late notifications of new placements
by some social workers reduces the teams capacity to ensure that health
arrangements are in place. (Recommendation)


Children living within the local area receive support from a dedicated child and
adolescent mental health service worker, who coordinates triage and support
for children in care. However, there are delays in children receiving treatment.
Bespoke packages of support have been commissioned for children on an
individual basis when they are looked after. Strengths and difficulties
questionnaires are completed for all children looked after; the scores that
these generate are better than national averages and indicate an improving
picture in relation to childrens emotional well-being.


Children who go missing from care or who are at risk of sexual exploitation
are safeguarded effectively. Risk assessments are undertaken and strategy
meetings held where appropriate. Return home interviews are not recorded
consistently. This means that opportunities to gather information and
intelligence about childrens experiences and whereabouts can be missed.
Performance information does not include all missing episodes; this makes it
difficult to provide an accurate missing profile of children in care.
(Recommendation)


Childrens social workers work effectively with the youth offending service to
try to prevent offending behaviour. When required, the service supports
children who have committed offences; currently 11 children are being
supported in these circumstances, a reduction from 14 children in 201516.


The virtual school provides good support for children in care. Primary-age
children looked after achieve very well at key stage 1. They achieve nearly as
well as other children, and staff are working to close this gap further. They
achieve less well at key stage 2. At the end of secondary school, key stage 4,
attainment figures are lower for children looked after than their peers
nationally. Virtual school staff provide rigorous challenge to schools about the
help they are giving to children looked after. Staff have been successful in
significantly reducing the number of days children looked after lose education
as a result of fixed-term exclusions. No child looked after has been
permanently excluded. None of the children on the active register for children
missing education are children looked after. All children looked after are
receiving 25 hours of education, or more, a week. The attendance of children
looked after at primary schools is very high, and the virtual school has been
effective in improving their attendance in Years 10 and 11. Pupil premium


funding is used to best effect to help children looked after make progress, and
the virtual school evaluates the impact of schools use of this funding.

Personal education plans require improvement. For too many children, actions
are vague and timescales not clearly defined. Targets lack clarity and are not
precise. (Recommendation)

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

Children in Central Bedfordshire for whom adoption is the right plan receive a
good service. Adoption is considered promptly for all children looked after,
including children whose brother or sister has previously been adopted. In the
last 12 months, 27 children have been adopted; of these, 15 children had
additional complexities to consider when matching with adoptive families. This
is an improving trajectory. At the time of the inspection, all children waiting
for adoption were either matched or linked with prospective adopters.


Family group meetings support early parallel planning for children effectively,
by helping to ensure that potential adopters come forward at the earliest
opportunity. Effective viability and connected persons assessments result in
detailed evaluations of the options for permanent placements. Good oversight
of these processes enables managers to anticipate and match the needs of
children with potential adopters at an early stage. As a result, the local
authority is matching children quickly with prospective adopters and has
consistently reduced the time taken between children entering care and
moving in with their new families.


Recruitment and preparation of adopters are effective. In the year leading up
to the inspection, 18 adopter households from diverse backgrounds were
approved, most of whom were matched or linked with Central Bedfordshire
children. Staff respond promptly to enquiries about adoption. Historical delay
in the first stage of the assessment has now been addressed, and newly
approved adopters are satisfied with the time taken for assessment. Most
prospective adopters undertake voluntary work to increase their experience
with unrelated children. This has strengthened the assessment process and
enabled applicants to use their experience to reflect on their understanding of
childrens needs. As a result, potential adopters have been willing to consider
a broad range of children, including disabled children and sibling groups.
Adopters are encouraged to undertake a wide range of training on offer to
increase their skills, and they report that this is of high quality.


Assessments of prospective adopters are consistently strong, and there is
good use of curiosity to explore personal histories and motivations to adopt.
Reports clearly analyse adopters strengths and vulnerabilities and ensure that
the matching process is robust. A full range of checks is undertaken to ensure


that children placed are safeguarded. There has been a strong focus on
seeking to recruit prospective adopters for fostering-to-adopt, which is
discussed as part of the assessment. In the last year, three children were
adopted from foster-to-adopt placements, benefiting from reduced placement
moves and promoting childrens attachments.

Monthly matching project meetings with the regional consortium have enabled
the authority to increase the pool of adopters available for children and to
make inter-agency placements without delay. To strengthen family finding,
staff make referrals to national and regional systems three months after
approval, if there is no local match.


Child permanence reports are of high quality and describe the needs and
attributes of children effectively. This ensures that successful matches are
made to potential carers. Children are prepared well for adoption. Most have a
wish you well visit with birth relatives who, in many cases, also meet with
prospective adopters. Introductions are sensitively managed and paced to
meet childrens needs. Birth parents are encouraged to accept counselling for
support.


The adoption service comprises a stable team of experienced, well-trained
professionals, who provide a highly effective service. Adoption social workers
work closely with childrens social workers to achieve a comprehensive
understanding of the childs needs and the adopters strengths and potential
vulnerabilities. This thorough approach ensures that matching decisions are
effective. Adopters are extremely positive about their experience. They value
their social workers, their experience at panel and the support that they
receive.


The well-run adoption panel is effective in improving practice standards within
the authority. Under the leadership of an experienced independent chair, it
scrutinises information provided and carefully considers recommendations
made. All reports to panel are rigorously quality assured by the panel adviser,
who also provides training to staff. Minutes are thorough and evidence the
recommendations succinctly. The chair provides an annual report to the
authority, including recommendations for improvement. Learning from
previous adoption disruptions is used to improve practice standards. For
example, the panel now gives closer attention to support for inter-agency
placements.


The agency decision-maker is challenging and child-centred in his decisions,
but does not record the rationale for his decisions. This would make it difficult
to explain decisions in the event of a challenge and results in a lack of a clear
record on file for the child. (Recommendation)


The adoption tracker is not effective in supporting senior management
scrutiny of the whole adoption process. It does not include all children for
whom a decision has been made by the agency decision-maker, or extend


oversight of the child beyond the adoptive placement. As a result, some
adoption decisions have not been rescinded when the childs care plan has
changed. This has not stopped revised care plans for children being
progressed.

A good range of adoption support is available, including specialist therapy and
support for disabled children. Adoption social workers are trained in
therapeutic techniques, enhancing their contribution to post-adoption support.
Adopters receive a quarterly newsletter, and there are annual seasonal and
celebrational events. The adoption team is currently supporting 30 children.
Life-story books and later-life letters are routinely provided when the child is
adopted. The vast majority of life-story books are creatively presented and
thoughtfully written and contain suitable information to support the child in
their developing attachments and identity. A minority of later-life letters are
overly long and too blunt in their narrative. Careful consideration is given to
post-adoption contact, and 121 children currently benefit from these
arrangements.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good

Care leavers are safe and feel safe. They are confident young adults who have
pride in themselves. The local authority takes seriously the need to engage
with care leavers, hear their views and to celebrate their achievements, for
example at the annual awards ceremony. Care leavers appreciate the contact
they have with senior leaders, who are rightly proud of them.


Personal advisers support care leavers very well and help them to understand
their choices. For example, one care leaver found their own independent
accommodation, but staff identified that this location would put the young
person at risk, and helped them to find good alternatives. Care leavers
understand the risks associated with their behaviour and what they can do to
improve their lives. Those who are at risk of harm are supported effectively to
reduce such risks.


Pathway planning is good. Plans provide a rich picture of each young person.
Case histories are very detailed. Care leavers are fully involved in producing
their pathway plans, and their views and experience shine through. Transition
planning is good, and staff ensure that there is always an overlap to ensure
continuous support. Pathway plans provide a detailed analysis of care leavers
health needs and show how they will be met. Basing a lead mental health
practitioner in the care leavers team has helped to ensure smooth transitions
for young people from child and adolescent mental health services to adult
mental health provision.



All care leavers are supported by a personal adviser and a member of the
councils youth support team. These arrangements work well for young
people, including those who have learning difficulties and disabilities.


Care leavers have had to wait too long for access to their health records and
health histories. The local authority is addressing this by introducing health
passports for young people. This is a recent development, and only a minority
of care leavers had received these at the time of the inspection.


The local authority works well to ensure that care leavers develop the skills
needed for independent living. Foster carers and semi-independent
accommodation providers support young people with a range of training and
development to help them work towards independence. Care leavers spoken
to are rightly positive about the help and support they receive from social
workers and personal advisers, who have a detailed knowledge of their needs.


The local authority supports young people effectively to remain looked after
until their 18th birthdays and a high proportion do so. Good support for young
people ensures an effective progression to independence. Accommodation for
care leavers is appropriate to their circumstances. However, the number who
stay put with their foster carers is low; there are only six in such
arrangements in the year to date and there were nine in the previous year.


The service monitors care leavers progress closely. Youth support specialists
and personal advisers help young people to access education, jobs and
training. They work well with education providers to help young people to
overcome any barriers to their progress and to set challenging goals for
themselves. As a result, the proportion of care leavers who are in education,
employment or training has increased year on year. At the time of the
inspection, seven care leavers were at university.


Virtually all care leavers are in suitable accommodation. Bed and breakfast
accommodation has not been used for the last four years. The local authority
undertakes rigorous monitoring and quality assurance of accommodation.
Staff in semi-independent living accommodation provide a range of
opportunities for young people to socialise. Personal advisers take good
action, at an early stage, to prevent tenancy breakdowns or find alternative
places for the young people to live. Personal advisers ensure that
unaccompanied asylum-seeking care leavers integrate well, meeting their
accommodation needs and helping to build their confidence.


Care leavers know about the leaving care grant and are able to obtain more
information about their entitlements through their personal advisers and youth
support workers. The local authority is continuing to develop the information
that it provides through its website and a new smart-phone application (app)
that it is planning for care leavers.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Senior managers and leaders in Central Bedfordshire share a clear vision and sense
of purpose. By engaging staff and partners successfully, they drive and sustain
service improvement. They listen to, and act on, what children and young people tell
them. Elected members are visible and active and provide an appropriate level of
critical challenge. Governance arrangements are robust.
Partnerships, particularly with health, are well established. Strategic priorities are
closely aligned. Strategic boards work well together to avoid duplication or overlap.
Reporting arrangements are clear and coherent. The childrens leadership board is
driving the shift towards integrated locality services.
Partners understand the needs of their local communities. Commissioning and decommissioning decisions are evidence-based. Contract monitoring is outcomefocused, but the draft sufficiency statement is not specific or measurable.
Partners work well together to combat child sexual exploitation but do not routinely
collate and analyse data on the identification, assessment and reduction of risks.
The CiCC is influential and effective. The corporate parenting panel works well with
the CiCC. The panel is able to show that it is helping to improve outcomes for
children, but it is not used to best effect to hold senior managers to account.
The local authority is proud of the progress it has made against key performance
indicators. However, senior managers do not have a clear line of sight on some
important areas of activity. The quality of data on the offer and completion of return
home interviews is limited. Senior managers are not rigorously tracking the use of
the Public Law Outline. Although managers act on audit findings, some audits focus
too much on process and compliance. As a result, audits do not always fully reflect
the childs experience.
Social workers receive regular supervision, which is increasingly reflective, but the
level of challenge and oversight is not always effective. This also applies to IROs and
child protection conference chairs. On occasion, this leads to drift or delay for
children.
Senior managers and leaders are outward looking and open to challenge. They have
succeeded in creating a learning culture, one in which social work can flourish. The
social work academy has made a major contribution to improving workforce stability.
It has also been successful in promoting professional development across childrens
services.


Inspection findings

Senior managers and leaders have a clear sense of vision and purpose. The
way in which the DCS is leading the transformation programme encourages
shared ownership. The emphasis is on sustainability and resilience. Partners
support the move towards integrated locality services. Managers and staff are
involved in the transformation programme, and there is widespread support
for the direction of travel.


The corporate centre is fully engaged with the childrens services agenda.
Corporate and childrens social care strategic priorities are aligned. Elected
members are supportive and engaged and provide appropriate critical
challenge. Governance arrangements are well established and effective. The
chief executive meets regularly with the DCS and at regular intervals with the
chair of the LSCB. He has been influential in strengthening the local response
to child sexual exploitation.


The Childrens Leadership Board is well chaired and well led and is effective in
promoting partnership working. The Health and Wellbeing Board (HWBB), the
community safety partnership and the children and adult safeguarding boards
work together to avoid duplication, agree priorities and keep children and
young people on the agenda. The local authority works well with health and
the two neighbouring unitary authorities, which is helping to deliver better
outcomes for children. There are good strategic and operational links between
children and adult services. This supports effective pathways to adulthood.


The joint strategic needs assessment gives a clear picture of local needs. The
local authoritys analysis of current and future demand for services is very
sophisticated. However, the draft sufficiency statement includes too many
objectives, some of which are not specific or measurable. This undermines its
effectiveness.


The local authoritys approach to commissioning and contract management is
suitably outcome-focused. The online performance dashboard is impressive
and provides live performance management and contract monitoring
information. This ensures that commissioning and decommissioning decisions
are evidence-based. Four young people, including two previously
unaccompanied asylum-seeking children, assist in reviewing care leavers
placements. Providers are very positive about their dealings with
commissioners and describe relationships as dynamic, responsive, supportive
and challenging.


Senior managers recently decommissioned the advocacy and independent
visiting service and brought it back in-house because they were not happy
with the support that children were receiving. Take-up is increasing. Twentyseven children have requested support since the beginning of April, and most
have received a service. Advocacy drop-in sessions are in the early


developmental stages in local childrens homes. Three new volunteers have
been recruited to act as independent visitors.

Members of the CiCC are making a real difference. The CiCC has influenced
the way in which looked after reviews are organised and run. It has been
influential in instigating a review of life-story work by the local authority.
Members of the CiCC help to induct and train elected members and staff,
including newly qualified social workers. The CiCC website is interactive and
easy to use and provides plenty of useful information and helpful links. The
local authority is good at celebrating childrens achievements. The council is
very proud of its CiCC. Members of the CiCC said that they feel valued and
that they are confident that senior managers and leaders take what they say
seriously.


The corporate parenting panel works well with the CiCC and can evidence its
impact in improving outcomes for children. Children looked after have free
access to leisure services. Elected members are signed up to the children
looked after pledge and use their contacts to try to increase opportunities for
young people. Good progress has been achieved in gaining appropriate
housing and supported accommodation for care leavers. However, the
corporate parenting panel is currently not used to best effect to hold senior
managers to account. For example, panel members need to know about
issues and things that are not working so well and what action is being taken
to improve them. (Recommendation)


Performance in relation to key performance indicators is good, including, for
example, the timeliness of initial health assessments and statutory visits.
Placement stability is good. The vast majority of care leavers are living in
suitable accommodation and the percentage who are in employment,
education or training is good.


Senior managers are not always measuring the right things. They are not
using performance management information to drive permanence. Some
children looked after have experienced drift and delay. Others, who live in
long-term foster placements, lack certainty about their long-term future.
Information about children who are missing from home or care is crosschecked against information about those who are missing from school, are
home educated or the subject of fixed-term exclusions. However, analysis
about the offer and completion of return home interviews is under-developed.
Similarly, the analysis of the impact of interventions in respect of child sexual
exploitation is also under-developed. Managers do not know how many
screening or risk assessment tools are being completed, or use this
information to inform subsequent planning. (Recommendation)


The local authority has a well-developed approach to quality assurance.
Managers audit 30 case files every month. IROs and child protection
conference chairs review the quality of social work practice, and senior
managers systematically consider the learning from this activity. The principal


social worker uses this information to inform practice and shape the training
offer. Despite these strengths, the quality of case management audits is
variable. A minority are over-optimistic and focus too much on compliance at
the expense of quality. There is a need to build more soft measures into the
performance framework, to better reflect the experiences of children and
young people.

Senior managers actively promote a business as usual approach to
continuous improvement, with an emphasis on learning rather than blame.
Team meetings share information about the learning from audits, complaints
and serious case reviews. Practice and performance are discussed in service
area meetings and a regular learning bulletin aims to ensure that everyone
gets the message. The number of complaints from children is small, and the
local authority acts on them all.


The local authority is open to challenge. It uses learning from peer reviews,
inspection activity and best practice from elsewhere to improve outcomes for
children. This reflects a genuine commitment to continuous improvement. The
DCS knows there is variability in the quality of management oversight. Many
managers, especially those in the family support teams, are still new. The
challenge is to strengthen the quality of plans. Ensuring that they are all
outcome-focused, specific and measurable will increase accountability and
help to drive improvement in outcomes for children. During this inspection,
the DCS has acted on the feedback from inspectors. (Recommendation)


The local authority has positive working relationships with the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and the local judiciary.
Care proceedings are timely. There is more work to do to develop better
three-way communication with Cafcass and the family justice board, and to
strengthen the quality of pre-proceedings and evidence presented to the
courts.


The success of the social work academy has helped to increase workforce
stability. It also promotes the development of staff in childrens social care,
early help and early years. All staff, including agency workers, have access to
high-quality training. Social workers are well supported during their assessed
and supported year in employment.


The local authority is creating an environment in which good social work can
flourish. New members of staff appreciate the quality of their induction and
having small teams and manageable caseloads. The results of the staff survey
are very positive. Staff feel valued and morale is high. All but one of the heads
of service are now in permanent posts. The local authoritys reliance on
agency workers has reduced, and is down from 52% three years ago to 17%
at the time of the inspection. Staff turnover is low. Children and families are
benefiting from the continuity that this provides.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
Central Bedfordshire Safeguarding Children Board is good. Clear governance
arrangements and systematic scrutiny ensure that accountabilities are clear and
enable rigorous oversight of safeguarding arrangements.
The influential independent chair has created a strong and engaged partnership,
with collective determination to safeguard children. A collaborative approach to
partnership working ensures that partners benefit from shared work-streams with
neighbouring LSCBs under a pan-Bedfordshire arrangement.
The board maintains critical oversight of the effectiveness of services provided to
children in need of early help and children looked after. It has ensured that
safeguarding arrangements are effective for children who have disabilities, those in
private fostering arrangements and other vulnerable groups. Close partnership
working supports effective disruption activity and ensures that children at risk of
sexual exploitation receive the help they need. There is a need to build on this
good work to ensure that the analysis from return home interviews, child sexual
exploitation risk assessments and screening tools informs future planning and
mapping activity.
Comprehensive performance analysis, audit and monitoring ensure that the board
has a triangulated understanding of safeguarding practice across the partnership.
While this enables scrutiny in most key areas, the board does not currently review
data relating to contacts and there have been gaps in the submission of
performance information in respect of missing children. Consequently, the board is
not yet assured of the effectiveness of practice in these areas.
The board has been proactive in consulting children and young people about their
views of the effectiveness of safeguarding arrangements.
The board robustly scrutinises frontline practice through a well-embedded
programme of audit activity, which provides a line of sight to frontline practice, but
action planning and evaluation need strengthening.
The learning and improvement framework draws on a range of learning, including
learning from child deaths and serious case reviews. A comprehensive training
programme equips staff with the knowledge and confidence to carry out their
work.
The annual report provides a comprehensive overview of local performance and
the work of the board over the preceding year, but it is too descriptive, with
insufficient evaluation of the impact of the boards work.


Recommendations

Ensure that the annual report provides a rigorous assessment of the
effectiveness of local services and the impact of the board.


Strengthen current arrangements to ensure more effective analysis and
scrutiny of return home interviews and child sexual exploitation risk
assessments.


Strengthen audit activity so that learning and recommendations are coherently
set out, and action plans are specific and measurable.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

An influential independent chair, diligent business manager and strong
partnership ensure that the board is effective and that it meets its statutory
responsibilities. Well-attended, proactive sub-groups rigorously drive the work
of the board and ensure delivery of its core priorities. Short-life task-and-finish
groups are an efficient way of achieving the boards development work. Two
active lay members positively contribute to the boards scrutiny and
monitoring function.


Strong governance arrangements ensure that accountabilities across the
partnership are clear. The board has a good interface with other strategic
partnerships, including the community safety partnership, the HWBB and the
adult safeguarding board. The independent chair meets regularly with the
chief executive and the DCS, and the chairs of other strategic groups, to
ensure that priorities align and that safeguarding is a high priority across the
partnership.


Partnership working is effective. Well-engaged partners make an active
contribution to improving the delivery of services for children. The boards
priorities are clear and there is a shared commitment to improving
safeguarding practice. Partners benefit from a collaborative approach to
joining work-streams on areas of common concern with neighbouring LSCBs,
through the pan-Bedfordshire arrangement.


Board members express confidence in the credible and influential independent
chair. He has created a culture of openness, where curiosity and challenge are
encouraged, and, combined with the highly effective support provided by the
business manager, ensure coordination of the boards activities.


The board rigorously oversees safeguarding arrangements, consistently
scrutinising partner agencies work through its performance analysis, audit
programme and scrutiny of activity across the partnership. A detailed multiagency dataset ensures that the board has oversight of frontline practice and


the effectiveness of safeguarding arrangements. Although it enables the board
to identify dips in performance, informing planning and priority setting, there
are some omissions. There is a lack of data on contacts received by childrens
social care, and the proportion of which lead to referrals, to support the
boards analysis of thresholds. The performance sub-group reviews
performance against comparators, but the omission of comparator data in the
performance framework means that trends and dips may not be easily
identifiable. Agencies provide some analysis of their performance information,
but this is not always sufficiently analytical. The board is already aware of
most of these weaknesses, with the exception of the lack of contact data, and
had begun work to strengthen practice in these areas prior to the inspection.

The boards priorities rigorously drive a comprehensive multi-agency audit
plan. Audits carried out over the last year include a focus on domestic abuse,
neglect, adolescent mental health and children subject to SGOs. Well-engaged
partner agencies participate in case file auditing. The learning and
improvement sub-group monitors audit action plans and ensures that learning
is disseminated. Audit reports do not always distinguish effectively between
findings and learning, and actions are not always sufficiently specific or
measurable. (Recommendation)


Partners provide challenge, and the independent chair is robust at holding
agencies to account. Agencies compliance with safeguarding practice is
monitored through a pan-Bedfordshire section 11 audit process, which
includes agency self-assessment, multi-agency challenge events and
development of a multi-agency action plan. These audits are carried out on a
three-yearly basis, followed by progress reporting against action planning in
year two, and then a thematic audit in year three. Partners have engaged
readily in this scrutiny process, enabling the board to assure itself about
agencies compliance with safeguarding standards.


There is a robust and effective process in place for ensuring systematic review
and revision of policies and procedures through the pan-Bedfordshire policies
and procedures group. Lessons learned from audit activity and case reviews
and other learning purposefully inform policy development. The Central
Bedfordshire threshold guidance is a comprehensive and clear document,
which supports professionals in making threshold decisions. However, it is
lacking in specific references to section 20 and section 31 of the Children Act
become looked after.


Despite the low prevalence across Central Bedfordshire, the board has taken
action to equip partners to identify and respond to honour-based abuse,
forced marriage and female genital mutilation. Work carried out by a
dedicated task-and-finish group includes the development of a multi-agency
strategy, service pathways and awareness-raising. The board has sought to
ensure that the additional vulnerabilities of children who have disabilities are
recognised and understood. These childrens needs are well considered in the


threshold guidance, and the board has engaged with a neighbouring LSCB to
deliver a well-attended disabled childrens spotlight event as a means of
raising awareness across the partnership.

The board has been active in overseeing the effectiveness of arrangements for
early help and children looked after. It has been influential in driving
improvements in practice for children looked after and care leavers, including
the timeliness of initial health assessments and strengthening the focus on
care leavers engagement in employment, education and training.


There is a strong and committed approach to tackling child sexual exploitation
across the partnership. Children benefit from a joined-up approach with the
neighbouring local authorities and LSCBs, driven by the three local authorities
chief executive officers. The development of a comprehensive, panBedfordshire-wide problem profile has informed awareness-raising and
disruption strategies effectively in Central Bedfordshire, including targeting of
hotels, fast food outlets and licensed premises. Awareness-raising has been
extensive, including the boards role in commissioning Chelseas Choice for
secondary schools and the use of the electronic e-safety tool, Looking Out for
Lottie. The boards child sexual exploitation and missing children sub-group
ensures that intelligence is shared to inform disruption strategies. However,
there is further work to do to ensure that intelligence from sexual exploitation
screening tools and risk assessments also informs wider problem profiling,
mapping and service development.


The board monitors the incidence of children going missing from home or care
and the completion of return home interviews through its multi-agency
performance dataset. The board has been robust in challenging deficits in
respect of police practice in response to missing children. Although progress
has been slow, recent changes in practice have resulted in a significant
reduction in the use of the absent categorisation, and more children have had
a risk assessment. Despite this progress, the scrutiny and analysis of data in
respect of children who go missing is not yet sufficiently robust or consistently
effective. There have been gaps in data-sharing by the police over recent
months, which means that the board has not had full assurance that the
response to missing children is effective. There is no formal structure in place
to ensure that the intelligence from return home interviews is used
systematically and strategically to inform analysis and disruption activity.
(Recommendation)


The boards joint training and development sub-group and the training unit
oversee an extensive range of multi-agency training opportunities across the
partnership effectively. Again, a pan-Bedfordshire arrangement ensures that
the burden on partners is minimised and that economies of scale are achieved
across the Bedfordshire-wide area. The training needs analysis is underdeveloped and is not yet informed by an understanding of partners
engagement in single-agency training to ensure that training is targeted
effectively. Work is already under way to address this shortfall.


completion rates, with continuous improvement evident. Participant
satisfaction rates are generally high. The board uses end-of-day surveys, dip
sampling and interviews with managers and staff at various points after the
delivery of training to assess the impact of training on behaviour and
performance. Impact analysis is included in evaluation reports to the board.
Some evidence of impact on learners skills, knowledge and confidence is
demonstrated, although poor engagement in surveys at the six-month review
stage means that evaluation of longer-term impact is limited.
incident notifications, to maximise opportunities for learning. The board
initiates serious case reviews appropriately when the criteria set out in
statutory guidance are met, resulting in the completion of three serious case
reviews in the last two years. There is multi-agency challenge and an
openness to learning, including from those cases that do not meet the criteria
for serious case review, with one such case currently under consideration. The
board provides presentations and briefings to agencies and seeks assurance
that messages have been cascaded effectively. Social workers spoken to
during the inspection were able to cite the key learning points from a recent
serious case review, providing evidence to demonstrate that the board has
been effective in ensuring that learning is embedded across frontline practice.
effectively, identifying modifiable factors and undertaking proactive work to
reduce the incidence of preventable child deaths. There has been extensive
work to raise awareness of safe sleeping, as well as work to reduce smoking
in pregnancy, among other activity. This has improved knowledge, although it
is difficult to evidence impact, given the small number of child deaths across
the local area. The panel has taken action to ensure a good interface with the
case review panel, in response to findings from a previous inspection.
Awareness-raising takes place, including dissemination of a twice-yearly
newsletter, to ensure that learning is shared.
to explore mechanisms for gaining an understanding of childrens experiences
of the help they receive. The tenacious and proactive approach of the subgroup chair has helped to secure good partnership engagement and a line of
sight to children and young people who are receiving frontline services. A
number of workshops and a conference have taken place to inform the
development of a questionnaire to capture childrens views. This will be used
agency-wide after the current pilot is complete.
performance and the work of the board, including some evaluation of local
effectiveness. However, the report is descriptive and does not sufficiently
analyse the impact of the boards work. (Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This includes children and young
people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and starting
their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and one
Additional Inspector (AI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Margaret Burke
Deputy lead inspector: Nigel Parkes
Team inspectors: Pauline Higham, Tracey Metcalfe, Cathy Blair, Derrick Baughan,
Donna Marriott
Senior data analyst: Judith Swindell
Quality assurance manager: John Mitchell


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


