Cheshire West and Chester
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
And
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 24 November 2015  17 December 2015
Report published: 19 February 2016

Childrens services in Cheshire West and Chester are good

Good

permanence

Good


Outstanding


Good


Outstanding


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Cheshire West and Chester are good. The director of childrens
services and the senior management team have worked hard to successfully
communicate their clear vision of high standards of practice. Social workers have
stayed with the authority, raising their standards and contributing to the
improvements. This outstanding leadership has resulted in good-quality services that
respond to the needs of children and families quickly and effectively.
Significant work by both leaders and staff has reinvigorated partnerships with other
agencies to develop and implement a shared approach to the assessment of risk and
the understanding of thresholds. As a result, key strategic priorities such as children
who go missing or who are at risk of sexual exploitation are clearly focused on
children and families who benefit from effective multi-agency working. The director
of childrens services is a calm and purposeful leader who understands his services
very well. He has a direct line of sight to front-line practice that enables him to have
a sufficiently clear understanding of any performance issues that arise. In turn,
leaders and managers respond quickly to rectify them. Social workers are well
supported and supervised by their managers, who have regular oversight of
casework. Leaders and managers understand local need  they respond to changing
demands and have planned well for the future. This is reflected in the strategic
service plan and commissioning framework.
The key recommendations from the safeguarding and looked after children
inspection in 2010 and the 2012 child protection inspection have been implemented
and progress has been sustained, resulting in improved outcomes for many children.
Some work is required to ensure that all strategy discussions benefit from a fully
comprehensive multi-agency sharing of information before actions are taken.
Assessments for disabled children do not always fully consider the impact of disability
on their everyday lives. Highly effective multi-agency systems that provide help to
families reduce the demand for statutory involvement with social care. When children
do need help and protection they receive appropriate good-quality services.
Arrangements for dealing with contacts and referrals are effective and decisions
made are appropriate and timely.
The level and depth of meticulous management oversight given to children at every
stage of the care and court planning process is an area of outstanding practice.
Outcomes for children who have returned home on care orders are tracked by the
service and any practice issues and learning are shared at The Merseyside and
Cheshire Local Family Justice Board. This ensures timely action, prevents drift and
delay for children and provides a good opportunity to share wider learning.
Children who are looked after are well supported. Planning for childrens permanence
happens without delay and plans are actively progressed and robustly challenged
when necessary by independent reviewing officers. Some assessments of children
looked after are not updated regularly enough to reflect current needs and
circumstances. Additionally the plans resulting from such assessments do not always
have specific targets for improving outcomes for children. Effective work is


undertaken by the local authority within the courts. Care applications are timely and
of good quality, leading to the completion of legal proceedings within expected
timescales.
Placement stability is good and the vast majority of children looked after live with a
foster family or are placed for adoption. A robust, analytical sufficiency strategy is
comprehensive and clearly sets out how future needs will be met. It includes
appropriate targeted recruitment of carers for larger families and older children. The
local authority has increased the number of children looked after who have their
health needs assessed and have dental checks completed on time, but delays occur
in this area for some children. Similarly, while life story work has been started for
most children in long-term foster care, there is delay in completion of this work in
too many cases.
Outstanding practice in the adoption service means that children are considered for
adoption at an early stage and creative family finding means that brothers and
sisters are adopted together and children who are considered difficult to match are
adopted. Performance against the adoption scorecard is very strong and reflects the
excellent practice in the service of robust case tracking to prevent delay and fast
tracking second-time adopters.
Care leavers benefit from good, trusting relationships with their personal advisers,
who make strenuous efforts to keep in touch with them, helping and supporting
them through the transition to independent living. Care leavers are provided with
grants to set up a home plus ongoing financial support. In addition, they are helped
to access local community health services. A good health passport scheme is in place
for young people aged up to 18 but presently does not include older young people to
understand their full health history. Young people feel safe where they live and there
is a good range and choice of accommodation.
A strong culture of performance management and quality assurance encourages
learning and continuous improvement throughout the childrens social care and early
help service. Social workers feel valued and supported by their managers and enjoy
working in the service. Workforce stability and sufficiency is a priority for the local
authority, which has taken action to ensure that there is a fully staffed service at all
times.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates three childrens homes. Two were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding
arrangements/arrangements for the protection of children was in October 2012.
The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for looked after children
was in November 2010. The local authority was judged to be inadequate.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since January 2011. He
is also the DCS in Halton.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since January 2014.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 66,157 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Cheshire West and Chester. This is 19.9% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 15.7% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 12.3% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 9.5% (the national average is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 4% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Mixed or Asian and Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 4.3% (the national figure is 19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 2.9% (the national figure is 15.0%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 October 2015, 2,088 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 October 2015, 268 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 246 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 October 2015, three children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from six at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, five serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and two serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at
the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 October 2015, 471 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 71 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 500 (75 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015. Of this number:
authority area
area
 one child is an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 23 adoptions
independent living
 eight children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now living
in houses of multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Recommendations

Ensure that information is gathered from all relevant agencies to inform
strategy discussions and meetings in order to gain all information before
decisions are made (paragraph 15).


Ensure that assessments for disabled children fully consider the impact of
disability on their everyday lives (paragraph 30).


Ensure that children looked afters health needs are assessed in a timely way
and extend the health passport scheme to all care leavers (paragraph 53)


Continue with and strengthen the work done by the virtual school with children
looked after at Key Stages 3 and 4 to increase their progress and attainment
(paragraph 57)


Ensure that assessments of children looked after reflect their current needs and
circumstances and that care planning documentation has targets for
improvement that are clear and prioritise the most important issues for children
and young people (paragraphs 40 and 42).


Summary for children and young people
 Senior managers have worked hard to improve services for children and families
and have made good progress since inspectors last visited. They have spoken
with children and young people and listened to what they have had to say.
Because of their work, children are kept safe and the help they are given
improves their lives.
 Professionals such as social workers and teachers work well together to give
children and families the help they need when they need it. This often means that
the difficulties they have do not become more serious. Social workers and other
professionals keep good records so that they are able to make the right
judgements about the help children and young people need. They are especially
good at finding out what help babies and their parents need before the baby is
born.
 Social workers support families well to keep children at home but make the right
decisions about when children must be taken into care.
 Young people who are members of the Children in Care Council told us that they
feel safe where they live and are well supported by their social workers.
 Social workers are good at identifying when children are at risk of being sexually
exploited. Children who go missing from home are spoken to quickly by expert
staff and given help them to avoid problems in the future. When children go
missing from school, staff work hard to find them and make sure they are safe.
 Professionals know children and young people well, and help them to understand
their problems and make plans to solve them. However, when they write plans
down sometimes they do not include targets to make it easy to see how well
children are progressing.
 Managers and social workers make good arrangements so that children who are
looked after can stay permanently with the same foster carers. This makes their
lives more stable; children in care are well looked after and are happy.
Arrangements for adoption are excellent. Workers make sure that adopters can
offer a good home to children, including those with special needs. Staff work hard
to match children with potential adopters and to make the adoption process as
quick as possible. They provide good help to support families once the adoption is
complete.
 Social workers help young people stay with foster carers until they are ready to
leave. Young people who leave care are helped to find a good place to live and to
learn how to live on their own. Professionals are working hard to ensure that
young people who leave care have a good choice of accommodation to move
into, even in an emergency.
 Although looked after children attend a school that is right for them, too few do
well enough at secondary school and this affects their chances of becoming
successful adults. Too few continue in education or gain an apprenticeship once
they leave school.


 Social workers sometimes are too slow completing work with children to help
them understand their life story, something that helps them make sense of their
place in the world.

The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Access to appropriate, effective help and support combined with a wide range of
good services are provided at the right time to meet the needs of children, young
people and families. As a result, risks are minimised and outcomes improve for the
majority of children. Multi-agency, community-based early support is well coordinated and timely. This means that needs are identified and appropriate early help
interventions prevent problems escalating.
Partner agencies have a good understanding of the thresholds for referral for early
intervention and childrens social care. This ensures that children are referred to the
appropriate agency for help. Children at immediate risk of harm are responded to in
a timely way and swift action is taken to ensure that they are safe. However, not all
strategy discussions benefit from the widest possible range of partner agencies being
consulted until after enquiries have commenced.
Timely assessments make effective use of historical information. Childrens wishes
and feelings are well recorded and all children have access to independent advocacy.
Assessments lead to the development of multi-agency plans that improve outcomes
and reduce risk for children. Disabled children are well supported and have access to
a range of good and helpful services. However, some assessments for disabled
children do not fully consider the impact of individual disability on the everyday life of
the child.
A wide range of effective and appropriate service provision is available at all levels of
need for children who are at risk of harm as a result of domestic abuse. Children are
well supported due to increasingly effective early identification and intervention.
Assessments of young people who present as homeless are completed in a timely
way and this results in support via multi-agency plans that address their needs.
Effective and established systems are in place to identify and evaluate risk for
children who go missing or who are at risk of child sexual exploitation. Children and
young people are responded to with a range of appropriate support to intervene and
reduce harm.


Inspection findings

Robust, co-ordinated and effective multi-agency early help services provided to
children and families prevent the need for escalation to more targeted services
in many cases. The Early Support Assessment Team (ESAT) and Integrated
Early Support (IES) service established in 2013 have improved access to early
help by providing a central point of contact. As a result, robust case
management of team around the family (TAF) arrangements supports and
helps families who do not meet the threshold for intervention from childrens
social care.


The Troubled Families programme is fully integrated into the Early Support
Service, providing effective support for families with good tracking systems in
place to monitor outcomes.


An effective central point for all early help referrals ensures that robust
information gathering takes place from a wide range of agencies to inform
decisions about next steps and get the right services in place to help children.
Referrals for early help support are discussed at weekly multi-agency locality
case management meetings to ensure effective information sharing and
provision of service by the right partner agency. Robust recording of consent by
families to share information is recorded on files.


Multi-agency locality teams develop good-quality TAF assessment and plans to
provide services to meet need. Assessments are detailed, including recording of
the childs voice and the views of parents and other significant adults. In many
cases, there is good evidence of direct work with children and the use of
assessment tools and other resources by workers. Assessments result in goodquality plans with specific targets and actions and clear consideration of
contingency planning to support families and reduce risk to children.

integrated electronic case management system for early support and is using
innovative technology to support successful partner contribution to TAF.
Improvements in the way that progress on case work is recorded and
monitored are enabling better understanding and monitoring of the journey of
children across the continuum of need. This has resulted in improved services
to individuals and better performance management information to inform wider
service development.
childrens social care ensure that children get the help they need from the right
service. Cases are progressed to referral and assessment where appropriate,
and where needs change they are stepped up or down the continuum of need
while retaining a plan that maintains the support being offered.
harm and take prompt and effective action to keep them safe. The screening of


contacts and referrals is rigorous and routine consideration is given to historical
information. Management oversight of contacts and referrals is appropriate and
thresholds are applied consistently. The majority of contacts are notifications
from police. The vast majority of these are appropriate and timely and all
referrals from the police include a statement of the voice of child which
considers the experience of children and improves the quality of the information
provided.
thoroughly with targets for completion being set and based on the needs of the
child. The majority of assessments are of good quality, use analysis to come to
appropriate conclusions and lead to the provision of appropriate support to help
children. The quality of pre-birth assessments is particularly strong and all cases
seen were of at least good quality.
clearly on case files to inform assessment and care planning. Social workers
routinely visit children and speak to them alone where this is appropriate. Their
views are clearly recorded on their case files. Work with parents of unborn
children (pre-birth) demonstrates social workers building trusting relationships
with parents to obtain their views, which are clearly considered when
developing care plans.
are protected and risk is reduced. Qualified social workers undertake effective
investigations, children are seen and spoken to, and decision-making is timely
and appropriate. Strategy discussions are timely, but occasionally the discussion
only includes childrens social care and police. This is mitigated in some cases
by the information being already available as a result of detailed screening in
the Contact and Referral Team or from the referrer themselves. In a small
number of cases, work is begun without the benefit of the widest possible
consultation with other agencies. However, all relevant agencies are routinely
consulted as investigations progress.
risks at an initial child protection conference is timely and leads to effective
multi-agency child protection planning to address and minimise the issues of
risk. The number of children on plans for emotional abuse is high at 56% and
reflects the increased identification and understanding of the impact of
domestic abuse. Children do not stay on plans for too long, with no child being
on a plan for over two years and low numbers of children being subject to
second or subsequent plans. Children are visited regularly, with 94.8% of visits
being within statutory timescales in the last 3 months.
child protection chairs, who use escalation procedures where necessary to drive
up standards and challenge any delay. Comments from child protection chairs
on quality and progress are evident on childrens files.


intervention that is meeting need or reducing risk. However, the recording of
some plans does not demonstrate sufficiently clear targets or timescales that
can be easily measured. As a result, records do not always demonstrate or do
justice to the impact of the help and support being delivered. However, social
workers can readily describe and evaluate help offered verbally.
multi-agency professionals at core group meetings. They ensure that
appropriate support addresses needs and in most cases, this successfully
reduces risk. Core group professionals are fully involved in care planning and
contribute to review conferences. Information sharing is good and the
timeliness and quality of core groups is monitored and reviewed by child
protection chairs.
identify children in need. All children seen during inspection had plans in place
that clearly identify the issues they face. A range of appropriate and goodquality multi-agency interventions and services were delivered to meet
identified needs.
risk children may face from sexual exploitation. Screening is well established
and undertaken across the partnership. As a result, interventions are delivered
promptly and risks are reduced in the vast majority of cases. Screening is
consistently undertaken by professionals in all agencies to identify levels of risk
to young people from child sexual exploitation. This leads to interventions that
successfully address and reduce risk.
children who are at risk of sexual exploitation. The establishment of a pilot
specialist multi-agency team to gather and share information about child sexual
exploitation in the borough is providing a range of services to support young
people. The cohort of young people at potential risk is well understood and all
have multi-agency plans led by childrens social care. In addition to undertaking
awareness-raising, the team is providing effective support to professionals and
intervention with young people, including health assessments and advice and a
range of direct work. A further good and helpful development is the new
workspace on the electronic record system enabling concerns about child sexual
exploitation to be more easily recorded and reviewed. Effective collation and
analysis of intelligence has led to further reduction of risk to young people
through successful disruption activity in the borough alongside some successful
prosecutions.
that children missing from home are identified by the police and offered
independent return interviews through a commissioned specialist service to
discuss the reasons for their absence. In many cases, this interview is followed


by direct work that reduces future risk. There are low numbers of young people
who repeatedly go missing from home. Good information sharing and joint
working between the police and services ensures good understanding of the
cohort and any emerging themes or issues.
exploitation are being made by professionals and effective use of the screening
tool to identify risk was seen by inspectors. Strategic work in the last 12 months
around missing children has focused on ensuring shared understanding,
practice and processes in relation to return home interviews. The regular
collation of intelligence gathered ensures that professionals have an
understanding of the cohort involved and issues as they emerge. This leads to
identified themes being considered as part of regular performance reporting to
the council and the local safeguarding board.
routinely used. The local authority maintains accurate records of children
missing education and vigorously pursues them until their location and
educational arrangement are known. Good work with local police ensures that
schools are informed and supported when children are affected by domestic
violence and this puts them at risk of non-attendance.
team to ensure a joined-up response when children stop attending school. Staff
cross-check their information with police and school records of those at risk of
sexual exploitation. Children missing education concerns that involve a potential
risk of exploitation are referred to social workers and the police without delay.
where domestic abuse is present. The response to domestic abuse by childrens
social care is well developed and co-ordinated and children are being supported
through a range of services to help improve their circumstances. In all domestic
abuse cases seen during the inspection, appropriate services are being offered
to families as part of planning, including perpetrators of domestic abuse being
provided with multi-agency response, challenge and support via Navigate Safer
and access to a voluntary perpetrator programme. Children and young people
are supported well by a range of services including commissioned services
providing research-based group work programmes designed to prevent
development of aggressive behaviour in teenagers. Services for adult victims
include in-house and commissioned services including Gateway, Survivor
Recovery Programme (for Adults) and a supportive accommodation service.
conference (MARAC) by multi-agency representatives results in good quality
information sharing and actions taken to reduce risk to children and vulnerable
adults. They review and risk manage higher-level domestic abuse cases to
ensure that families receive the right level of intervention and support. Minutes
demonstrate all referring agencies using an agreed risk assessment tool,


sharing information and putting appropriate actions in place to address
presenting issues. Actions are followed up by the chair, and if they are not
reported as complete then agencies are challenged appropriately. Referrals to
the MARAC have continued to increase as a result of greater awareness-raising.
Fifty per cent of referrals are from agencies other than the police (155 referrals
in quarter two of this year compared with 121 in same quarter of 201415).
The chair of the MARAC reports good and consistent attendance at multi agency meetings by named workers from each agency.
support to families where domestic abuse is identified but where the threshold
for social care intervention is not met. This means that children are not left in
situations of risk without being given help and support to reduce it. In October
which resulted in support to 105 children from 55 families.
services to help meet ongoing needs, and parents reported feeling listened to
and well supported. Some written assessments are brief, but in all cases seen,
the risk analysis was focused, identified future planning and clearly reflected
the voice of the child. The recording of plans is not consistently of good quality
and would benefit from more detail and greater focus on the impact of disability
on the child in their everyday lives. Managers are aware of these issues and are
currently undertaking a review of the support offered to disabled children, with
initial recommendations expected in January 2016.
assessed by social workers to identify if they are in need and appropriate
support is provided. There are currently no young people in B&B
accommodation and there have been no young people placed in such
accommodation for the past five months although there were a small number
of episodes prior to this time. This was an action of last resort and young
peoples needs were assessed and they were judged to be low vulnerability
before being accommodated there. The DCS has made a personal pledge that
they will not be used again. The local authority is giving high priority to this
matter and fully understand that B&B is not suitable accommodation for young
people. Following a review of its supply of temporary accommodation, six new
emergency placements have been acquired to complement existing units
available to the local authority.
statutory requirements are met. This could be improved further through having
more focused oversight for decision making in respect of private fostering to
monitor the quality assurance of private fostering arrangements and to ensure
that the statement of purpose and annual report fully describe the awareness
raising that has taken place and its impact.


practice by adults working with children are in place. The annual report is clear,
accessible and includes essential performance information. The majority of
referrals are dealt with in a timely manner. Records are kept separately from
the main IT system and are not accessible to other managers in the authority.
Cases seen proceeded to timely strategy meetings that are well recorded and
well managed, with all risks identified and appropriate actions specified and
followed up. This includes robust enforcement of learning and disciplinary
action in both cases. Appropriate designated officer practice was also evidenced
in case work sampled by inspectors.
support them in ensuring that their views are heard as part of child in need or
child protection procedures. There is evidence that this service is well promoted
and used by a growing number of children to effectively support their
involvement in their own care planning. This is good practice and needs to
continue to be expanded to a larger number of young people. Child protection
chairs recommend advocacy as part of the outline plan but this is not followed
up in all cases.
childrens rights advocacy and independent visitors for all children receiving a
service from childrens social care including looked after children, children in
need and children on child protection plans. Children are supported to get their
thoughts and feelings heard in core groups and reviews and are also supported
to raise issues such as problems with placements or with contact arrangements.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
In Cheshire West and Chester, decisions for children to become looked after are
timely and based on thorough risk assessments. All work completed as part of the
Public Law Outline is rigorous and effective. Senior managers closely track the
progress of children throughout, ensuring that there is no drift. The quality of
assessments and plans to support applications to the court are good, and timeliness
of court proceedings is very good.
Independent reviewing officers (IROs) are proactive and tenacious in their oversight
of the service. Their additional oversight of children placed out of area ensures that
children are not disadvantaged by distance. Children spoken to during the inspection
highly valued their relationship with them.
Children and care leavers who have additional vulnerabilities due to going missing or
who are at risk of child sexual exploitation benefit from swift multi-agency action to
reduce risk that is based on a sound analysis of their circumstances.
The vast majority of children live in stable placements with carers who meet their
needs well and have appropriate levels of contact with people who are important to
them. Almost all children are thriving. However, their educational outcomes at Key
Stage 4 require improvement and more work needs to be done to assure timeliness
of routine health and dental checks.
Assessments of looked after childrens needs are generally good but they are not
updated regularly enough. Care plans while considering childrens needs do not
always demonstrate a consistent level of analysis and rigour and often do not reflect
the high-quality work undertaken with children and families. Pathway planning
supports and challenges young people, but written targets need to be improved
Most care leavers live in suitable accommodation and are supported well to develop
the skills they need to live independently. Their access to education, employment
and training, including to local authority apprenticeships, needs improvement and
they do not always have enough information about their family medical history.
Numbers of children made subject to special guardianship orders or who are adopted
are high and increasing. The local authority provides good, often creative financial
and practical help and assistance to these families. Performance on the adoption
scorecard is consistently good, improving and the best in the region. This, combined
with effective work to keep children out of care and to support children to safely
return home, means the numbers of children who need to be looked after in
Cheshire West and Chester are decreasing.


Inspection findings
and in almost all cases involved no delay. Responses to children and families
who are at risk of children becoming looked after are robust. When children are
not at immediate risk, the edge of care service, which started in June 2015,
offers planned and purposeful work using evidence-based practice. In some
cases seen this helped young people to remain at home with parents and in
others it assisted families to make informal appropriate arrangements within
the wider family to avoid the need for the child to become looked after by the
local authority.
or interim care order. Only 11% are subject to voluntary arrangements under
section 20 of the Children Act 1989. Senior managers and independent
reviewing officers monitor these children closely to ensure that they are not
subject to voluntary arrangements inappropriately.
Outline (PLO) is effective and robust. Good use of tracking documentation by
senior managers at every stage in the childs journey ensures that any potential
delay is identified, understood and responded to appropriately. Letters before
proceedings clearly explain to parents the local authoritys concerns and are
underpinned by clear contracts of expectations that outline in detail the
required changes. As a result, parents understand what is expected of them
and, in some cases seen, were assisted to make sufficient changes so that the
threshold for court proceedings was no longer met.
performs well in all aspects of court work. The quality of reports and
assessments provided to the court is good and cases generally come to court
well prepared and at a time that is right for children. As a result, the timeliness
of court proceedings is good. In 201415, the average duration was 26 weeks,
matching expected timescales. The year to date figure for 201516 is 27
weeks, demonstrating consistently good performance. In cases seen where
there was delay it was purposeful and led to good outcomes for the children
concerned.
good quality. A few are very good, drawing on research and family history,
resulting in appropriate next steps. However, despite clear practice guidelines
assessments of children looked after are not always updated frequently
enough, even when childrens circumstances significantly change. Updates of
childrens circumstances are included within care planning documents but do
not contain the required degree of analysis. Assessments to inform planning for
permanence such as viability assessments and together or apart assessments
are timely and of good quality.


means of ensuring that the review itself is child-focused and only those people
invited by the child can attend. Timing of these meetings is variable and a
minority take place too soon before the review, meaning that reports from the
meeting are not available to the IRO and the child in advance. The local
authority recognised this was an area for improvement prior to this inspection
and IROs have provided staff with training and guidance. Records of care
planning meetings and children looked after reviews seen by inspectors were
directly written to the child and reflected the childs lived experience very well.
workers to prioritise actions that will make the most difference for children.
Many plans seen confused needs with actions, were often too generalised to
assist families or carers to understand the detail of what was expected of them
and did not have clear measures of success. However, parents spoken to by
inspectors said that social workers had been clear with them what needed to
change and why, even if it was not always clearly reflected in the written plan.
In the vast majority of cases seen, outcomes for children had improved despite
the deficits seen in written plans.
children they were working with well and ensured that their wishes and feelings
were elicited through a variety of means including direct work and observations
of younger children. The vast majority of statutory visits (96%) are undertaken
within local expected timescales, which are shorter than statutory timescales,
and many young people are seen more frequently according to the needs of the
case. In all cases seen children were seen alone when appropriate to do so and
time taken to discuss key issues that were important to them. These included
contact with family members, school and health. However, children spoken to
by an inspector had experienced multiple changes of social worker in the past,
making it difficult for them to invest in these relationships. In a small number of
cases (4 of 17), changes had been very recent. In these cases, IROs had
remained a stable figure for the child. All young people spoken to value the
relationship they have with their IRO.
arising out of disability or their sexuality and all children live in placements that
can meet their cultural and ethnic needs. Although inspectors saw some good
examples of wider identity needs being considered, such as impact of parenting
on children, these were a minority.
of review quality assurance and challenge well, contributing to improved
outcomes for children. Caseloads, although slightly higher than nationally
recommended levels, are manageable. As a result, IROs are able to ensure that
they maintain increased contact with children who are particularly vulnerable,
for example those placed out of area. In 201415, timeliness of reviews was
good, with 98% held within statutory timescale. As of September 2015,


unvalidated data provided by the local authority show that 90% of children and
young people participated in their review, which represents very good
performance. In all cases seen by inspectors, children attended their review or
had had contact with their IRO, including in between reviews.
subsequent review. This, combined with a clear commitment throughout the
organisation to consider permanence in all its forms, has led to more children
achieving it. In 201415, 24% of children left care through special
guardianship, double the percentage in 201314 and slightly higher than the
number who left care through adoption. This demonstrates that good effort is
made to reduce the number of moves for children and to keep children living
within their own family if possible.
placed for adoption and 5% of children lived in childrens units or homes. This
ensures that the majority of children looked after experience the benefits of
family life. The majority of children live in placements that are close to their
family and friends, with 82% living within 20 miles of home. The majority of
children who live further afield are in specialist placements due to their complex
and multiple needs. In cases seen by inspectors these placements were
meeting childrens educational and health needs well and children were
supported to have appropriate contact with the people who are important to
them. At the point of placement, no children are placed in provision that is
judged to be less than good by Ofsted. In the minority of cases (6%) where a
child is in provision that requires improvement, decisions about continuation of
the placement take into account how well it is meeting the childs needs, wishes
and feelings and the quality of the settings improvement plan. This means
children are not moved unnecessarily. The Access to Resources team is vigilant
in ensuring that provision which is regulated by the Welsh Inspectorate, which
does not provide graded judgements, and unregulated provision for care
leavers is of good quality.
children who had been looked after for 12 months had three or more placement
moves. This is an improvement on the last published figures for Cheshire West
and Chester in 201314, which at 10% was better than statistical neighbours
and North West averages for that year. Long-term placement stability, while
not as strong, is improving. At the end of quarter two, 201415, 68% of
children looked after had been in the same placement for at least two years. As
a result, increasingly more children are benefiting from the opportunities to
develop enduring relationships with carers and the community they live in that
a stable placement affords.
their parents care, arrangements are informed by robust assessments that
include analysis of parents capacity to sustain positive change. Returns home
are well planned and children and families receive good, timely and, where


indicated, intensive support and oversight. If circumstances deteriorate the
local authority acts swiftly to secure appropriate alternative arrangements.
and its sufficiency strategy is well informed by a robust analysis of present and
future need. This means that the local authority is well placed to provide quality
services for children now and in the future. Recruitment is targeted at finding
carers for children who have the most need, such as teenagers and larger
families. A net gain of five carers was achieved in 201415 as a result of these
efforts. Use of good-quality independent provision supplements the local
authoritys own resources and has ensured that the vast majority of children
live in placements that match their needs and that they are not separated from
their brothers and sisters. At the time of the inspection, one group of children
assessed to live together were living apart. This was due to the complexity of
their family arrangements rather than a lack of appropriate resource.
they receive from supervising social workers and childrens social workers.
Foster carer training is comprehensive and appropriately linked to national
minimum standards. At the time of the inspection, 88% of carers had
completed the training support and development standards workbook within 12
months of approval. Arrangements for delegated powers are clearly negotiated
on a case-by-case basis and commensurate with childrens care plans, age and
needs. As a result, children benefit from a more normal family experience,
negotiating with carers in the same way their peers do with their families.
waited too long before receiving the help they needed to understand their
history. The local authority has prioritised its completion, providing good-quality
training to workers. As a result, social workers for 39 out of 198 children in
long-term foster placements who need life story work have completed it, and a
further 137 have life story work in progress. It is not appropriate for the
remainder to start life story work at this time.
children and young people, the local authority has not yet assured itself that
enough young peoples basic health needs are assessed and met in a timely
fashion. Unvalidated figures provided by the looked after children health team
show that 76% of children and young people had had dental checks at the time
of the inspection. While still too low, it represents considerable improvement
from most recently published figures for 201314 (62%). Long-standing issues
in relation to the timeliness and quality of health assessments have recently
been addressed through the development of clear pathways and escalation
policies. In September 2015, 100% of initial health assessments were
completed on time, meaning that any health issues are identified and
addressed early and children receive any specialist help they may need in a
timely way. This compares to 64% in August and only 32% in July and
demonstrates the improved focus that has been applied to health assessments.


result of their emotional or mental health received a service from a dedicated
team, Caring to Care, provided through a commissioned service. The service
provided support for a wide range of emotional and behavioural issues
including to children placed out of area within 40 miles of the local authority
boundary. Waiting times for assessment and intervention at the beginning of
this financial year were far too long. In quarter one of 201516, children who
needed direct work waited almost six months on average to receive a service.
In quarter two, this significantly improved to an average of 40 days. A newly
commissioned service started in December 2015. It is too early to evaluate its
effectiveness. Good transition arrangements have ensured that childrens
access to treatment has not been delayed during the changeover.
educational experiences of children looked after. Routine contact with school
staff is also kept when children are placed outside of their local area. The large
majority of these children attend a good school. Where they do not, it is
considered to be in the best interests of that particular child to enable them to
remain in a school where they are settled well and achieving or to stay close to
home or brothers and sisters. Staff of the virtual school monitor closely the
attendance of children at school and provide teachers with timely and effective
support when difficulties arise. As a result, the school attendance of children
looked after is high (97.1% sessions attended in 2013/14). Staff of the virtual
school provide good opportunities for teachers and governors to develop the
skills and understanding they need to work effectively with children looked after
through a well-considered range of training events and frequent cluster
meetings at which teachers can share experiences and good practice. Virtual
school staff work well with teachers to address issues of bullying and
harassment of children looked after.
children have a personal educational plan (PEP) as soon as they enter care.
Virtual school staff are meticulous in ensuring that these plans are reviewed
and updated once per term and, wherever possible, involve the child. However,
although childrens needs are assessed well, in around half of all PEPs action
plans are insufficiently detailed or specific to measure progress. Virtual school
staff are aware of this, and have prioritised improvements over the coming 12
months. PEPs are used effectively to plan and review Pupil Premium Plus
spending through a clear bidding and review process and this ensures that
interventions help improve childrens academic attainment.
strong up until the end of Key Stage 2. Children make good progress from their
starting points in reading, writing and mathematics and by the end of primary
school attain in line with all other children. However, the progress children
looked after make in secondary school is insufficient. Few gain a good range of
GCSEs at grades A* to C, despite a range of appropriate interventions from the
virtual school. Many young people enter care in Years 10 and 11, making it


difficult for them to make up for time lost in earlier years. A small number
missed by a single grade the target of five GCSEs at grade A* to C including
English and mathematics.
alternative provision. The virtual school works closely with schools to support
the small number of children who are unable to benefit from 25 hours of
education per week and these children follow appropriate programmes that are
well matched to their needs.
robust multi-agency response as children who go missing from home, including
for children placed out of area. In the second quarter of 2015, 59 children
looked after were reported as missing. Return interviews were offered in all
cases and in 61% of cases took place within 72 hours of the missing episode.
Almost all interviews sampled (seven of eight) were detailed, including analysis
of risk. Timely services were provided where needed. Use of a comprehensive
screening tool ensures that additional vulnerability to child sexual exploitation is
considered when children go missing.
management meetings are swiftly held. Those seen were well attended by key
partner agencies and resulted in comprehensive plans to reduce risk to children
who were victims or perpetrators of child sexual exploitation. When risk does
not reduce or is escalating, robust alternative action is taken to protect
children, for example a change of placement to reduce proximity to known
triggers, serving of child abduction notices or, where necessary, use of secure
accommodation.
educational opportunities. Carers are provided with discount cards for
attractions and free leisure passes and in cases seen, childrens hobbies and
talents were encouraged and achievements celebrated.
Children in Care Council that is representative of all children looked after
including disabled children and children placed out of area. The young people
meet on a regular basis (in two age groups) and make a positive contribution to
service development that is helping to drive up standards such as visiting
housing provision and helping to design a new residential unit.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is Outstanding
through adoption and this is embedded in the culture of social work practice.
Adoption policy, procedure and practice is sharply focused on delivering the
best possible permanence outcomes for children. Arrangements for creative


financial and practical help and assistance for adopters is a strong feature of
the service. Children who may be in need of adoption are identified at an early
stage in the planning process. This work is characterised by twin tracking
arrangements that start at the pre-proceedings stage. This work is underpinned
by effective legal gatekeeping meetings to ensure that all permanent options
are explored rigorously and early. Children do not experience needless delay
through care proceedings. Every childs progress is tracked, so that managers
and social workers are sharply focused on what they need to do and by when.
The effective use of data supports robust reporting arrangements so that
managers are equipped with the information they need to make decisions.
in more than enough adopters in the borough to meet the demand for this type
of family placement. This promotes choice for children, leading to better
outcomes. It has also enabled the local authority to contribute to the National
Adoption Register. Adopters report that they are attracted to Cheshire West and
Chester local authority because of the quality of the adoption literature, the
effectiveness of the targeted recruitment campaigns and the speed with which
social workers make the first contact.
suitability as part of the assessment process. Pre-adoption reports are carried
out in a timely fashion. The quality of these reports is consistently good and
they provide a sound basis for the Adoption Panel to make decisions on
approval. Adopters report that the assessment process is made clear and is
transparent throughout. Reports focus on what they need to and social work
practice is sensitive but robust to determine suitability.
for a match. For example, action to support family finding for children from
ethnic minority groups starts early, even before birth. At the time of the
inspection, there were nine children with a decision to adopt, of which eight
were on Interim Care Orders with potential matches awaiting the court
decisions and one with a Placement Order has already been matched. There
were 28 adopters without a placement and one of these had a potential match.
Decisions are signed off by the Agency Decision Maker (ADM), who is at an
appropriately senior level in the local authority. The Adoption Panel chair is
qualified, experienced and sufficiently independent of the local authority. The
panel membership provides a good balance of social work professionals, other
professionals and adopters, including members who are from the ethnic
minority population. Checks on those approved for adoption are rigorous. The
Adoption Panel has carefully considered recommendations leading to 55
adopters being approved in 201415, with a further 22 approvals since April
adopters. Social work reports are always of good quality, sensitively written and
child-focused to support the Adoption Panel in their recommendations. The


Adoption Panel chair and the ADM meet quarterly to ensure the early
identification of issues and actions to enable the smooth operation of the
service. For example, the frequency with which the panel meets has increased
to manage the rise in numbers of fostering-to-adopt applications.
high majority of children characterised by the local authoritys track record, with
only a small number of revocations of Placement Orders. For example, over a
two-year period from 201315 only two families experienced this change in the
route to permanence. The local authority gives high priority so brothers and
sisters can live together wherever possible. For example, of the 31 children
adopted in 201415, eight out of the 10 children who were part of sibling
groups were placed together.
concurrent planning and has a well-established fostering-to-adopt approach
that is used to full potential as an option for permanence for children.
Innovative practice has led to 10 children benefiting from permanence through
this route since December 2013. This is very good performance and has
demonstrably improved outcomes for the children involved.
range of effective pre- and post-adoption support that is embedded. This
includes training, group activities, seminars and individual one-to-one
arrangements to meet the holistic needs of adopters and children, including
those children with complex needs. The number of adopters who are engaging
with this support is increasing year on year. Adopters report that the support
they receive is appropriate, available for as long as they want it and highly
valued. The local authority has been proactive and effectively utilised the
Adoption Support Fund to deliver this programme of work.
such as the weekly teens adoption support group, known as the TAG group.
Teenagers use this group to discuss a number of complex issues such as
relationships, mental health, self-harm and behaviour management. Workers
help young people to understand adoption, meet other young people who are
adopted and encourage peer support where this is appropriate. This work is
highly valued by parents. The TAG group has directly helped to prevent
placement breakdown and has helped to identify additional support that
families need to access. The Approved Adopters Support Group, for carers
approved but who as yet do not have a child, meets regularly to ensure
ongoing momentum and engagement. The group allows carers to share their
experiences of searching for children to adopt and as up and coming first time
parents, and many develop relationships with other prospective adopters,
which they find helpful. This has proved invaluable for retaining this group of
adoptive carers. There are examples of highly effective work to promote
adoption for children with special needs, such as better targeting through the


use of Adoption Link, leading to successful family placements for this hard-toplace group of children.
best in the high-performing North West region. The latest published threeyearly figures for 201114 show that the average time between a child entering
care and moving in with their adoptive family is 476 days, which is better than
the national average of 628 days by 152 days. Year-on-year performance is
also good. Data from the Adoption Leadership Board return for 201415 show
that performance has improved from the previous year and is 422 days. The
latest published figures for 201114 show that the average number of days
between receiving court authority to place a child to be adopted and the local
authority deciding on a match to an adoptive family is 135 days. This is better
than the national average of 217 days by 82 days and above the national
scorecard threshold of 152 days by 17 days.
robust arrangements for tracking cases early from the pre-proceedings stage
and fast tracking for second-time adopters to reduce any delay. This means
that while their assessments still go to panel for approval, they are prioritised
as known carers and are especially more likely to be able to take siblings if
needed. The latest published figures for 201114 show that the percentage of
children who wait less than 18 months between entering care and moving in
with their adoptive family is 69% for 201114, significantly better than the
national level of 51% and above the statistical neighbour level of 50%.
social work practice, which is creative and of the highest standard, and ensures
that needs are comprehensively met. Social workers and their managers are
passionate and tenacious in their efforts to secure the best possible outcomes
for children and families. Social workers relationships with adopters are well
developed. Life story work seen is good quality; written in child-friendly
language and supported by extensive use of pictures. Later life letters are
sensitively written and letter box is used extensively so that contact
arrangements are secured for children and their birth families. Close scrutiny of
the local authoritys own data show that a high proportion of the children
looked after population leave care through adoption. For example, this was
Children placed for adoption are thriving and outcomes are demonstrably
improved for these children.
panel activity. The opportunity is missed to evaluate some key areas of the
service operation. The panel chair has identified this as an area for
development to support ongoing improvement as the local authority strives for
excellence. This will ensure that data on the performance of the childrens


social care teams and the adoption team are reported, so that the Adoption
Manager has a holistic overview of the adoption service operation.
The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is Good.
leavers and is in touch directly with 103 of the 125 (82.4%). The majority of
the remaining 22 young people have contact with other services and do not
want contact with the local authority or have returned to live with their family
or friends and choose not to have contact, but the leaving care team know
where these young people are. Of those with whom the local authority is in
contact, 93.2% live in appropriate accommodation and the vast majority are
happy with their arrangements. The young people spoken to reported no
concerns about their personal safety in their accommodation. Partnership work
through the local authoritys strategic housing department and a number of
housing associations is well developed, ensuring that the needs of care leavers
are met by, for example, ensuring that care leavers can live in the localities
they know, so that they feel safe and supported by friends. Social landlords
work closely with care leavers and their support workers to identify and
mitigate risks of tenancy breakdown and consequently these are rare.
pathway plan. This work is continued by social workers and personal advisers,
who review progress and update plans every six months. Support workers know
their young people extremely well and use the pathway planning process to
challenge them effectively. Pathway plans document clearly the needs of care
leavers, but in around half of all those seen, action plans would benefit from
increased focus to comprehensively support young people to make rapid
improvements in their life. Care leavers trust their social workers and personal
advisers and value the opportunity the pathway planning process gives them to
explore the issues that affect them.
by social workers and personal advisers including issues around substance
abuse and sexual health. They help care leavers to register with doctors,
dentists and opticians and encourage them to have regular check-ups. Where
care leavers are living semi-independently, support workers help them to
access services by, for example, taking them to appointments. Young people
have said that where they have particular needs, their personal adviser
provides help quickly and effectively.
a health passport at their review health assessment. This initiative has not yet
been offered to care leavers over 18, although managers plan to include it in


pathway planning. Young people receive a Me and my health guide before
they leave care as part of their preparation for independence. This is improving
their understanding of their basic health history during their time in care, but
they do not currently receive enough information about their family health
history. The local authority recognises this is an area where further work will be
beneficial.
accommodation, including support from an overnight support worker, followed
by daytime support and moving to full independence. Young people speak
positively of the support they are given and are confident that they will be
ready for fully independent living when the appropriate time comes. Care
leavers are all given a copy of the pledge and are helped by personal advisers
to understand their legal rights and entitlements such as access to their records
and the right to financial support.
workers to develop the skills they need to be successful adults. This support
commences while the young person is still in care and continues through
regular meetings with support workers during the young persons transition to
adulthood. The local authority provides appropriate financial support through
setting up home allowances, the childrens trust fund, payments at birthdays
and Christmas and small incentive payments for engaging in education and
employment. It supports financially those young people who go to university.
Sixteen young people are currently following higher education programmes on
a full-time or part-time basis.
so. This is an excellent indicator that young people are receiving ongoing
practical and emotional support while preparing to live independently. Thirteen
of the 125 care leavers aged 18 to 20 have taken advantage of staying put
arrangements to remain with their foster carers, which means they are
benefiting from living with a family for longer.
workers. One works with young people to re-engage them in education,
training and work and the other is funded through Pupil Premium Plus to
support the specific needs of children looked after and care leavers in further
education. Fifty-one care leavers (49.5%) do not currently participate in
education, employment or training. Of these, 25 are not in education,
employment or training for medical reasons or because they are a new parent.
apprenticeships, three within the local authority. Managers acknowledge that
this is too few and that they have struggled to retain care leavers on
apprenticeship programmes because of their lack of work-readiness. To address
this, they have engaged a third party to provide pre-apprenticeship training


through a period of focused basic skills training and work experience followed
by a tailored traineeship programme and ultimately recruitment to local
authority apprenticeships. This is a positive and proactive approach by the local
authority but it is too early to judge the impact of the programme.


Leadership, management and
governance

Outstanding

Summary
The DCS and his senior leadership team in Cheshire West and Chester have worked
steadily and diligently to implement, deliver and oversee good-quality services to
meet the needs of children and families. Starting from the time of the 2010
inadequate safeguarding judgement in their safeguarding and looked after children
inspection, steady and sustained progress is evident, passing through an adequate
judgement in 2012 to this inspection, finding services to be good overall. This
outstanding work has included the contribution of managers at all levels of the
service.
Political leaders are aware of their duties and responsibilities. They have confidence
in the DCS and have developed productive working relationships with him and the
leadership team that encourage support and appropriate challenge. Elected members
are fully committed to the local authoritys priorities and plans for children. The
corporate parenting board provides additional oversight and monitoring of services
and ensures that young people are engaged in helping to contribute to and influence
the services provided.
The local authority is committed to its workforce and has demonstrated genuine
commitment to providing a wide range of opportunities and training to help staff
develop skills and knowledge. There is an established career structure and staff are
supported through regular supervision and the opportunity to reflect upon practice.
Staff feel valued and are positive and proud to work in Cheshire West and Chester
(CWAC). There is a largely stable and permanent workforce, which means that
improvements and learning are driven forward and sustained.
Performance information is well developed and used effectively to facilitate a cycle of
learning and improvement. Effective quality assurance systems through regular case
auditing lead to improved practice. Social workers and managers are provided with
feedback on individual cases. Additionally, findings from case audits are used as
themes for reflective discussion sessions for social workers.
Good working relationships with partner agencies have been established through
effective strategic work and focus by the Childrens Trust, the Health and Well-being
Board and the Local Childrens Safeguarding Board. These overarching leadership
bodies are effective in identifying and meeting local needs through well-embedded
commissioning frameworks.
Good strategic and operational partnerships with the police, health and schools are
evidenced by an effective early help offer. A wide range of partners identify the
needs of children and families at an early enough point to ensure that the problems
they face do not escalate.
Senior managers are committed to ensuring that children in this authority are safe
and benefit from good and improved outcomes. Childrens and families needs are
assessed on a timely basis and services provided as a result. Children are protected


and plans for support and intervention progressed.
Child sexual exploitation and missing from home, care or education arrangements
are robust. The strategic director and senior management team have prioritised and
focused on these issues and have worked hard to ensure that partners are fully
engaged with the agenda. This means they are identifying young people at risk and
services are in place to minimise that risk. Partners are active in co-ordinating their
efforts, including using disruption methods to reduce risk.
Children in care are looked after well and get a good service from this authority. The
authority is effective in ensuring that young people plans are progressed quickly.
Strong commissioning arrangements ensure that young people are provided with
stable placements and permanency solutions are well considered and implemented.
Young people are well prepared for leaving care and the authority ensures that
support remains in place to help them on their journey. Care leavers feel valued and
listened to.
Senior managers give high priority to the promotion of adoption to secure
permanence for children. They ensure that adoption plans are progressed quickly
and that children are placed with adopters as soon as possible.
The authority is forward-looking and has put in place shared arrangements and
pooled or aligned budgets that are helping to mitigate economic pressures on
services while continuing to provide support to children and families. Many of these
arrangements including a shared director of childrens services with Halton and a
range of shared services  Safeguarding Unit, Commissioning and the headteacher of
the Virtual School  are recognised nationally as good practice.
The authority talks to young people and listens to them. Young people in care and
those about to leave care are able to influence the local authority through an
effective Children in Care Council and Leaving Care Forum.
The authority has taken steps to begin to stabilise its social care workforce, with
comprehensive plans put in place to both recruit and retain and develop staff.
Inspection findings
time to drive forward change and progress since previous inspections to
develop an effective and responsive service for children and families in Chester
and Cheshire West. They have achieved significant and substantial progress
through a steady advancement of improvements that have been carefully
sustained and embedded.
respective roles and are well informed about the service and the experiences of
families and young people; they know their services well. They are aware of
high-profile cases and issues of concern to young people. They are visible to
staff and undertake regular visits to front-line services. They discharge their
responsibilities appropriately.


Children and Families in Cheshire West and Chester is also the director for
childrens services in neighbouring Halton. This arrangement, in place for the
last four years, is supported by the Chief Executive and political leaders in
Cheshire West and Chester, who consider that it has facilitated a range of joint
working arrangements and budget alignments to the benefit of both authorities.
Many of these arrangements are recognised nationally as good practice and
include a shared director of childrens services and shared services such as
Safeguarding Unit, Commissioning and the headteacher of the Virtual School.
and reports and have received training in the role of social workers and the
social care service. The DCS, Chief Executive, LSCB chair and lead member
meet together on a quarterly basis and these meetings are used to identify and
highlight areas of progress or concern in relation to safeguarding.
was launched in October 2013 to ensure that the needs of families and children
were identified at an early stage and help provided. Strong partnerships at
strategic and operational levels operate effectively to ensure that children get
the help they need from the appropriate service. Significantly, work has
resulted in a good and shared understanding of thresholds. The positive impact
of the early help offer is clearly demonstrated by 100% of troubled families
(525) being turned around, a reduction in reports of anti-social behaviour by
have progressed through the IES model. Further, a fall in referrals to social care
of 10% in the last year links to the impact of the integrated early support
model. Robust management of early help services ensures that TAF
assessments to families are of good quality. In addition, the authority has
invested in further strengthening the quality of the TAF response with the
recent appointment of three TAF advisers.
high-level assessment of need to appropriately inform strategies beneath it and
across the partnership. The sufficiency strategy is robust, sets out clear
priorities and takes a whole systems approach, including prevention, to ensure
quality and the provision of a range of placements at all stages of the childs
journey. This is based on a comprehensive understanding of current and future
need and research findings. The strategy has seen the creation of an edge of
care team and the establishment of a new residential unit to respond to the
accommodation needs of older young people.
commissioning arrangements are in place. The Childrens Trust and the Health
and Well-being Board are appropriately constituted and active in driving plans
forward. Plans are focused on identified priorities including the continued
improvement of the integrated early support offer together through action
planning and appropriate reviews of progress. The leader chairs the Health and


Well-being Board (HWBB) and the lead member supported by the DCS chairs
the Childrens Trust and this is helping to ensure that plans are aligned and
have sufficient focus on childrens needs. The strategy for commissioning
identifies core priorities for further development and investment, including
improving outcomes for children in care, emotional health and well-being and
promoting integrated early support.
framework in place and a dedicated commissioning team providing robust
scrutiny of commissioned arrangements and the quality of services provided.
Services are required to demonstrate how young peoples views have been
taken into account. There are examples of services being decommissioned on
the basis of poor delivery, demonstrating a focus on quality. There is a range of
pooled funding with Halton, including the provision of advocacy services, the
Pan-Cheshire Missing Service and the post-adoption service. Regional pooled
budgets provide funding for the leaving care regional tender and there are
aligned priorities and budgets in relation to speech and language services.
practice, enabling the local authority to identify where action needs to be taken
to address shortfalls. Performance information is available at a local level and
front-line managers are encouraged through a challenge and answer format to
provide explanations for performance on a monthly basis. This strengthens both
the authoritys understanding of issues as well as staff understanding of the
links between performance data, performance and practice. The authority
aligns its performance with ambitious targets monitored on a regular basis.
However, not all data collected are routinely analysed and monitored. This
applies to areas of activity such as core groups taking place in timescale and
attendance by young people at conferences. The result of this is that, because
the data are not included in the current score card, the authority lacks a fully
detailed overview of performance. Managers acknowledge that this is not
comprehensive and have now acted to remedy the matter.
has ensured that an already embedded culture of casework auditing is
accurately providing a picture of practice across front-line teams. Inspectors
judgements on audited and tracked cases largely mirrored that of the local
authority. Front-line managers and staffs understanding of what is good and
consistency of casework auditing is supported by monthly learning from audit
sessions facilitated by the quality assurance lead. Quality assurance is further
strengthened through the work of the principal social worker and 12 senior
practitioners leading peer reflective sessions themed as a result of audit
findings. A key role of the principal social worker and senior practice leads is to
re-enforce and progress practice standards and support newly qualified social
workers thorough their assessed first year of practice. They have created
robust action plans focusing on practice progress and appropriately identify key
areas for further development including SMARTer plans.


support through supervision. However, the recording of case supervision overall
is variable. Detailed recording was seen on many cases, including reflective
practice, but some records are lacking actions and timescales, making
supervision less useful as a tool to measure progress.
Workforce planning is robust, with both a workforce strategy covering all of the
childrens services workforce and a separate but linked social work recruitment
and retention strategy. The authority has taken action to have a fully staffed
service at all times, with Chief Executive agreement to go beyond the social
worker establishment by 12 posts to ensure availability of staff. The authority
closely monitors social work caseloads and as a result, social workers have
manageable caseloads, helping to improve and assure the overall quality of
practice. Staff are positive about working in the authority and feel well
supported. In addition, the authority is active in trying to retain staff through a
staff development policy including aspiring senior practice leads and aspiring
team managers courses, and is currently developing an aspiring senior
manager course, all in conjunction with Bournemouth University. Newly
qualified staff are engaged in a well-developed, newly qualified social worker
(AYSE) programme with support from senior practice leads as mentors, and the
authority encourages social work staff to become practice educators with, as a
result, a large complement of students in teams (currently 24). Social work
vacancies are low and staff turnover rates are reducing, demonstrating a
stabilising workforce from earlier higher levels of staff churn.
extremism and has a well-developed Channel Panel established two years ago.
In addition, their recently developed overarching Prevent strategy clearly
outlines the role of the multi-agency panel to agree levels of risk and to coordinate and monitor the impact of prevent activity. The authority and its
partners have ensured that significant numbers of multi-agency staff have
undertaken WRAP3 (Workshop to Raise Awareness of Prevent) Home Officeapproved training, including 162 schools by December 2015.
exploitation and missing from home and care is effective and well developed.
The local authority is part of the pan-Cheshire strategic group that ensures
strategic planning and direction for children who are at risk or are victims of
child sexual abuse or who go missing from home or care and who are at risk of
trafficking. Child sexual abuse intelligence has led to successful disruption
activity in Cheshire West and Chester and the establishment of a multi-agency
child sexual abuse team offers effective co-ordination and oversight of all young
people at risk of child sexual exploitation.
Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), the family courts and the local Family
Justice Board. This has resulted in improved timescales in private and public


law proceedings (27 weeks on average this year), reducing delay for children
and young people. Both Cafcass and the judiciary report that Cheshire West
and Chester are one of the stronger-performing authorities within the region in
all aspects of court work. No cases have been referred back to the local
authority by the courts under the local protocol for inadequate practice.
May 2015 elections and has had the benefit of the Children in Care Council
recently reviewing its working and format and developing a range of
recommendations for its members to consider. Members have a commitment to
the panel, with the lead member chairing and the leader of the council also in
attendance. There is evidence of challenge and consideration of young peoples
views, for example ensuring that all young people in care received a pack
detailing their rights and entitlements after it was raised at the panel by a
member of the Children in Care Council. In addition, a decision was taken that
all care leavers would be placed in Band A in relation to housing need. The
panel has access to senior officers and performance information and councillors
on the panel visit childrens homes and social work teams on a regular basis,
enabling members to be fully briefed on areas of progress and concern.
young people participate in their reviews (201415) and the majority of young
people attend personal education and pathway planning meetings. Social work
assessments and social worker visits record childrens views clearly. Partners
also understand the importance of capturing the childs voice, with police
referrals having an explicit section on the childs voice and commissioned
services being required to demonstrate both how they record the young
persons experience of the service they are receiving and how that service is
seeking to learn from young people.
well established and effective. Children in care and care leavers have a voice
and a central input into service development. In addition to this, they have
representation on a number of forums, including the Corporate Parenting Panel
and the Leaving Care Forum. Activities include delivery of training on childrens
rights, design of a new health passport, foster carer induction and training and
involvement in recruitment of staff at all levels in the organisation. The
members of the Children in Care Council report that they have been proactive
in ensuring that all young people are aware of the availability of free leisure
passes and that information about rights and responsibilities is included in the
information packs that they have helped to redesign and that are given to all
children newly looked after. There is active support to young people provided
by two participation and inclusion officers to help ensure that their voice is
heard. The local authority does not take the work of young people for granted.
Those who offer their time to help the authority understand young peoples
concerns and work towards meeting their needs are appropriately remunerated.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is Good

Executive summary
The independent chair of Cheshire West and Chester Local Safeguarding Children
Board (LSCB) has been successful and demonstrated strong leadership in engaging
the local authority and partner agencies in the safeguarding agenda. As a result, she
has ensured that all board members are ambitious in their drive to improve the
effectiveness of the Board.
The LSCB fulfils its statutory requirements and with the support of a tenacious
business manager and a range of effective subgroups, it has been instrumental in
scrutinising and offering challenge where appropriate to its key partners in both the
statutory and voluntary sector. As a result, the LSCB has achieved the
recommendations from the 2012 Ofsted inspection of child protection services in
relation to the monitoring and oversight of front-line practice.
The Board has a good clear governance framework and the recently updated
protocols successfully ensure effective links between the Board, the Childrens Trust,
the Health and Wellbeing Board as well as the Adult Safeguarding Board and the
Community Safety Partnership.
Key statutory areas are regularly and robustly scrutinised by the Board, including
private fostering, allegations management, early help, missing and child sexual
exploitation and the work of the Child Death Overview Panel (CDOP). More recently,
the LSCB has made positive links with, and reported on the work of, the Local Family
Justice Board (LFJB). Children looked after have been a clear focus and their views
are well represented. The voices of children and young people from other vulnerable
or diverse groups are less evident and therefore the Board does not have a crossrepresentation of childrens views.
A comprehensive range of training is offered and receives positive feedback from
professionals. Although the training and development group evaluates the
effectiveness of specific training immediately after delivery, there is no overall
consideration of the impact of the full training offer and the Board cannot be fully
assured that the training provided is meeting the needs of all the professionals within
the CWAC area.
The annual report for 20142015 effectively analyses the safeguarding work the
board has undertaken in the last year, identifies progress against the key priorities
and considers the effectiveness of the work undertaken by agencies.
The Board facilitates a comprehensive audit cycle in order to test the quality of front-


line practice. Historically, the quality of written outcomes of audits has not been
consistently robust and the audits undertaken did not always provide an accurate
reflection of practice at the front line. However, the case review group and the Board
have made improvements that include allocating additional business support
resources to support the process. A recent audit seen during this inspection was
robust and more qualitative in its evaluation of practice.
The Board does not yet have a strategic oversight of female genital mutilation.
Although prevalence is not high, the board recognise this as an area for
development.

Recommendations
further be assured that the findings are an accurate reflection of practice within
CWAC (paragraph 120).
the Board has an understanding of a broader range of views and can use these
to influence the safeguarding agenda (paragraph 123).
training needs analysis, and use this information to review the current offer to
ensure that it meets the needs of all practitioners within CWAC (paragraph
that it can quickly analyse and report on the prevalence and hold agencies to
account for their practice in protecting girls who are potentially at risk or who
are at risk (paragraph 128).

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
and Chester Safeguarding Children Board (the LSCB) under the leadership of
the independent chair has progressed and implemented the identified
recommendations in relation to the monitoring of safeguarding. Consequently,
the Board can demonstrate effective delivery of outcomes, including a
significant reduction in the use of overnight custody for young people.
and the Local Safeguarding Children Regulations 2006. The Board has a


suitably experienced, independent chair who has a clear and ambitious vision
for the LSCB. The Board benefits from the commitment and full support of a
wide range of partner agencies represented at the right seniority, who commit
resources to the board and to the safeguarding agenda.
between the LSCB and other strategic partnerships including the Childrens
Trust and the Health and Wellbeing Board as well as the Adult Safeguarding
Board and the Community Safety Partnership. The work of these boards
highlights an appropriate focus on safeguarding children and young people
across the partnerships.
private fostering, allegations management, child sexual exploitation and the
work of the Child Death Overview Panel (CDOP) assists the Board in monitoring
and evaluating the effectiveness of what is done by the local authority and its
board partners, both individually and collectively, to safeguard and promote the
welfare of children. Additionally, the LSCB has now made links with the Local
Family Justice Board (LFJB) and the Board has received assurances that
childrens needs are a priority in relation to public and private law proceedings.
Children looked after have been a clear focus for the Board and there was until
recently a children looked after and care leaver subgroup. This subgroup now
reports directly to the Childrens Trust but oversight of its work will continue via
regular reporting arrangements to ensure that safeguarding this vulnerable
group continues to be a priority.
Lead Member for Children and the Leader of the Council and the minutes reflect
challenge offered in relation to the work of the board and close monitoring of
actions and plans.
plan has utilised information from the JSNA, audits and practice learning
reviews (PLRs). The identified priorities are in line with local needs. The
reporting system for the subgroups means that they hold responsibility for the
work undertaken and report progress and exceptions to the board so that the
board agenda remains focused on addressing the appropriate safeguarding
areas.
meaningful and that the Board receives assurances that multi-agency partners
are more than just compliant with safeguarding arrangements. The analysis of
the most recent audit concluded that all agencies are meeting the required
outcomes but, following challenge sessions, action plans are in place to assist
the LSCB to consider more detailed evidence so that it can be confident that all
agencies are ambitious in effectively discharging their safeguarding duty.


multi-agency partners to assist it in carrying out its statutory functions
effectively. The level of contributions reflects the ethos that multi-agency
partners see safeguarding as a priority.
appropriately localised from the North West Learning and Improvement
Framework to reflect the learning processes within CWAC. The LSCB works
hard to ensure that the messages from reviews and audits are effectively
disseminated and various creative dissemination methods such as newsletters,
bulletins and bite-sized briefings were seen during the inspection
line workers with differing levels of need and the take-up of this is over 90%.
Learning from reviews and audits influences and directs the training agenda
and this year has included sessions on disguised compliance and a new
assessment toolkit for front-line practitioners. The evaluation of individual
training sessions demonstrates that it is well received by professionals and
there has been some demonstrable improvements in key areas of front-line
practice. In particular, pre-birth assessment training has led to a significant
improvement in the quality of pre-birth assessments. There is no overall
analysis of the impact of the full training offer. The Board therefore cannot be
confident that it is addressing the practice needs of all professionals. In
addition, there has been no evaluation of safeguarding training provided in
individual agencies to ensure that it is fit for purpose. There are plans in place
to address these shortfalls, including a training needs analysis and a new
system for tracking impact.
initiate serious case reviews. The Board has undertaken and completed two
serious case reviews (SCR) in 2015, within appropriate timeframes. Plans are in
place to publish both the reports and continued efforts to engage the families in
the process, including agreeing dates for publication, are evident. The LSCB has
progressed the action plan of the first completed SCR prior to publication and
the current work of the LSCB is focusing on expediting the learning. As a result,
a review and refresh of the escalation process has been undertaken and the
board has published assessment tools for all agencies.
opportunity to learn from cases that do not progress to formal review, with four
completed this year. All agencies can and do refer to the case review group
when they consider that a case might meet the criteria for a PLR. The findings
from these reviews are themed in order to aid action planning and learning.
The case review group appropriately monitors and progresses the action plan.
Where necessary, procedures and guidance are subject to reviews and updates.
Bite-size learning events take place regularly to feed back themes as part of the
learning cycle. The Board tests out the reach of the learning via audit, and
LSCB visits to front-line services.


partner agencies to account and tracking and escalating the outcomes where
appropriate. The Board has provided strong challenge to partner agencies,
leading to improvements in a number of areas, including police and youth
detention arrangements and use of the graded care profile. A challenge in
relation to schools completion of the Section 175 Audit resulted in a 99%
compliance rate.
undertaken five multi-agency audits since January 2015, identified through
issues and themes from PLR and SCR outcomes, previous audits, data analysis,
or national and local issues. The quality of write-up of the audits, however, is
variable and there have been deficits in the information provided. The board
has recognised this and challenged the case review group, as it needs to assure
itself that the audits undertaken are a true reflection of practice at the front
line. The Board has taken action to address this shortfall, including allocating
additional business support resources to the process and ensuring that there is
consistency in the quality of reports. A recent audit seen during inspection was
more robust and qualitative in its evaluation of practice.
arrangements following the completion of a serious case review. The Board
received assurances that decisions made about referrals at the front door are
appropriate and effective and that the application of thresholds is consistent.
performance information. It includes a comprehensive overview of data around
child sexual exploitation. The dataset is analysed by the quality assurance
group and exceptions reported to the Board and where appropriate this then
becomes an area for development or challenge and scrutiny. In the last year,
this has led to a multi-agency audit to look at an increase in admissions to
hospital for self-harm, which was then a topic area for the LSCB conference.
Although the dataset is primarily social care, multi-agency data are apparent
and the board have challenged agencies about providing data when this has
not been forthcoming.
recognised area for development, but the strategic co-ordination of this is not
yet robust. There are examples of involvement of children and young people,
including a conference run by and delivered to young people and children, and
visiting a youth custody suite to offer input about ways to improve the
environment.
data-rich and identifies key themes and trends. The recently appointed chair
has reviewed progress of actions from previous years and introduced an action
log to ensure that findings and recommendations in individual cases are tracked
and monitored. Actions are taken in relation to lessons learned both locally and


nationally including a safe sleep campaign and a challenge to hospitals to
ensure swift notification to the CDOP of young people aged between 16 and 18
years old who die on adult wards.
exploitation and missing children. The well-established and effective Pan
Cheshire subgroup demonstrates a high level of understanding and
commitment from all key partners in these areas of work. The work of this
group influences and directs the CWAC child sexual exploitation subgroup and
there is monitoring, both operationally and strategically of the work by all
partner agencies. The board receives regular comprehensive reports which
detail prevalence, work undertaken and planned strategic development. The
board has been instrumental in the development of a dedicated multi-agency
child sexual exploitation team. A recent evaluation of the service supported by
the LSCB identified the need to extend the pilot so that its impact can be better
analysed and to look at the potential integration of the service into the front
door arrangements.
It has a comprehensive, up-to-date set of procedures, which are interactive.
The LSCB has a simple but effective threshold document in place, which is
interactive and provides links to relevant procedures, documents and guidance
for ease of use.
the board has undertaken in the last year, identifies progress against the key
priorities and considers the effectiveness of the work of agencies. The
contribution of other agencies is clear but the document is very lengthy and
diminishes the effectiveness of the report. The Children in Care Council rejected
the proposal to develop a childrens version of the report, as they believed that
this would not be of interest to young people.
yet developed. The Pan Cheshire protocol is in draft and the development of
local practice guidance is currently work in progress. Training takes place but
there is no understanding of how many professionals that this has reached yet.
No children have yet been identified as victims or being at risk of FGM.
The strategic lead chairs the Channel Panels, and is knowledgeable about the
agendas and links with the relevant partnerships, including the Community
Safety Partnership, the LSCB and the Adult Safeguarding Board. The Channel
Panel has met four times and has considered 30 cases with 12 referrals made
since the panels commenced. The LSCB is aware of the prevalence and receives
updates as part of its monitoring of safeguarding arrangements.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people it is trying to help, protect
and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted and one additional inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Sue Myers
Deputy lead inspector: Peter McEntee
Team inspectors: Shirley Bailey, Paula Thomson-Jones, Cath McEvoy, Russ Henry, Ali
Mekki and Gary Lamb AI
Senior data analyst: Hywel Benbow
Quality assurance manager: Lynn Radley


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


