City of London
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 28 July 2016
Report published: 20 September 2016

Childrens services in the City of London are good

Good

permanence

Good


Not judged


Good


Outstanding

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Determined and inspiring leaders within the City of London take a detailed and
ambitious approach to continuous improvement. For this reason, services provided
for vulnerable children are consistently good and, in some instances, very good. As a
result of outstanding leadership, management and governance, the trajectory is
positive, with all the key components in place to enable the City to achieve
exceptional outcomes for children.
The senior leadership team is stable and entirely child focused. Governance
arrangements facilitate a culture of firm challenge and generous support, which
extends beyond the City limits. Partners agree on their priorities and work together
with real energy to achieve them. Leaders and partners have ensured that they know
their community extremely well. This has resulted in a highly individualised
approach, which takes full account of the unique, diverse and sometimes challenging
City context. Services, including those that are commissioned, consistently meet the
needs of local families. They are also well targeted to safeguard children who do not
live in the City yet are supported by its services, or whose parents work there.
Early help services are effective, and some are particularly strong. A comprehensive
early help strategy underpins the partnership approach to providing support to
families before their problems worsen. Parents told inspectors that they are very
happy with the help that they receive. Although positive impact can be evidenced for
individual children, the City is yet to introduce a multi-agency evaluation tool to help
them to judge how effective their early help services are, overall.
Partners have a clear understanding of local thresholds of need and support, and
children consistently receive help at the right level for them. Targeted work with
partners has led to an increase in referrals and early help assessments, which is a
positive development. The social work response to risk and need within families is
swift and reliably good, with analytical assessments leading to helpful support that
demonstrably improves childrens lives and makes them safer. Although working
plans are effective, written plans are not always clear enough to make sense to all
families. In a small number of cases, the work with parents who disengage from
support lacks purpose and clarity. It is positive that the City has commissioned
innovative research into neglect within affluent families.
The City of London is a caring and aspirational corporate parent. Most children
looked after are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children. They are provided with
good education and healthcare, many leisure opportunities, high-quality independent
fostering placements and very effective social work support. This enables them to do
well in their lives. Social workers and children enjoy enduring relationships beyond
childhood, built on meaningful time spent together. All children looked after
experience good outcomes, and some are doing exceptionally well in the context of
their life experiences. Senior and commissioning managers have taken steps to
further improve placement choice in order to enable social workers to consistently
achieve the ideal match for children.


The City is very committed to its care leavers and continues support until, and
sometimes beyond, the age of 25, whether or not they are in full-time education. All
care leavers live in safe and suitable accommodation, guided by their own choices
and needs. Social workers consistently stay in touch with young people and work
closely with other services to ensure that the young people reach their full potential.
Healthcare for care leavers is very good, but not all care leavers have been provided
with information about their health histories. Planning for these young people is
effective, and their diverse needs are particularly well addressed. Written plans
should include more focused personal targets and better attention to young peoples
views.
Children looked after and care leavers are actively encouraged to share their views.
Direct contact with senior managers, the highly effective independent reviewing
officer service, independent advocates and visitors, and an annual consultation event
ensure that their voices are heard. The Children in Care Council (CiCC) enables
young people to use their direct link to leaders to effect positive change. Children
looked after and care leavers meet with the corporate parenting board. However,
council members and the town clerk (chief executive) could further strengthen these
relationships by spending more informal time hearing about young peoples lives.
No children have had a plan for adoption for some time, but commissioned and
shared services are in place to provide a full range of adoption and post-adoption
services. Social workers and managers ensure that children experience a strong
sense of belonging to their carers. Care plans address childrens need for
permanence well and in good time.
The City of Londons approach to increasing the skills and abilities of childcare
professionals to provide outstanding services is exemplary. The knowledge transfer
programme, an innovative partnership with a local university, provides practitioners
with valuable opportunities to improve their practice. Training, supervision and
support of social workers are comprehensive and contribute to good and improving
outcomes for children. The workforce is stable, and this is linked to the vibrant
learning environment. Caseloads are manageable and allow social workers to spend
the time that they need with children and their families.
Supported by thorough quality assurance processes and excellent performance
information, leaders and managers routinely identify where services for children need
to be improved in order to be consistently good or better than good. This is reflected
in strategic service plans and translated into specific actions that are assertively
progressed. Case auditing is well established and ensures that leaders and managers
are confident that they know what is happening on the ground. However, audits do
not routinely include the perspectives of children, families and partners.
At the time of the last inspection in 2012, services for children were judged to be
good. A number of areas for development were identified, including improving and
integrating performance and quality assurance systems. Supported by the childrens
improvement board, all these areas have been rigorously addressed.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates no childrens homes.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
March 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
March 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since April 2013.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services and housing services.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
April 2013.
 The LSCB is shared with the London Borough of Hackney.
 The local authority has commissioned out the following services:
 information, advice and guidance for children looked after and care
leavers (Prospects)
 advocacy services (Action for Children)
 adoption services (Coram)
 youth offending services (London Borough of Tower Hamlets)
 emergency duty team (Hackney).
Children living in this area
 Approximately 1090 children and young people under the age of 18 years live in
the City of London. This is 12.4% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 14.3% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 20.8% (the national average is 15.6%)
 there are no state secondary schools in the City of London.

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data, where this was available.


 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 42.6% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian, Asian British and Mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 64.6% (the national average is 19.4%)
 secondary schools data is supressed (the national average is 15%).
 The City of London is just over one square mile in size. It contains 15,105
enterprises and is a key transport hub within London. The residential population
is approximately 8,000. Only 10% of households have children, compared with
times greater than the resident population.
Child protection in this area
 At 1 July 2016, 37 children had been identified in need of a specialist childrens
service, including child and family assessment. This is an increase of one from 36
at 31 March 2015.
 At 1 July 2016, two children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. Data at 31 March 2015 was suppressed.
 At 1 July 2016, no children were living in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This was also the case at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, no serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and no serious case review (SCR)s had been completed or were ongoing
at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 1 July 2016, 10 children were being looked after by the local authority (a rate
of 91.7 per 10,000 children). The number was in line with that at 31 March 2015,
although the rate had increased (84.0 per 10,000 children at 31 March 2015). Of
this number:
 no children live in residential childrens homes
 no children live in residential special schools
area
 nine children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been no adoptions


 two children became the subject of special guardianship orders
 six children ceased to be looked after, none of whom subsequently
returned to be looked after
 three children and young people ceased to be looked after and moved on
to independent living
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Further improve the quality and consistency of written plans for children,
including early help plans, child in need plans, personal education plan (PEP)s
and pathway plans. These should be clear and simple, fully integrate the
views of children and young people and clearly state what is to be achieved
by when.


When families disengage from services and the threshold is not met to
escalate the case further, ensure that any ongoing work is purposeful and that
case records clearly evidence managers rationale for ceasing or continuing
support.


Ensure that permanency planning records include a record of decisions about
legal permanence for children, along with the rationale for these decisions.


Expedite the provision of health histories for all care leavers.


Increase opportunities for direct contact between children looked after, care
leavers and councillors, and between these children and the chief executive, in
order to establish even more meaningful personal relationships.


Strengthen the inclusion of the perspective of children, families and partners
in case auditing, in order to improve services.


Summary for children and young people
 The City of London is a small area where many more people come to work than
to live. Just over 1,000 children live within the City of London, and many older
children travel outside of the City to go to school.
 Services for children in the City of London are good. Some children have
difficulties within their families. When this happens, a social worker steps in early,
to see whether they would like some support. This help is very good and families
are very happy with it. It improves childrens lives and, for most families, it stops
their worries increasing.
 Social workers spend a lot of time with children and families who have bigger
problems, making sure that they understand what has gone wrong. This means
that the help that they offer is what families need. When there is a risk that
children may be unsafe, social workers talk to other adults like the police and
teachers. Together, they make good decisions about what to do next to keep
children safe.
 Some parents do not want a social worker to help them, even though they have
problems that are making their children unhappy. Social workers need to be
clearer about why they are involved with these families and what they are doing
to help them.
 When children need to be looked after, they are found caring foster homes.
Almost all children who are looked after have moved here from another country,
often because they were scared or unhappy where they were living before. They
are given good help to speak English, to talk about their experiences, and to
settle into their new homes and schools. As a result, they make friends and
quickly become more confident. They are helped to be healthy and to do many
enjoyable things like playing sports and going to the theatre.
 Social workers and managers are proud of the children whom they look after and
they care about them, as a loving parent would. They make sure that children go
to good schools and that they get a lot of help so they achieve well. Social
workers encourage young people to stay living with their foster carers for as long
as possible, and this means that they only leave home when they are ready.
 When children leave care, they receive good help and support. They live in safe
homes that they are proud of, and most find a job or carry on with their
education. Senior managers and local politicians are very interested in the
children whom they look after and those who have left care. They listen carefully
to the CiCC and have meetings to find out what young people think. Relationships
between young people and local politicians would be even better if they spent
more informal time together.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Social workers in the City of London listen to the children whom they work with and
develop good relationships with them. The children and families team is settled and
stable, and all social workers have manageable caseloads, allowing social workers to
spend the time that they need with families. This supports good direct work with
children. Managers at all levels provide practitioners with good formal and informal
oversight and guidance.
Children in the City of London who need help are identified early. They are supported
by a range of services that make a tangible difference to their lives. Increasing the
number of children who benefit from early help has been a priority for the City and
partners. This has successfully led to a doubling in the number of children being
helped in the last year.
In a few cases, families do not believe that they need help and disengage from
services. As a result, support plans are difficult to achieve. Plans are regularly
reviewed, and efforts to re-engage with families are tenacious, but the rationale to
continue or cease involvement is not always recorded well.
When children are, or may be, at risk of significant harm, information is shared
appropriately. Decisions are sound and are made promptly, and assessments are
consistently good. They take into account risk, family history, childrens diverse
needs and relevant research. Childrens views and experiences are well reflected.
Childrens case files are generally clear and up to date, although a very small number
of children in need cases do not include an up-to-date chronology.
Multi-agency work is well coordinated and has a positive impact on outcomes for
children, including those living with parental mental ill health or learning difficulties,
or domestic abuse. Child protection conferences and plans are very effective in
understanding, addressing and reducing risk within families.
Very few children are known to be at risk of sexual exploitation, go missing, live in
private fostering arrangements or become homeless. Appropriate policies and
procedures are in place to identify and support any children who present to social
care in these circumstances. Practitioners are well trained and well informed to
ensure that they can deal with new situations and presenting problems as they may
arise.


Inspection findings

Strong arrangements are in place to identify children in need of early help. All
new parents receive an early help visit. This is often a joint visit by a family
intervention worker and a health visitor. Such early identification has led to a
complete take-up of two-year-old childrens free childcare places. Families
have access to a wide range of helpful services. The friendly dentist scheme
provides dental checks for all under-fives and parenting support is available
from a child psychologist through a commissioned service, while weekly
speech and language sessions, stay and play and other activities are
available through the Citys childrens centre. Parents are well supported with
benefits advice and debt counselling by a commissioned service. The nanny
network, launched in 2015 to establish links between the Citys early help
services and this large group of private childcare providers, runs weekly stay
and play sessions for approximately 10 nannies and the children for whom
they care.


Increasing the number of children and their families taking up early help
services is a priority in the City of London. Although numbers remain low,
determined work across the partnership at a strategic and operational level
has led to a doubling of the number of new early help assessments completed
over the last year.


Early help assessments are generally of a good standard, and lead to helpful
and valued support. Team around the child meetings are held when they are
needed, and there is good engagement in these by a range of professionals.
Although there are individual agency tools to measure progress, there is not
yet a single agreed system to measure family improvements so that they can
be aggregated and reported on. Work with partners to agree a suitable tool is
already underway.


A consultation conducted on behalf of the City indicates that parents are very
positive about the help that they receive. For example, parents increase in
confidence, manage their childrens behaviour better, strengthen childrens
routines and improve their childrens speech. Parents spoken to by inspectors
said that staff are fantastic, services are provided quickly and the help that
they received sorted things out.


The children and families team includes social workers and early help
practitioners, and is fully staffed and stable. An experienced manager has
been in post for over a year, and oversees both the practice of social workers
and early help staff. Practitioners who spoke to inspectors during the
inspection were positive about working in the City of London. Senior
managers are described as visible, approachable and knowledgeable about
childrens circumstances. Staff feel well supported and have access to a wide
range of training and development opportunities. They were able to describe
how they apply learning from training to their work with individual children.



Secure arrangements are in place in relation to contacts and referrals that are
made to children and family services. All calls are taken by a qualified social
worker, and recommendations made by them are signed off by a manager.
Appropriate and detailed instructions about next steps are included in the
management decision record. Decisions are made promptly, and all records
seen during the inspection were signed off within 24 hours.


The thresholds of need document is clear and up to date. When making
decisions about how to respond to referrals, social workers consistently apply
the guidance appropriately. Consent is sought explicitly, with careful
consideration to overriding it given when it is necessary. Partners report a
clear understanding of thresholds, and this is supported by close partnership
working. Police forward all notifications to the children and families team
when there are potential child welfare concerns. These often relate to children
who have been stopped in the key transport hubs of the City. Many of these
children do not live in the City, and some are flagged for child sexual
exploitation concerns. When this is the case, the duty social worker
proactively ensures that the referral is made to, and received by, their home
local authority area.


When children are identified as being at risk of significant harm, prompt action
is taken to understand their circumstances and to protect them. Strategy
discussions include relevant professionals, and appropriate decisions are
made. In one case, details of significant relevant information were not shared
by the police. This was appropriately escalated and resolved by senior
managers.


Children are seen, and seen alone, as part of their assessment. When case
auditing, senior managers specifically look for evidence of regular and
meaningful visits to children. Inspectors saw case examples, where senior
managers had appropriately raised questions about visits to children, leading
to actions to strengthen practice further. Social workers know the children
whom they work with well. They use a range of tools to work with them to
ensure that their views are understood and reflected in assessments and
plans. Some very good examples of bespoke direct work were seen by
inspectors. Social workers include detailed observations of the demeanour and
developmental progress of younger children in case records and assessments.


Assessments are comprehensive. They consider family history and reference
the appropriate research. Strong examples were seen of social workers
identifying presenting and emerging risks, including those arising from
domestic abuse, sexual exploitation, honour-based violence and parental
mental ill health. In almost all cases, childrens diverse needs resulting from
disability, ethnicity and religion were well considered. Good use is made of
advocacy services when parents with learning difficulties need support to
engage with and understand the assessment and planning process.



Assessments lead to appropriate plans that make a difference to children. A
parent of a disabled child described the support that his child receives from
the City of London as amazing. Child protection conferences are well
attended, and enable professionals and families to reach a clear
understanding of risk and need. Children make use of advocacy services to
share their views, and professionals take careful account of these views when
agreeing the plan. Subsequent work is consistently effective, and risks for
children reduce as a result of good multi-agency intervention. Inspectors saw
cases where children were being supported to develop an understanding of
the risk of child sexual exploitation, with effective strategies leading to a
marked reduction of risk.


Although the support provided to children and families is effective, not all
written plans are in simple language that clearly describes the desired
outcomes. Some actions do not specifically include the date by which they
should be completed. (Recommendation)


Practitioners demonstrate tenacity in working with the small number of
children whose parents do not wish to accept support, yet the threshold is not
met, in order to escalate to child protection procedures. However, in a few
cases, child in need plans remain in place but are not purposeful, due to the
disengagement of the family. Managers need to ensure that their rationale for
continuing involvement or ceasing support is clearly recorded. A research
project considering neglect within affluent families is nearly complete. It has
been commissioned with a view to assisting practitioners in working
successfully with such families. (Recommendation)


Multi-agency working to meet childrens needs and keep them safe is
effective. Early help, child in need and child protection plans are regularly
reviewed. Inspectors saw examples of effective joint work with an
independent school, a homelessness officer, a housing support worker and a
debt advice service, as well as a specialist parenting support agency and adult
services. Bringing together agencies and working in a coordinated manner
consistently leads to improved outcomes for children and their families, such
as moving to suitable housing, managing debt, improving school attendance
and the provision of intensive support for a mother to continue to care for her
child.


Case records seen were generally up to date and comprehensive, and showed
evidence of clear and regular management oversight and direction. Although
family history is considered well in assessments, in a very small number of
children in need cases chronologies are not kept up to date on childrens files.
This is a lost opportunity to maintain a clear record of significant incidents,
themes and patterns in childrens lives.



No child has been reported missing from home in the City of London in the
last 12 months, and very few children have been identified as at risk of sexual
exploitation. Clear and well-publicised processes are in place to monitor and
coordinate services, through the multi-agency sexual exploitation group, for
those children who may be at risk. This group has an intentionally low
threshold, to identify children who may be at risk at the earliest opportunity.
Awareness raising about child sexual exploitation across the City is
comprehensive and is targeted at residents, businesses and those who work
in the City. Positive links have been made with the two independent
secondary schools in the City to raise awareness of a range of safeguarding
issues, including sexual exploitation. A drama production with a sexual
exploitation theme was commissioned for the girls school during this school
year, and will be delivered at the boys school in the new school year.


Although no children were known to be living in private fostering
arrangements at the time of the inspection, a small number of arrangements
have been identified in the past year. Thorough assessments, in line with
requirements, are completed with appropriate and timely ongoing support.


Effective work has been completed in relation to raising agencies awareness
of their responsibilities in relation to allegations against adults who work with
children. This has led to an increase in the number of referrals received.
Processes to manage allegations, once they are made, are comprehensive. In
one case, the City took responsibility for coordinating the multi-agency
response to concerns in order to avoid further delay, even though the
professional no longer worked in the City and the child lived in another area.
This demonstrates a commitment to good practice.


Multi-agency risk assessment arrangements to support vulnerable victims and
children affected by domestic abuse are effective. Meetings are convened
when required, are well attended and lead to appropriate support plans.
Support to victims of domestic abuse is available from the advocate for
vulnerable victims. Specialist programmes and services for individuals,
including perpetrators, are provided on a case-by-case basis when needed.


At the time of this inspection, no children were missing from education.
Managers frequently and assiduously monitor childrens school attendance
both within and outside the City. Very good processes are in place through
productive partnerships with schools, to respond when safeguarding concerns
are identified. An effective risk RAG-rating (red, amber, green) system and
procedure is in place for those children at risk of missing education.


Very few children are electively home educated in the City of London. For
those children who are, good arrangements are in place to monitor their
progress, in cooperation with their parents.



Out-of-hours services are commissioned from a neighbouring authority. The
commissioning arrangement is sufficient to meet current need and any
unexpected peaks in activity outside of office hours. Inspectors saw an
example of effective joint working between the out-of-hours team, City police
and childrens social care when there was concern about possible child
trafficking.


No 16- to 17-year-old young person has presented as homeless in the last 12
months. Close working relationships are in place between the housing
department and the children and families team. These support clear
arrangements that would be put in place if a young person presented to either
department. This includes an assessment and consideration of whether the
young person should be looked after by the City of London.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
All of the children looked after and care leavers spoken to during the inspection
were very positive about the services and help that they have received. Inspectors
found that the support provided is reliably good. Many children looked after are
unaccompanied asylum seekers with no previous links to the City. Children are
provided with highly individualised care and support, leading to them settling well
and achieving consistently good outcomes.
By design, there are no care placements in the City of London. All children are
placed within 20 miles of the City in fostering placements judged to be good or
better by Ofsted. Children live in families and communities that meet their diverse
needs well, with interpreter services and helpful English and educational support.
Social workers and managers care about children and know them very well. The
small number of placement breakdowns are due, in the main, to a lack of in-depth
knowledge of children who have recently arrived in the United Kingdom (UK). The
range of placements is being improved. A permanence panel monitors childrens
care plans well, although some decisions could be recorded more clearly.
No City of London child has had a plan for adoption since 2012. However, a secure
and comprehensive commissioning arrangement is in place to ensure that any child
or adult who requires an adoption service can access this.
The independent reviewing officer has established strong relationships with
children. Children looked after reviews are purposeful, and plans are rigorously
progressed. Potential risks for children are considered well. On the rare occasion
that children go missing, follow-up is swift and effective. Good information
briefings are used well to raise awareness, of child sexual exploitation and
radicalisation, among foster carers, children looked after and care leavers.
Accommodation for care leavers is good, and young people are supported well to
remain with their carers into adulthood. High-quality independent accommodation
is provided in the City or where care leavers choose to stay. The virtual school
provides valuable support to children, including to care leavers at university.
Employment and training opportunities are also good. Most PEPs and pathway
plans are comprehensive, but a few could be improved by more focused targets
and better recording of young peoples views. Health support is timely and meets
the needs of children. Mental health assessments are particularly good. Not all care
leavers have been provided with information about their health histories.
Children use a number of routes to express their views. The CiCC is well attended
and has effective links to the corporate parenting board. The group makes good
use of its direct link to senior and political leaders.


Inspection findings

Services for children looked after in the City of London are somewhat unique.
Although the proportion of children who are looked after is similar to that in
other local authorities, the number is small in comparison. All children looked
after are between the ages of 14 and 17, and only one was resident in the
City prior to being received into care. The other children are unaccompanied
asylum seekers who are the responsibility of the City through a London-wide
dispersal scheme for sharing refugees across the capital. Most of these young
people have arrived in the country and become looked after in the past year.
Inspectors looked at the support provided to all of these children and found
social work to be, in the main, of a high standard and, in some cases, of an
exceedingly high standard. Many children looked after achieve very good
outcomes. However, support is not yet consistently demonstrating an
exceptional and sustained difference to all childrens lives.


All children receive at least a good service. They are supported and helped by
social workers and managers who have found creative ways to ensure that
they know them well. Visits are regular. Children are seen alone. The children
spoken to by inspectors were very positive about the support that they have
received. Their views are considered very well in visits, meetings and plans,
and are recorded, in the vast majority of cases, to a high standard.


There is a strong focus, led by the DCS, on building high-quality relationships
between social workers and children. Social workers and children spend time
together doing fun activities on both a one-to-one basis and as a group, and
this strengthens their relationships. An annual holiday for social workers,
children looked after and care leavers is valued by children and social workers
as an opportunity to get to know each other much better. This complements
the time spent during other visits. All childrens cases are known, in depth, by
the DCS and the assistant director, who, commendably, visits all children
looked after on a bi-annual basis.


Due to the unique nature of the City, and in order to maintain sufficient
matching choice, the City of London has chosen not to provide any in-house
foster placements for its children looked after. No children are placed within
the City, and all children are placed in foster placements within 20 miles. The
quality assurance of these placements is rigorous. The City has decided that
children will only be placed in placements that Ofsted has judged to be good
or better. The City complements the training offered by foster carers own
agencies with additional targeted learning, for example through the provision
of workshops on countering radicalisation and child sexual exploitation.
Overall placement stability is good. There have been a small number of
placement breakdowns, due in part to the lack of knowledge about children
who have recently arrived in the country. Work is ongoing to improve further
the choice of carers available. Related children are placed together, when


appropriate. Effective support is provided to children to have continued
contact with their families, including for unaccompanied asylum seekers.

All children looked after attend school regularly. During 201415, the
attendance rate was 96%. No children have been excluded from school
permanently in the past three years, and only two have been excluded for a
day or so, and the isolated incidents were resolved. No children looked after
are in alternative provision. Children participate and make the expected
progress in their learning. Staff at the virtual school, in good partnership with
teachers, work relentlessly to make sure that children with vastly different
starting points, most with skills levels below level 1 in key stage 3, receive
bespoke individual support. This ensures that they develop the skills that they
need for life in the UK.


All but one child looked after came into care as an unaccompanied asylum
seeker at secondary school age. Just over half of these have achieved entrylevel qualifications in English and have progressed to the next level. Some
children looked after have made particularly good progress, and others have
made sufficient progress in their studies towards achieving GCSE
qualifications. Good advice and guidance from experienced advisers ensures
that all children looked after are prepared well to make the next steps in their
education or training. For instance, a wide range of progression opportunities
is provided to learners who are about to progress to key stage 5.


Most PEPs are purposeful, and staff are particularly effective in monitoring
each childs progress. Targets for children looked after to improve their
academic skills and knowledge, particularly English and mathematics, are
clear. A few identified gaps in personal skills, which are recorded well in the
plans, do not translate sufficiently well to targets. (Recommendation)


The City virtual school team implements effective measures to make sure that
children looked after get the support that they need through, for example,
pupil premium funding. This includes funding for targeted support to help
those who are falling behind with their GCSE studies or to improve the English
skills of unaccompanied asylum seekers who have recently come into care.
The City ensures that foster carers are well equipped to care for children for
whom English is not the main language. For example, a toolbox including a
whiteboard, word box, world map and role-play pictures is provided to foster
carers, along with helpful guidance. This enables them to help children to
improve their English at a faster pace than through formal education alone.


Good enrichment opportunities have had a visibly positive impact on the
confidence and attitude to learning of children looked after. Children looked
after participate in a good range of activities, including sailing, football, cricket
and art classes. They enjoy trips that staff facilitate. One such trip to a local
maritime museum, where there is a large map of the world, provided a safe


catalyst for a group of unaccompanied asylum seekers to show each other
where they had come from and to get to know each other better.

Health outcomes are improving. Most children looked after have needs arising
from poorer health provision, or from the ways in which they were treated in
their home countries or on their journeys to the UK. Most initial health
assessments are done promptly and all are undertaken by a paediatrician.
Children also receive timely dental support, immunisations and further health
support, when needed. All children receive a baseline extended mental health
assessment by City of London child and adolescent mental health services
(CAMHS), wherever they are placed. This has been specifically negotiated by
senior managers with the local CAMHS. Children are referred promptly and
receive ongoing support when further emotional or mental health needs are
identified. No children are known to be misusing substances.


A small number of children looked after have gone missing over the past year.
This has mainly been for a matter of hours. The response by childrens
services and police has been swift and robust. All of these children were
offered a timely return home interview, and strategy discussions were initiated
to consider any wider safeguarding issues. One child was subject to a more
in-depth assessment, which was of a high quality, to look at risks of child
sexual exploitation. Careful consideration is given to potential ongoing risks to
those children who had been trafficked by organised criminal networks into
the UK. No children looked after have been involved in offending during the
time covered by this inspection.


All children looked after reviews are held within national timescales. Reviews
seen and attended by inspectors were of a high standard, with children fully
engaged. The independent reviewing officer provides a strong, creative and
sensitive service. She visits children between reviews and closely monitors the
progress of care plans. Her interaction with children was observed by
inspectors to be warm and engaging. She also regularly meets with the head
of the virtual school, health commissioners and providers to ensure that highquality support is provided to children looked after. Plans are well focused and
child centred, and actions decided at reviews are, in the main, actioned
promptly.


All children looked after have clear and appropriate plans for permanency
before or by the time of their second looked after review. The permanence
panel ensures good oversight of all children in care, and includes the assistant
director, legal services and the independent reviewing officer. Consideration is
given to whether care proceedings should be initiated to provide security for
children, although decisions with accompanying rationale are not always
explicitly recorded in permanency panel minutes. In addition to ensuring that
social workers and managers have access to these decisions in the future,
better recording would ensure that, in later life, children can fully understand
why these judgements were made. (Recommendation)



There are no current or recent care proceedings, although the City of London
maintains good relationships with the family courts and the Family Court
Advisory and Support Service. No children have had a plan for adoption in the
past three years. Secure and appropriate commissioning arrangements are in
place to ensure that the full range of adoption and post-adoption services is
available for adults and children, if these are required. A small number of
children looked after have recently left care and are subject to special
guardianship orders. The full range of permanence options was considered for
these children, and the resulting care arrangements meet childrens needs
well. Court work in relation to these children was of good quality, and the
ongoing support provided is appropriate.


Direct work is a strong feature of social work with children looked after in the
City. Some of this is of an exceptional standard. For the unaccompanied
asylum seekers, there is sensitive and sustained support to help them with
their claims for refugee status. Local children are also well supported through
family- and community-focused activities. Careful and sensitive life-story work
is provided for all children looked after, to help them to gain a better
understanding of their backgrounds and of what has happened to them. Work
is underway to extend the skills of staff in culturally specific life-story work, in
particular for children who have experienced disrupted childhoods before
arriving in the UK. Support to children and children from different ethnicities,
faiths and beliefs is very good.


Independent visitors are provided to over half of children looked after, and
they are matched well to childrens interests and hobbies. Some of these
relationships have been sustained over many years through shared interests,
such as going to the theatre and sports. Two further children were being
matched at the time of the inspection.


Formal advocacy support is available and well publicised, but it is not taken up
by many children, who rely more on their social workers, their independent
visitors, the support of the independent reviewing officer and visits from the
assistant director. When children raise concerns, they are responded to swiftly
and appropriately, including when it is felt that a change of social worker
would genuinely make a difference to them. In one instance, a young person
asked the independent person who visited him after he had gone missing
from his placement to sort out a worry about his placement. This was quickly
resolved, leading to the missing episodes ceasing. There have been no
formal complaints from children and young people in the past year, although
concerns or worries expressed by children, for instance through the
independent reviewing officer, have been responded to promptly and to the
satisfaction of the children.


Thresholds for whether children and young people should become looked
after are clear. Agencies understand these well, and social work support to


children and families at home is good. A small number of cases have met the
threshold to be dealt with through the Public Law Outline. In these cases,
high-quality social work resulted in there being no need for legal proceedings
to protect children further. Managers appropriately involved the commissioned
adoption service at an early stage, ensuring that all permanence options were
considered to avoid potential delay for children. Care proceedings involving
the High Court were also initiated last year, as the case involved the citizens
of another European Union country. This was resolved promptly with the
family returning home, supported by their local social services department.

The CiCC is well attended and meets quarterly. Members receive child-friendly
versions of key policies and strategies. There have been a number of
improvements facilitated by this group, including improvement of the pledge
for children looked after and care leavers. This, along with a welcome pack, is
provided to all children looked after, in both English and the childs first
language. CiCC members have been involved in interviewing new staff and
producing reports for the safeguarding sub-committee on the services
available for care leavers. It is good that members of the CiCC have also been
involved in mentoring children who have become looked after more recently.

The graded judgement for adoption performance
At the time of the inspection, and within the timescales for judging adoption
performance, the City of London has neither commenced adoption proceedings nor
placed any child for adoption. Therefore, arrangements to provide adoption
services were considered, but adoption performance was not judged.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care
leavers is that it is good

Care leavers who spoke to inspectors were very positive about the assistance
that they receive. All are allocated to a social worker who sees them, in most
cases, regularly and flexibly, depending on the young persons wishes and
needs. Social workers support children and young people through their time in
care and throughout their transition to adulthood. This supports enduring and
trusting relationships.


The quality of support provided to care leavers is consistently good. No young
people leave care before the age of 18. Specific care-leaver support starts at
age 18 years and continues at least until the age of 25, whether or not they
are in full-time education. The care leavers who are at university are being
supported beyond the age of 25. The City is in touch with all of its care
leavers.


All but one care leaver is an unaccompanied asylum seeker. All care leavers
live in suitable accommodation. This is either in staying put arrangements,
whereby they remain with their former foster carers, or in independent
accommodation provided in the City of London or an area where the young
person wishes to live. Social workers undertake checks to ensure that
proposed independent accommodation is not in an area known by police to
cause concern, due to anti-social behaviour, gangs or drugs-related activity.
There has been a good range of awareness-raising courses for care leavers,
for instance on the dangers of child sexual exploitation and radicalisation. No
care leavers are known to be involved in criminal activity.


The large majority of planning for care leavers is effective. Education and
employment outcomes for most of those leaving care are good. Of the current
care leavers, 80% are following courses in further or higher education, are in
training or are in employment (EET). A few care leavers achieved particularly
good results, following completion of their degree courses at university. For
those care leavers who are currently not in employment or training, there
have been concerted efforts by the virtual school to enable them to participate
in a range of work experience opportunities. The City commissions a targeted
service to help young people to access and sustain EET opportunities. The
support includes attending college open days, accompanying young people to
maths and English tests, completing enrolment forms and helping with
bursary paperwork. Advisors are steadfast in the help that they provide and,
in most cases, this increases young peoples ability to succeed with their
choices.


The City provides care leavers with work experience opportunities within its
own services. At times, this is used as a creative way to encourage young
people to re-engage with a meaningful daily activity or for staff to re-establish


contact with older young people who are resisting support. Senior leaders
such as the DCS and the chief executive promote and support these
opportunities.

The advice and guidance for young people leaving care are supportive and
skilled. Good links to the City of London adult learning service mean that care
leavers have the option to start apprenticeships and higher apprenticeships in
subjects such as butchery and accountancy. Two care leavers will soon be
commencing a traineeship programme to help them to progress onto an
apprenticeship. Support to prepare young people for independence is good.
Examples were seen by inspectors of focused programmes that had assisted
children looked after in developing their practical skills in preparation for
future career opportunities.


The large majority of needs assessments and pathway plans are good. The
diverse needs of young people are particularly well considered in these
records, with sensitive consideration of young peoples asylum-seeker status
and preparation for the possibility that they will not be allowed to remain in
the UK. Access to good legal advice is prioritised for young people who are
making asylum-related claims. The best pathway plans have clear, aspirational
targets and desired outcomes. A few pathway plans have actions that do not
move the young people forward quickly enough. In a small number of cases,
pathway plans had not been shared with care leavers, and the voice of the
young people was not consistently recorded. (Recommendation)


The availability of health support is good. The provision of care leavers
support to one young person was extended beyond his 25th birthday to allow
time for the social worker to ensure that his emotional well-being was stable.
However, not all young people have received a summary of their health
histories upon leaving care. Senior managers are working with health
managers to progress this. As most of the care leavers are unaccompanied
asylum seekers, these health records would assist in proving an overview of
their emotional, mental and physical health needs, wherever they choose to
live in the UK. This is currently being taken forward by the CiCC.
(Recommendation)


The CiCC includes care leavers. It has developed the Pledge, which also
incorporates the Citys promises to its care leavers. It is provided to all young
people in their first language. This ensures that care leavers have a good
understanding of their entitlements. Activity-based schemes are run, through
the CiCC, to provide learning experiences and to maintain contact with care
leavers. For instance, a popular annual activity holiday strengthens social work
relationships with care leavers and facilitates mentoring relationships between
young people.


Over the past year, the corporate parenting board has met with the CiCC for
lunch and young people attended a board meeting. The board has considered


messages from the annual consultation with young people. However, regular
informal contact is not yet a strong enough feature. Members have a good
awareness of their responsibilities, but have underestimated how powerful
regular, direct contact with children looked after, in particular care leavers, is
likely to be. (Recommendation)


Leadership, management and
governance

Outstanding

Summary
Leadership, management and governance in the City of London are outstanding. All
aspects of strategic, political and operational leadership are keenly focused on
achieving the best outcomes, not just for children who live in the City but for children
or parents who spend time there. Senior and political leaders know their local
community very well indeed. Scrutiny arrangements are challenging and support
improvement. Leaders and managers work proactively with key partners and forums
to ensure that services meet the needs of the diverse and unique population. The
response to the potential risks of female genital mutilation and radicalisation is
robust. Commissioning arrangements, including those to meet the needs of any child
or adult who may require adoption services, are evidence based and sensible, and
demonstrate the Citys exacting standards for its children.
Leaders are attentive and proud corporate parents. Children looked after and care
leavers do consistently well and, sometimes, exceptionally well. Leaders listen to
what children think about their lives and go to great lengths to provide them with
very good care. However, council members have not used all available opportunities
to further strengthen their informal relationships with children looked after and care
leavers.
The strong and stable senior management team has ensured a very clear
understanding of the quality of frontline practice. Analysis and evaluation of
performance are meticulous. Quality assurance, including case auditing, is robust and
leads to sustained improvements, although the voices of children and partners are
not always evident. Leaders and managers are responsive to challenge and make
focused improvements at a timely pace. The City improvement board has been very
effective in addressing areas for development.
Leaders and managers have created a safe and vibrant environment in which social
workers and their practice can continually improve. Learning opportunities are rich
and wide ranging. They include the knowledge transfer programme, through which a
local university and the City work together to strengthen practice through research.
Caseloads are manageable, supporting social workers to establish meaningful
relationships with children. Social work practice is consistently strong, and
consideration of childrens diverse needs at all levels is extensive. The childrens
workforce is stable. Good management oversight of practice is evident, and social
workers appreciate opportunities for reflection, although records do not always
evidence this well. Leaders commit their time to supporting local authorities that are
not performing well. This illustrates the Citys approach to improvement, and has not
detracted from the quality or effectiveness of leadership in the City.


Inspection findings

The DCS has been in post since April 2013 and the chief executive since
September 2012. The DCS is responsible for community and childrens
services, which include education, community housing, and adults and
childrens services. Together with the assistant director for childrens services,
they provide strong and inspiring leadership, with a steady determination to
use all the skills and resources available to them to benefit children in the City
and in Greater London. The DCSs capacity to undertake his roles and
responsibilities has been thoroughly explored by a test of assurance
undertaken by an independent person. He states that he is a social worker
first and a senior leader second, demonstrating this through a highly detailed
and enthusiastic approach to all areas of social work practice and a keen
interest in individual children. Senior leaders have an outward-looking and
philanthropic approach to improvement, for example in their willingness to
invest their time in mentoring and supporting senior leaders from other
London boroughs.


Governance arrangements are highly effective in prioritising and improving the
well-being, safety and outcomes of children who live or spend time in the City.
Safeguarding is a clear theme through all City strategic documents. The DCS,
chief executive and the lead member for the City are active and committed
partners of the City LSCB. The priorities within the children and young
peoples plan are clearly linked to measurable objectives, with a strong
emphasis on early help, and on preventing domestic abuse, radicalisation,
neglect and child sexual exploitation. They are congruent with the priorities
and plans of the LSCB, the childrens services improvement plan, the health
and well-being strategy and the Citys education strategy.


The City executive links proactively with a range of partnerships, including
Transport for Londons safeguarding board and the Safer City Partnership,
through formal membership, informal meetings and an inter-board chairs
meeting. Importantly, all strategies, priorities and plans relating to City
children are rooted in a highly detailed understanding of the local community.
The joint strategic needs assessment has been supplemented by the resident
insight database, the troubled families analysis and a detailed review of a
particular neighbourhood in the City to enable partners to gain a clearer
understanding of the local resident and non-resident population. Assertive
steps have been taken to understand this diverse City, for example through
the public health analysis of more than 300 local private health providers. This
has been scrutinised by the City executive and is being taken forward in
partnership to ensure that these providers fully understand their safeguarding
duties towards children.


Partners share a firm commitment to innovate and to tailor safeguarding
activity to the unique way in which children live in and connect with the City.
For example, strong performance management information and tracking
systems identify, monitor and respond to children who live locally yet may go


missing from education outside of the City, and children at risk who pass
through the area or use its public transport.

Childrens casework at all levels of need, including for those children who are
in need of protection, is overseen by experienced managers who have a
sound understanding of the legal and statutory framework in which they work.
In almost all cases, decision-making at key points in childrens lives is
considered and unambiguous, leading to plans that meet childrens needs and
reduce risk. Managers demonstrate a clear understanding of the importance of
establishing permanent care arrangements for children. Case supervision is
regular, and social workers have many opportunities to discuss children with
managers at all levels. Social workers are clear about plans for children and
can articulate these well. However, not all staff supervision records are up to
date and, in a few instances, they do not reflect the key discussions about
professional challenges and dilemmas that social workers describe.


Leaders and managers are nurturing, determined and aspiring corporate
parents. Care and ambition are backed up by personal and financial
investment. The assistant director visits all children looked after, personally
addressing the issues that they raise with him. The City supports care leavers
to the age of 25 years and sometimes beyond, whether or not they are in fulltime education. Senior leaders, in partnership with the head of the virtual
school, make effective use of their chain of academies to ensure that children
are matched with good schools that meet their needs. They welcome care
leavers into the City for work experience and apprenticeships, as they would a
family member. Senior and political leaders use these arrangements creatively
to establish and maintain helpful contact with young people.


All care leavers are in suitable accommodation and almost all are in
employment, education and training. The City sets very high standards for the
provision of support to its children looked after and they are adhered to. For
example, through a commissioning arrangement, CAMHS assessment and, if
needed, ongoing therapeutic support are provided to all children looked after,
wherever they are placed. Bed and breakfast accommodation is never used.


The corporate parenting board receives good-quality data and information
about childrens experiences, and this enables members to challenge practice
effectively. Questions asked by members demonstrate genuine scrutiny and
insight. The scrutiny function of the safeguarding sub-committee is effective.
The provision of good-quality performance information and reports enables
the committee to decide what it wishes to analyse. The chair has a no
nonsense approach to getting to the heart of critical issues. The dual adults
and childrens focus of this sub-committee enables helpful crossover and
resolution of shared issues, such as young peoples transition to adult
services.


The views of children and young people are sought and acted upon. Annual
consultation, undertaken by the commissioned childrens rights service, results


in an action plan that is closely monitored by the improvement board and
safeguarding sub-committee. Senior managers are held firmly to account for
their actions, in response to the issues raised by children. For example, they
have raised the profile of the virtual school and have taken appropriate steps
to increase the knowledge of practitioners about immigration issues. With a
direct link to senior managers, the independent reviewing officer acts as a
strong and influential voice for children subject to child protection plans,
children looked after and care leavers. Children are confident to raise their
concerns or worries, and these are swiftly addressed. Formal complaints are
rare, but when they are received they are dealt with quickly and fairly.
Members of the corporate parenting board have met with children looked
after and care leavers through joint meetings and a lunchtime event. Council
members and the chief executive could establish even more meaningful
personal relationships with children and young people by seeking out informal
opportunities to get to know them well. (Recommendation)

Senior leaders ensure that they have an exceptionally clear line of sight on
frontline practice. They have achieved this through the combination of a
comprehensive quality assurance framework, a very detailed and analytical
approach to performance information, and a personal interest in childrens
experiences. The quality assurance framework provides a clear structure,
which ensures that practice is thoroughly explored and analysed through the
routine oversight of case work, a robust cycle of independent and in-house
case auditing, learning from complaints and consultation, and detailed scrutiny
by the independent reviewing officer. Learning is translated into whole-service
change through the service improvement plan. For example, quality assurance
activity highlighted some areas for improvement in the independent reviewing
officer service, leading to the service being brought back in house. This is now
a highly effective and child-centred service.


The lead member for childrens services takes a direct interest in practice.
Over the past year, he has attended a step-down meeting, a child protection
conference and a multi-agency sexual exploitation (MASE) meeting. He
assertively exerts his influence on behalf of individual children. The DCS
regularly reviews and audits cases, inviting social workers to reflect with him
on his findings. The audits carried out by managers for this inspection were
reflective, clearly focused on childrens experiences and, on the whole,
accurate in their appraisal of the quality of practice. Early help audits
consistently include the views of families and partners, but other audits do not
do this routinely. (Recommendation)


The quality assurance of independent fostering arrangements is detailed and
effective. The voice of children is a key part of twice-yearly monitoring
reviews. This leads to improvements in the quality of placements. For
instance, as a result of a quality assurance visit, additional training was
provided for an independent foster carer, to enable her to respond more
effectively to a young persons alcohol use.



Live and retrospective performance information is very comprehensive and is
shared with the right people and forums. Performance reports are detailed,
and commentary is particularly helpful where numbers are low, enabling
managers at all levels to maintain a sharp oversight of services and to identify
patterns and trends to scrutinise further. Low numbers do not lead to data
being dismissed as insignificant. For each area of data, analysts, leaders and
managers ask, Does this mean anything? and, If so, what? As a result, no
assumptions are made about how relevant or otherwise the data is. Where
numbers are low, additional child-level detail is provided. Rigorous analysis of
performance information has led to targeted work and practice improvements,
such as raising overall referral rates to childrens services and increasing
referrals to the designated officer about adults who work with children.
Proactive steps are taken to improve the use of performance information
continually, for example through collaboration with another London borough
to improve the Citys child sexual exploitation dataset.


Senior managers recognise that local professionals who work with children will
not necessarily have the same breadth of opportunity to develop their practice
skills as those who work in other areas. This potentially reduces their ability to
make an exceptional difference consistently to childrens lives. There are
relatively low numbers of staff in the City and, as a result, they are required to
deal with a wide range of tasks that would be undertaken by more specialist
teams in most other areas. In response to this, and to ensure that services for
children are as good as they can be, leaders have taken determined steps to
provide many innovative and creative learning opportunities for staff.


The knowledge transfer programme, a three-year partnership between the
City of London and Goldsmiths University of London, was established in 2014,
to increase the ability of staff to provide outstanding services through ready
access to high-quality research and knowledge. A launch event and four
seminars have been attended by over 90 professionals, combining policy,
practice and research, to explore subjects such as mental health and risk, and
domestic abuse. The programme has completed research projects on the
longitudinal impact of early help and the impact of social isolation on City
families. Structured reflective practice sessions help staff to think more
creatively about their work with local families. The learning in relation to
domestic abuse has led directly to the development of a revised City domestic
abuse policy and to the creation of a new coordinator post to counter
domestic abuse.


In response to the recognition that abuse and neglect within affluent families
can be harder to recognise and address, the DCS, the chair of the LSCB and
the chief executive have worked together to commission a research project in
partnership with Goldsmiths University of London. The findings of this project
are due to be shared with stakeholders in autumn 2016. The City will draw on
the findings to promote a greater understanding of the issues, with a view to
enabling practitioners to respond better to the needs of children who may
experience harm within affluent families.



Social workers and practitioners are very positive about the environment in
which they work. It affords them the right learning opportunities to
strengthen their practice and to prepare them to respond effectively to a wide
range of complex case situations. For example, social workers attend the
adoption and fostering boards in Hackney, and any referrals and assessments
relating to the children of staff who are employed by a neighbouring borough
are dealt with by the City to enhance the range of work in which social
workers are involved. Moreover, staff are supported to attend higher-level
courses in order to benefit individuals and all staff. In one instance, a
manager undertaking a Masters level degree in strategic management was
able to use her learning to strengthen further the impact of case audits on
staff and on practice.


The childrens services training programme is closely linked to City priorities
and complements the LSCB training provision very well. All of the 15 training
priorities for 201516 were achieved, including the legal context for
unaccompanied asylum-seeking children, the use of research in assessments
and life-story work. During the inspection, the positive impact of this training
was seen by inspectors in casework, such as the helpful use of research to
inform assessments and plans for children, and the quality of life-story work.


The Citys approach to staff retention is well considered and effective. It is
realised on a number of levels, including providing social workers with the
right technology to do their jobs, good-quality supervision and support, the
care and interest of senior managers, appropriate financial reward, generous
investment in training and a firm commitment to using research to improve
practice. Social workers are afforded rich opportunities to develop meaningful
relationships with children, through low caseloads, direct work and activity
breaks. Staff reported to inspectors that the approach to improvement and
the Citys outward-facing culture attracted them and retains them. The
childrens workforce is stable at all levels and turnover is very low indeed.


The strong commitment to promoting learning and development extends to
the independent foster carers who care for City children. Free training has
been provided to carers to counter radicalisation, child sexual exploitation and
children going missing. The City provides all foster carers with an innovative
toolbox to enable them to help children to improve their English at a faster
pace.


The City works resolutely with the LSCB to reach out to professionals who
work in the City of London, in order to ensure that they take their
safeguarding responsibilities seriously. There is a particular focus on those
who might not usually engage closely with childrens services, such as private
healthcare professionals and public schools. The nanny network identifies
and reaches out to carers, many of whom look after children who do not live
within the City, and provides them with safeguarding advice alongside stay
and play sessions. The network is also used as an opportunity to raise their
awareness of private fostering.



Commissioning arrangements are based on a clear understanding of the local
population and the needs of children. Where services have not been deemed
to be consistently good enough, senior and commissioning managers have
rigorously reviewed arrangements. This has resulted in the decommissioning
and recommissioning of services, such as the independent reviewing officer
and childrens rights services, leading to better quality provision and improved
outcomes for children. Arrangements to meet the needs of any child who may
have a plan for adoption in the future are robust. A comprehensive
commissioning partnership, established in June 2015, is in place. This includes
the provision of a good range of services, including post-adoption support and
services for individuals who wish to seek information or help in later life.
When specific commissioning needs are identified, new arrangements are
made, for example through the provision of a targeted service to support
young people who need intensive help to engage with work or learning. This
is particularly helpful to young people whose first language is not English.


City leaders and partners have worked together in a focused and determined
way to develop clear and practical procedures and guidance for agencies to
identify and tackle child sexual exploitation. The City has its own wellstructured operating protocol to counter child sexual exploitation. Wideranging education and awareness raising have been undertaken in the City in
partnership with the LSCB. Senior leaders, including the chief executive, were
closely involved in the highly successful notice the signs campaign. Multiagency training is comprehensive and targeted awareness raising includes
local hoteliers. Although numbers of children at risk of child sexual exploitation
in the City are low, MASE meetings ensure that children, adults and places of
concern are identified and that targeted support is provided. The City has
established helpful intelligence-sharing links with neighbouring authorities. All
child sexual exploitation concerns are referred to and followed up by the child
and family team, whether or not the children are resident in the City.


Partners are highly proactive in their approach to issues such as female
genital mutilation and radicalisation, which have not, to date, been a problem
in the City. Few cases of concern have been raised in relation to radicalisation.
However, the response by partners to potential risks is very robust,
demonstrating a sound knowledge of the community, effective partnerships,
the interconnectedness of strategic priorities and a determined approach to
identifying the individuals of concern.


Leaders have ensured that they are fully engaged with the Prevent duty, with
regular updates to the City executive and the identification of Prevent leads
in all 19 of the City's departments. They have worked with police to provide
free Prevent workshops to all foster carers caring for City children, all
children looked after and care leavers, police cadets, young apprentices and
those undertaking adult skills courses. The City supported the police to run a
fun day to engage with the local Bangladeshi community. Partners are aware
of the possible links between radicalisation and child sexual exploitation,
prompting Prevent leads to deliver a presentation to the City MASE group.


Police and City leaders have forged links with neighbouring boroughs to share
intelligence and good practice.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is outstanding
Executive summary
This is an outstanding Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB). It is a dual board,
covering both the City of London and Hackney. The board demonstrates an
unwavering determination to safeguard children who live in or visit the City, or
whose parents work there, with a firm commitment to sustaining and improving
partnerships. The board has an ambitious resolve to be the best that it can be, to
contribute the best possible outcomes for children, and to learn from itself, external
sources and, most importantly, from children and their communities. Strong
governance arrangements are evident across partnerships, developed to ensure that
the City of London is not overshadowed by its dual partner authority on the board.
As a result, it is making a real difference to childrens lives. An example is the chairs
persistent escalation of a recommendation from a SCR to the Home Office,
Department of Education and the national police chiefs council.
The board has inspirational leadership, which is open and reflective, with a relentless
focus on quality and a passion for improvement. Outstanding partnership working
has enabled the board to respond to emerging safeguarding issues through highly
effective strategic approaches that positively influence childrens lives. The board
robustly reviews progress and takes decisive and prompt action when necessary in
order to meet its objectives. The boards business plan is pivotal in improving
safeguarding practice.
The board is unrelenting in its challenge to partners to improve services to safeguard
children. It scrutinises agencies compliance with safeguarding policies and
procedures through effective bi-annual section 11 audits and evaluation. The board
is forward thinking, demonstrates an impressive ability to reflect on a range of critical
issues and robustly considers creative solutions to address individual and collective
partnership concerns. Learning from SCRs, as well as from other LSCBs and relevant
research, is well embedded across the partnership. The LSCB annual report provides
a rigorous assessment and overview of key strengths and weaknesses across
safeguarding services in the City of London and Hackney.
Learning and practice improvement is systematically cascaded to frontline staff
through a wide range of creative and highly effective opportunities. The boards
analysis and evaluation of performance are effective, and help partners to
understand the impact of services and the quality of practice, and to identify areas
for improvement. However, it would benefit from stronger links to the diverse
communities within the City.


Recommendations

Take steps to engage with children and families in all diverse communities
within the City, for example through the role of lay members.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
Inspection findings

The LSCB is a highly accomplished safeguarding board, supported by solid
governance arrangements. It demonstrates exemplary effectiveness in holding
partners to account to ensure that they safeguard children. The separate City
and Hackney executive boards ensure that rigorous oversight of safeguarding
practice in each local authority area is achieved, while also benefiting from
economies of scale created through their shared sub-groups. The boards
relationship with City of London leaders is highly effective.


The independent chair provides strong, credible and influential leadership. He
has successfully facilitated a culture of openness and challenge that has
positively influenced wider partnership working. LSCB members express a high
level of confidence in the chair, who is extremely knowledgeable across all
areas of the boards business. As a result, board members are motivated and
engage fully with the work of the board. Safeguarding is a firm priority for all
board members, demonstrated by consistently good levels of attendance,
effective engagement in sub-groups, and a strong culture of constructive
challenge and debate.


Governance arrangements are robust, with clear lines of communication
between the chair, DCS, lead member and chief executive. A productive interboard chairs meeting, alongside clear protocols, links the chairs of the LSCB,
the Health and Wellbeing Board, the Adult Safeguarding Board and the Safer
City Partnership. It shares annual reports and business plans, which feed into
strategic documents. As a result, the board effectively influences partner
agencies and provides persistent challenge, to ensure that safeguarding is a
golden thread running through all strategic documents.


The senior professional advisor, board manager and community partnership
advisor provide highly effective support to the board. The senior professional
advisor has been pivotal in strengthening the boards scrutiny function, as well
as providing a valued resource to partners.


The board is forward thinking, demonstrating an impressive ability to reflect
on a range of critical issues. It robustly considers creative solutions to
safeguarding or partnership challenges. For example, female genital mutilation
is now flagged on the Citys electronic recording systems, and a private
fostering mobile phone application (app) is disseminated by the board and the
City to provide information for residents, practitioners, children and parents. It


is of note that the City has recently received two private fostering
notifications.

Board members describe the chair as seeking opportunities through horizon
scanning, to ensure that the board is proactive in anticipating new issues.
This enables the board systematically to investigate emerging evidence, which
might pose new and future safeguarding threats to children. For example, in
response to challenges identified by City of London leaders, the board has
worked with the City to commission independent research on effective
intervention with affluent families in need. The board has also introduced a
comprehensive and up-to-date strategy to tackle online safeguarding
challenges. This sets out guiding principles for professionals about how to
keep children safe in the context of social media and technology.


Serious incident notifications are thoroughly scrutinised by board partners
through the joint SCR sub-group. This leads to appropriate and timely
recommendations that are reviewed and endorsed by the chair. The national
panel of independent experts has validated these decisions, commending the
clear and analytical correspondence and the inclusion of childrens voices in
the process. Opportunities for learning from national SCRs and multi-agency
case reviews are comprehensive. Lessons concerning neglect, sexual abuse
and domestic abuse are widely disseminated in the City through well-attended
learning events, lunchtime seminars and things you should know (TUSK)
briefings. Discernible differences have been made, including the
implementation of an escalation policy for practitioners and managers. The
majority of practitioners spoken to by inspectors had attended briefings, and
almost all articulated the lessons learned.


The board demonstrates respectful, rigorous and tenacious challenge of
partners and agencies. One member who sits on other boards said that this
board is the most challenging, rigorous and child focused of those he
attends. It has an impressive and up-to-date log that identifies challenges,
alongside persistent tracking of recommendations until sustained evidence of
improved practice occurs. For example, the LSCB continues to challenge the
Home Office with regard to its position on a recommendation arising from an
SCR. The board is requesting a review of Home Office guidance for police on
how to disclose soft intelligence. This is not yet fully resolved, but the
determination of the board in pursuing the issue is testament to the culture of
resolute challenge.


The City of London has a small residential population characterised by
extremes of wealth and poverty and a broad range of ethnic groups. The
board has a clear commitment to safeguard and promote the welfare of
children and to build partnerships based on mutual respect and trust. An
example of this is the work of the boards community partnership advisor, who
provides extensive support to community and voluntary organisations on a
range of issues, such as economic and cultural diversity, female genital


mutilation, forced marriage, radicalisation, child trafficking and honour-based
violence.

There are numerous examples of where the board has influenced and
supported the City to maintain a strong focus on the safety and well-being of
children. The board and City leaders have worked together to engage more
closely with private schools, in order to ensure that safeguarding is their first
priority. The addition of lay people to the board has strengthened links to
schools and other settings.


The board maintains a very strong focus on hearing the views of children and
using their experiences to influence developments to improve local
safeguarding arrangements. Board members make extensive efforts to
engage with children who have experienced services and, from a wider group,
to use their feedback to inform practice developments. In partnership with the
City, consultations with children led to the commissioning of a new childrens
rights service and training sessions for independent reviewing officers on
immigration rights. The say something if you see something campaign was
launched at Hackneys youth conference, following consultation with children
who challenged professionals about the original ideas for communication. The
focus of the campaign changed from one of raising awareness in the local
community, in order to spot signs of child sexual exploitation, to encouraging
children to identify friends who may be at risk of, or experiencing,
exploitation. The introduction of lay people who engage directly with children
in settings such as schools and other services for children is already having an
impact, but it requires further development to ensure that the authentic voices
of harder-to-reach children and communities are heard. (Recommendation)


The boards business plan is comprehensive. It has three key strategic
priorities that are underpinned by strategies to tackle safeguarding, relating to
neglect, domestic violence and child sexual exploitation and preventing
radicalisation and female genital mutilation. Sub-group work plans provide a
robust framework detailing how the board works to safeguard children. These
plans are well coordinated, effectively monitored, challenged and used to
drive priorities for children robustly. Specific City sub-groups have been
established to ensure that the needs of local children are prioritised.


The board has made substantial progress in raising awareness of female
genital mutilation, forced marriage and child abuse through faith, belief or
culture. The board has worked closely with public health services to influence
and monitor the multi-agency response to female genital mutilation. The chair
has hosted meetings with the voluntary sector and survivors of these abusive
practices, enabling the board to take account of these voices in the
development of the strategy to counter female genital mutilation.


The board closely monitors the Citys Prevent duty and holds agencies to
account for driving their response, including awareness raising and
recognition. The City Prevent coordinator post is well established. The post


holder is also the community safety manager. Designated Prevent leads are
in place in each corporation department. Awareness-raising sessions have
been held across agencies, foster carers and community groups, and the
coordinator links with other boroughs to share information and good practice.
Risk assessments include awareness of risks within affluent communities.

The Prevent lead is approved to deliver workshops to raise awareness of the
Prevent duty. The widely disseminated Safer City Prevent roadmap is
informative, comprehensive and well presented. A designated email address is
available for people to seek advice, alongside clear referral processes.
Innovation is evident, with discussions and challenge regarding the links
between radicalisation and mental health, and the connection between
radicalisation and child sexual exploitation. Extensive awareness raising, using
a variety of media, has been effective. For example, a foster carer reported a
concern about radicalisation. Work is underway to develop the use of social
media to increase the communitys understanding of risks further.


The board continues to drive the strategy and action plan to counter child
sexual exploitation effectively and coordinates the partnership response
through a highly effective child sexual exploitation and missing working
group. The boards data analyst has ensured that comprehensive information
about children informs the local child sexual exploitation profile. The Citys
operating protocol sets out comprehensive, well-structured and practical
guidance. Extensive work has been undertaken through a City-specific
children sexual exploitation working group. The group coordinated a targeted
City campaign with hoteliers, alongside multi-agency training and support for
children, together with research and intelligence. The police refer all children
at risk of sexual exploitation to City child and family services, regardless of
where children reside. Effective intelligence-sharing links with neighbouring
authorities are in place.


In May 2016, the LSCB supported the City in its highly effective and innovative
notice the signs campaign, utilising a range of communication media to raise
staff understanding of the signs of child and adult abuse, including child
sexual exploitation. This included blogs, a website and a film. Senior leaders,
including the chief executive, distributed leaflets. This stimulated many
conversations with members of the residential and business communities,
schools and other agencies involved with children who live or spend time in
the City.


The LSCB led the say something if you see something campaign to raise
public awareness of child sexual exploitation. This included a film made by
young people for young people, leaflets on countering sexual exploitation for
parents and young people, and free sessions of the Chelseas choice play,
attended by more than 1,300 students across the City of London and
Hackney. During 201516, the LSCB delivered seven separate training
sessions on child sexual exploitation to 113 staff from the City and Hackney. A
further 199 staff from the two local authorities attended the boards


conference on the theme of child sexual exploitation. Operation Makesafe
continues to raise awareness in the business community, including hotels, taxi
companies and licensed premises.

The board utilises a comprehensive range of multi-agency performance
information, which includes children with disabilities, unregistered schools
and, more recently, attendance and reports received by agencies at child
protection conferences. The dataset is clear. It represents all agencies
contributions to safeguarding and fully supports an understanding of effective
practice across the whole partnership. Data and commentary are thoroughly
scrutinised by the quality assurance sub-group, executive group and the main
board, with appropriate focus on the boards priorities. The board receives
regular reports regarding the few children who go missing in the City and the
actions taken when they return, including return home interviews. However,
the board has not sufficiently scrutinised the timeliness of these interviews.


The board comprehensively monitors multi-agency frontline practice. An
extensive programme of themed audit activity is determined by the boards
priorities, and local and national concerns. These include early help and
intervention, child sexual exploitation, children who go missing, the journey of
the child and the experiences of children with disabilities. The board considers
findings from its own audits, alongside those from City single-agency audits
and from staff surveys. Learning is carefully fed back to staff and findings
inform training.


The board has ensured that safeguarding is a priority for all partner agencies
through rigorous scrutiny of agencies compliance with safeguarding policies
and procedures. A comprehensive section 11 audit process engages all
partners. Returns are rigorously analysed by the quality assurance sub-group.
Bespoke training to support agency participation and peer reviews provides
the board with assurance that agencies are meeting their safeguarding
responsibilities. Training extends to diverse sections of the community. Audits
have led to changes, which have improved the safety of children in the City,
for example joint actions with British Transport Police regarding children using
public transport. Low referral rates led to the scrutiny of two hospitals outside
the City, where City children are born, to assure the board that safeguarding
practice was robust. Further work is progressing to map the private health
providers in the City, in order to engage them in the safeguarding agenda.


Early help remains a firm priority for the board, with the effectiveness of early
help services evaluated through the learning and improvement framework and
City sub-group. The board rigorously monitors the numbers of children who
receive early help assessments, through its multi-agency dataset. The annual
report provides a comprehensive overview of early help services. A multiagency audit of the effectiveness of early help identified strengths and
learning, which are widely disseminated through TUSK briefings. The City
early help sub-group has led to improvements in practice and services. For
example, good performance data increased the focus on concerns about


adults who work with children, and this led to an increase in referrals.
Awareness raising and protocols to counter child sexual exploitation led to the
identification of a small number of children with vulnerabilities. 40 partners
attended a multi-agency partnership event in February 2016, which included a
presentation covering the strategic objectives and operational priorities for
early help.

The board has adopted pan-London LSCB policies and procedures, which are
adapted to the City and reviewed regularly. The City has refreshed and
relaunched a revised threshold document, which is comprehensive and
practical. Descriptors provide clear examples for each level of need, including
child sexual exploitation, radicalisation and disability, as well as a link to the
joint City and Hackney escalation policy, which staff reported as extremely
useful in achieving resolution when agencies disagree. Thresholds are now
understood well and used by staff across the City.


Arrangements for the review of child deaths are highly effective. The child
death overview panel (CDOP) is well attended by the right professionals and
has clear terms of reference. The CDOP annual report provides a
comprehensive analysis of local issues and appropriately sites this in a
national and regional context. It identifies issues of concern and themes, for
example the risks associated with baby slings and co-sleeping with infants.
Both have resulted in well-targeted public awareness raising across the City.
The panel identified the need to discuss a range of issues with the senior
coroner. As a result, all coroner reports concerning the prevention of future
deaths are now sent to the panel to ensure that learning is widely circulated.


The board has created and fostered an effective learning culture that extends
to frontline practitioners and embraces the community. Professional
relationships across the City are based on a team approach, ensuring excellent
communication and an atmosphere of continuous improvement. The board
delivers a comprehensive range of training for managers and practitioners
relating directly to multi-agency improvement priorities. Technology is used
creatively and well, for example the online booking system and the provision
of a range of online training modules through its website. The training and
development sub-group ensures highly effective planning, monitoring and
oversight of all training activity. Regular reflection by the board on the
learning arising from SCRs, reviews and case audits further enhances the
training programme, with relevant themes shared effectively with trainers.
Contemporary messages to improve safeguarding of children are
comprehensively included in the rolling programme of training. The board
regularly monitors the effectiveness of its training courses. This includes
observation of trainers, post-course evaluation, staff surveys and random
telephone calls to participants and their managers, to assess how learning has
influenced practice. Following safeguarding awareness training, a City
apartment receptionist raised concerns about a child to the police.




The annual report for 201415 is well written, comprehensive and evaluative,
providing rigorous and detailed overview of the boards work. The report
clearly identifies learning and provides documented examples of effective and
constructive challenge to partner agencies and other boards. The boards
website is accessible, mobile telephone friendly, easy to navigate and well
used. It includes a comprehensive and up-to-date set of procedures with links
to research information, legislation and practice guidance. The latest news
from the board is highlighted on the home page and is disseminated through
monthly TUSK briefings. There are regular tweets from the Twitter account to
update staff.

Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of four of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Stephanie Murray
Team inspectors: Janet Fraser, Neil Penswick, Steven Stanley
Senior data analyst: Tania Corbin
Quality assurance manager: Sean Tarpey


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


