Cornwall Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 April 2016 to 6 May 2016
Report published: 27 June 2016

Childrens services in Cornwall are good

Requires improvement

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Cornwall are good. A stable and dedicated senior management
team, led by an experienced director of childrens services (DCS), has worked
steadily and purposefully to implement systemic change to services for children and
young people in Cornwall. In doing so, they have created a culture of learning,
support and challenge in a professional environment that has enabled social work to
flourish. The senior management team demonstrates a good understanding of
services, is committed to continual improvement and responds swiftly to meet the
changing needs and demands for services.
Childrens services in Cornwall were subject to a period of intervention from the
Department of Education between 2009 and 2013. Almost all areas for improvement
identified during this period have been tackled and, as a result, services for children
and young people have continued to improve and are in a much stronger position.
Improvements achieved since the previous inspection of child protection services in
well-coordinated approach to services that provide targeted and specialist help at an
early stage and reduced social work caseloads.
Continued investment in high quality training and support has resulted in a stable
and skilled workforce. Social workers use a range of effective interventions to
improve the lives of children and families. Managers and staff are enthusiastic about
improving outcomes for children and young people. Children are visited regularly and
social work practice is child centred. Direct work with children is an area of strength
with creative methods used to assess and understand the individual needs, wishes
and feelings of children. Children and young people in need of help and protection
receive an effective and prompt response from the multi-agency referral unit
(MARU). The MARU handles all new referrals to childrens social care. Thresholds for
services are clear and applied effectively. All decisions are clearly recorded and, in
most cases, the rationale is clearly evident. A new early help hub (EHH) has further
strengthened the arrangements that already existed. Consequently, children and
families receive swift access to the most relevant services that result in positive and
sustainable change for them.
Assessments are timely, comprehensive and analytical. They explicitly consider the
voice of the child and the childs lived experience and are routinely informed by
research. When child protection referrals lead to strategy discussions, they are
mainly timely with appropriate outcomes. However, for a very small number of
childrens cases open to the children in need teams, there had been delays in holding
strategy discussions when their risks had increased. As a result, some children
remained in situations where their risk had not been fully assessed. Child protection
conferences effectively analyse and respond to the risks affecting children. Reviews
of plans and core group meetings are regular and are attended by a range of
agencies, which ensure that plans progress well and in the childs timescale.
The local authority has ensured that there are strong arrangements for children who


are on the edge of care. Gweres Tus Yowynk (GTY) provides an intensive response
to support young people to stay at home. Decisions to take children into care are
appropriate. The local authority Public Law Outline (PLO) and court work is an area
of particular strength, with proceedings concluding well within national timescales. As
a result, children move into a permanent home with carers or return to their families
more quickly.
Children looked after in Cornwall receive a consistently good service, with some very
strong work seen by inspectors. However, despite continued effort, a small minority
of children still have too many placement moves and the gap in educational
outcomes between children looked after and other children in the south west and
nationally, although narrowing, is still too wide. Adoption services are good and
children are placed in a timely way with well-matched and well-supported adoptive
parents. Placements of brothers and sisters are not consistently informed by together
or apart assessments and child permanence reports do not always explore the
lifelong impact of all issues. The timeliness of stage one of adopter assessments
requires improvement. Services for care leavers are good, with care leavers feeling
well supported into adulthood, making good progress in their studies, receiving
effective support and living in suitable accommodation.
The practice of only the youngest or most vulnerable child within a group of brothers
and sisters having a named social worker has resulted in the individual needs of
some children not always being given sufficient consideration. This practice was
identified as an area for improvement in the Ofsted inspection in 2013 and remains
an area which requires further work. Senior managers accepted this finding and took
swift action during the inspection to clarify their policy in relation to child in need
assessments.
Services for children vulnerable to sexual exploitation are at an early stage of
development. Data and intelligence are not sufficiently aligned, collated or analysed
to inform service development. The timeliness of return home interviews and the
quality of safety plans to minimise risk for children who go missing from home and
care, and children who are vulnerable to child sexual exploitation, vary in quality.
The local authority and partner agencies had already recognised the majority of the
areas for improvement identified during the inspection through a peer review and
their own recent audits. Action is being taken to address the work required.
Young people aged 16 and 17 at risk of being homeless are well supported by
targeted youth workers and a homeless housing officer. At the time of the
inspection, no young people were living in bed and breakfast accommodation.
However, over the past six months a small group of closely monitored and vetted
bed and breakfast establishments have been used by the housing department for
young people to live in while their needs are jointly assessed by social care and
housing. This is not acceptable practice and leaves young people potentially
vulnerable. Senior managers accept that this area needs to be addressed and plan to
expand the Open Door provision to meet the needs of this group and to extend the
range of options available for supported living.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. Four were judged to be good
or better in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in February 2013. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in January 2011. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The DCS has been in post since June 2010.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult and public health services.
 The chair of the local safeguarding children board (LSCB) has been in post since
June 2014.
 The LSCB is shared with the Isles of Scilly local authority.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 117,102 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Cornwall. This is 21.8% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 18% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 12.5% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 11.7% (the national average is 13.9%)
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 17.8%
(including Cornish) of all children living in the area. Non-Cornish minority ethnic
groups make up 2.9% of the children and young people population, compared
with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Cornish (16,657 or 14.9%) and mixed/multiple ethnic group (2,068 or 1.8%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 2.3% (the national average is 19.4%).
 in secondary schools is 1.8% (the national average is 15.0%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2016, 2915 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a decrease from
 At 31 March 2016, 413 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 404 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 March 2016, 20 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from 25 at 31 March 2015.
 Since the previous inspection, two serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted and two serious case reviews have been completed or were
ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2016, 431 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 38.6 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 440 (42 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015. Of this number:
authority area
area
 There are no unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
returned to be looked after


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


independent living
 no children or young people ceased to be looked after and are living in
houses of multiple occupation.
 Social work model
 The local authority uses Signs of Safety as its social work model for child
intervention work.


Recommendations

Improve the arrangements to reduce the risk to children of sexual exploitation
and episodes of missing from home and care by:
 improving information sharing and ensuring that the missing and child
sexual exploitation meeting (MACSE) identifies and monitors substantive
intervention plans to ensure that risks are reduced
 ensuring risk assessments are of a consistently good standard supported by
good analysis of risks and protective factors
 developing suitable arrangements to share and analyse information from
child sexual exploitation risk assessments and return interviews to reduce
future risks for individual children and young people, and to inform
partnership prevention and disruption activity.


Ensure that homeless young people aged 16 and 17 are aware of their rights
and entitlements to section 20 accommodation, assessment of risks are
completed and adequate accommodation is available to meet their needs.


Ensure that strategy discussions are promptly considered and, where
appropriate, held for all children when risks increase.


Ensure that, at the point of referral, all children in a household are considered
and are subject to a referral and that they have an individual assessment of
need that informs an individual plan.


Improve planning and work to support children who return home from care.


Improve educational attainment for all children looked after at all key stages,
particularly at key stage 4.


Improve the quality of child permanence reports so that they provide a
comprehensive understanding of the impact on the child of their history.


Ensure that all permanence decisions for brothers or sisters are informed by a
formal together or apart assessment.


Summary for children and young people
 Inspectors found that services for children and young people in Cornwall are
working well and some areas are good, but more work needs to be done to make
sure that children at risk of sexual exploitation and homelessness are kept safe,
particularly services for children who need help and protection.
 Social workers are good at finding out what needs to happen to help families
make changes to keep children safe.
 Social workers meet children regularly and listen to them, but not all children
have their own assessments and plans.
 Families, children and young people who need extra help are able to get the
support they need when they are having difficulties.
 Social workers are good at helping children and young people to feel safe and
supported and use lots of different ways to help children say what is worrying
them and what they would like to happen.
 Managers are improving childrens and young peoples lives and making sure that
there is sufficient money for services.
 When children cannot live at home, their social workers make the right decisions
and they are looked after by people who take good care of them and support
them in their education and hobbies.
 Senior managers and councillors take their role as corporate parents very
seriously. They regularly meet with children and young people and take an
interest in their lives. They understand what children need to lead healthy and
successful lives.
 Social workers help children and young people to keep in contact with the people
who are important to them.
 More needs to be done to help children do as well as they can in school.
 When children need to be adopted, this happens quickly and they are helped to
understand their life stories.
 Most young people leaving care feel well supported by their personal advisers and
feel safe where they live.
 The Children in Care Council, known as Voice4Us, is dynamic and their work helps
make positive changes for all children looked after.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Senior managers acknowledge that they need to improve and develop services for
children at potential or actual risk of child sexual exploitation. This includes
strengthening assessments of risk, safety planning and increasing the rigour and
scrutiny of cases presented to missing and child sexual exploitation meetings.
Nevertheless, the vast majority of children and young people who are in need of help
and protection are identified, and prompt action is taken to ensure that they are
safe.
Children and young people benefit from effective early help and specialist services.
The coordination of these services through the new early help hub is increasingly
effective in identifying need and supporting children and families at an early stage.
The MARU is the entry point for all new referrals from the public and partners.
Experienced social workers take account of the risks identified at the point of
referral, incorporate historical information thoroughly and make prompt decisions
about levels of intervention.
The practice of only allocating a named social worker to the youngest or most
vulnerable child within a group of brothers and sisters has resulted in the individual
needs of some children not always being given sufficient consideration. When child
protection referrals lead to strategy discussions, they are mainly timely with
appropriate outcomes. However, for a very small number of childrens cases open to
the children in need teams, there had been delays in holding strategy discussions
when their risks had increased. As a result, some children remained in situations
where their risk had not been fully assessed.
Assessments, including early help assessments, are comprehensive and make good
use of research to inform practice. Social workers are knowledgeable about the
children they are working with and use a wide range of effective direct work to
understand their lived experiences. Child protection and review conferences are
timely and are attended by an appropriate range of agencies. These meetings
analyse risk well.
The arrangements for responding to the needs of children and young people who go
missing require improvement to ensure that children receive timely return home
interviews, and rigorous safety plans to reduce risk. A small group of closely
monitored and vetted bed and breakfast establishments have been used by housing
for young people aged 16 and 17 at risk of homelessness to live in while their needs
are jointly assessed by social care and housing. The local authority has
acknowledged the urgent need to address the shortage of supported provision and
while there are plans, it is too early to see any impact on the supply of supported
provision.


Inspection findings

A wide range of coordinated early help provision supports children and young
people in Cornwall. Early help services are now an integral part of the areas
early help and protection services. Family support workers and targeted youth
workers based in the early help locality teams work closely with partner
agencies. A comprehensive range of evidence-based parenting programmes is
available to parents and carers. As a result, some childrens circumstances
improve and others are quickly stepped up to targeted or specialist help.

and located within the MARU, provides an accessible first point of contact for
children, families and professionals. This ensures that children and young
people who have identified needs but do not meet the threshold for a statutory
service are signposted to the appropriate level of service within early help.
Partner agencies have a good understanding and apply thresholds consistently.
range of direct delivery and commissioned services to support people with
complex needs, including drug and alcohol misuse, domestic violence,
unemployment and antisocial behaviour. Cornwall successfully met the target
for phase one with 1270 families. Phase two has been launched with 711
families (689 target) identified in 201516.
and analytical assessments that inform their work with families. Common
assessment framework assessments completed by partners are more
descriptive than analytical but contain sufficient information to ensure that
children receive the right service. The number of children receiving early help in
Cornwall has risen significantly, from a low base of 200 in 201112 to 2700 in
help is now seen as everyones business. Parents who spoke to inspectors
highly value the help they receive, saying it was amazing and brilliant. They
described real improvements in their childrens lives as a result of the help they
had received.
Experienced social workers take good account of the risks identified at the point
of referral, and incorporate historical information thoroughly. An experienced
manager rigorously oversees all work. When the threshold for statutory
intervention is met, cases transfer swiftly to children in need teams for further
assessment. Nevertheless, the practice of opening only a referral on one child
(usually the youngest), when brothers and sisters have the same or similar
presenting need, means that not all children have an assessment based on their
individual circumstances. This is likely to lead to under-reporting of re-referral
rates and social workers caseloads. Senior managers took swift action and
issued renewed guidelines to managers in a response to learning from
inspectors findings (Recommendation).


strategy discussions or meetings are timely. However, for a very small number
of childrens cases open to the children in need teams, there had been delays in
holding strategy discussions when their risks had increased. As a result, some
children remained in situations where risks had not been fully assessed. The
quality of strategy meetings is variable with the majority comprehensively
considering information and identifying clear actions. In weaker cases, they
lacked clarity relating to actions, timescales and outcomes to inform effective
planning (Recommendation).
thoroughly completed, and clearly outline risk and protective factors. Initial
children protection conferences (ICPC) are timely: 83.8% in 201415 compared
to statistical neighbours at 81% and the national level at 74.7%. The vast
majority of plans are reviewed on time: 95.4% in 201415 compared with
statistical neighbours at 97.8% and the national level at 94%. Multi-agency
attendance and information sharing is good which contributes to effective
decision-making and planning. Child protection conference chairs provide
effective scrutiny and challenge to ensure alternative actions where planning is
not securing the required change. Social work reports are comprehensive and
include danger statements. Children and young people are encouraged to
participate in child protection conferences. Advocacy arrangements are strong,
with a presumption that advocacy will occur through an opt out policy rather
than opt in. As a result, advocates have represented 418 children at ICPCs and
review conferences in the last 12 months. This figure represents almost 80% of
conferences at which the childrens voice was heard.
second or subsequent time in 201415 was 19%, slightly above statistical
neighbours (18%) and England (17%). The local authority has a good
understanding of the factors leading to children needing protection. At the time
of the inspection, 413 were subject to child protection plans. Neglect featured
in 54%, emotional abuse in 27%, physical abuse in 11% and sexual abuse in
category of sexual abuse has substantially increased from 31 March 2015 when
reports that this is due to awareness-raising of issues of sexual abuse and child
sexual exploitation with social workers and partners.
domestic abuse, and have access to a range of specialist advice and services to
support children and families. A domestic abuse and sexual violence needs
assessment and work plan is in place. Progress to date has included
independent domestic violence advisers based at the Royal Cornwall hospital,
access to a specialist domestic violence perpetrator programme, and direct
work with children and young people who have experienced domestic abuse. A
specialist children and young persons violence adviser has successfully
engaged with 84% of young people referred. There are six area-based multi-


agency risk assessment conferences (MARAC) held monthly across Cornwall
that consider children living in households where domestic abuse is a risk.
However, the levels of analysis, and consequently the quality of safety planning
and following up of actions recorded by MARAC, are variable and require
improvement. In 201516, 817 referrals (930 children in households) were
made to MARAC, of which 38% (306) were re-referrals, which is above the
national average of 25%.
explicitly informed by up-to-date research, explore all presenting and historical
concerns, address areas of risk and need and clearly reflect the lived
experiences of children. Step-up and step-down processes are effective. When
change has been effective, cases are appropriately stepped down using the
team around the family process. This ensures that there is continuity of
support for children and their families and smooth transfer to early help locality
team workers. In a small number of assessments, absent fathers and significant
male adults are not always involved in the assessment process.
them. Case recording is mainly up to date and clearly demonstrates the voice of
the child. A particular strength of social work practice is the comprehensive
individual work with children using a variety of creative tools to enable them to
express their views and to inform assessments and plans. Diversity is
considered in the vast majority of cases, including the Cornish identity, sexual
orientation and faith, but more analysis could be undertaken to consider the
impact in assessments.
disabilities. Inspectors saw thorough and sensitive work with children and their
families. Risks are identified and appropriately assessed and children are
protected. Transition arrangements between children and adult services for
children and young people are timely. A recent peer review (January 2016)
identified positive areas of practice in work undertaken with children with
disabilities, including child protection, court work and for children looked after,
and good multidisciplinary working helped by co-location.
children coming into care, particularly teenagers, if this is possible. The
innovative specialist edge of care service, Gweres Tus Yownyk, provides a
dedicated multidisciplinary intervention support for teenagers. An independent
evaluation in January 2016 found that 90% of the young people were able to
remain at home. Of the 10% who came into care, more was understood about
their needs due to the intensive assessment and therapeutic work undertaken.
The evaluation also showed positive impact through improved communication
within the family, improved emotional well-being and a reduction in offending,
substance misuse, missing and child sexual exploitation.


who go missing require improvement. The local authoritys own audit,
completed in December 2015, raised concerns about the consistency of
approach and the quality of practice. A number of children and young people
who go missing do not receive a return interview or do not receive it within 72
hours of their return. The local authoritys data shows that out of the 63
missing episodes involving 50 children between January 2016 and March 2016,
a number did not have a completed return home interview. As a result,
important information is not available to inform future safety planning to reduce
risk (Recommendation).
exploitation have been too slow to develop. Awareness-raising sessions and
training have taken place with a wide range of professionals, which have
increased the number of risk assessments and referrals to MACSE. However,
awareness-raising sessions and training have not occurred with transport
providers, hoteliers or licenced premises around the warning signs to look out
for with children and young people. Between 1 January and 31 March 2016,
analysis and information gathering within these assessments is variable. Some
good quality assessments were seen, but not all are sufficiently rigorous in
identifying all risks posed. As a result, plans are often weak and do not
routinely identify named individuals to complete particular actions, or do not
incorporate timescales. The local authority is developing this work and has
improved identification of children at risk of sexual exploitation but it is too
early to demonstrate any measurable difference (Recommendation).
considered 137 children in 201516, but the level of risk to these children is
unknown as the information presented lacks detail, such as the level of risk and
the age of the child. As a result, the local authority and partners do not hold an
accurate picture of the prevalence of child sexual exploitation in Cornwall.
Actions from MACSE are often incomplete and the level of scrutiny and
challenge is not good enough. Safety plans lack specificity: they are not clear
about who is taking action and by when and they do not prioritise the changes
needed to reduce risks. Actions from a recent multi-agency review of child
sexual exploitation have included the use of a disruption toolkit and a police
detective inspector chairing the three area MACSE meetings to bring
consistency and greater rigour to the quality of actions (Recommendation).
children missing education and elective home education, and maintains up-todate records. Tracking is thorough following clear procedural guidelines, with
regular reporting to the senior management team. A wide range of registered
education provision is effectively integrating children back into mainstream
placements.


children who had been missing from education during the last academic year,
only 32 were missing at the time of the inspection, 24 were known to have left
the country and six had been referred to other local authorities. A dedicated
officer coordinates a well-resourced team that follows up on the circumstances
of these children. The children missing education officer is part of the MACSE,
ensuring that children missing education are fully considered and ensures that
there is effective information sharing with schools.
local authority is aware of parents reasons for choosing this option and the
virtual headteacher maintains a close overview through effective analysis of
information from home visits. Where additional needs are identified,
appropriate liaison with other agencies is carried out. Outcome data is not yet
collected for children electively home educated. Consequently, the local
authority does not know the numbers who progress into post-16 education
provision or become not in education, employment or training.
were living in bed and breakfast establishments. Nevertheless, arrangements
for the provision of services to 16- and 17-year-old homeless young people are
underdeveloped. Young people are not routinely informed of their rights to be
accommodated under section 20 of the Children Act 1989. A joint protocol
agreed with housing is comprehensive, but there remains a shortage of
supported housing provision to offer young people, particularly in certain parts
of Cornwall. A small number of quality assured bed and breakfast
establishments have been used. While this is not appropriate, substantive
assessments of young peoples needs were undertaken and significant levels of
support provided to ensure that young people were safe. The local authority
has acknowledged the urgent need to address the shortage of supported
provision, and while there are plans it is too early to see any impact
(Recommendation).
enabled the local authority and its partners to respond effectively to issues of
female genital mutilation and radicalisation. There is good communication with
the MARU when referrals are made and the Prevent team has been proactive
in giving advice in situations where potential concerns have been identified.
thorough and the arrangements that support the work are sound. The work of
the designated officer is clearly recorded and enquiries responded to
appropriately and promptly. Cases seen by inspectors demonstrated a good
response, with prompt and appropriate steps taken to protect children, and
active follow-up to ensure that children are protected.
intervention out of hours is sound. Staffing is provided by daytime social


workers and family support workers who work additional hours to cover the
shifts required in the out of hours service. The majority of referrals relate to
open cases. In cases seen by inspectors, comprehensive support was effective
in resolving difficulties for children and was appropriately passed to daytime
services. Three children have been detained in police custody overnight
between January 2016 and April 2016. The local authority is undertaking work
with the police to understand the reasons for this. It is intended that learning
from this work will inform future practice.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Children looked after in Cornwall receive a consistently good service resulting in good
outcomes with some very effective work seen by inspectors. The quality and
timeliness of court work is particularly strong. The highest consideration is given to
childrens stability and emotional well-being and co-working, inclusion and
participation with the Children in Care Council. There is a strong collective ownership
and understanding of corporate parenting and a high profile and commitment to
young people looked after placed outside of Cornwall.
Children looked after have regular effective reviews, clear permanence plans,
comprehensive health assessments, a good range of leisure activities, strong direct
work and quick access to extensive and skilled clinical in-house psychology services.
Children looked after are fully supported by a skilled and committed group of social
workers who know them well, visit them frequently and ensure that their needs are
understood and that their voices are heard. The Children in Care Council is well
organised, inclusive and reflective, and is highly effective as a result.
Placement choice is provided through a group of well-trained and well-supported
foster carers with continued emphasis to expand both in-house and external local
provision. Short-term placement stability has had a high profile and the local
authority continues to maintain a tight management oversight on placement moves
for children. Despite continued effort, a small minority of children still have too many
placement moves.
Thresholds for children coming into care are understood well and children do not
come into care unnecessarily. When possible, they are placed within their families or
return home. A small minority of children return home without the full circumstances
being understood or appropriate support. Risks for children looked after are
understood well but there is too much variability of response to children experiencing
sexual exploitation or who go missing from care.
Adoption services for children are good and children are placed in a timely way with
well-matched and well-supported adoptive parents. Care leavers are well supported
into adulthood, making good progress in their studies, receiving effective support
and living in suitable accommodation. Pathway plans are helpful but overly long and
care leavers require better access to careers advice.


Inspection findings
after in Cornwall since the previous inspection in 2011, when they were found
to be adequate. These improvements reflect the continued thought, effort and
resources invested in services for children looked after to achieve the good
outcomes seen in this inspection. The local authority demonstrates persistent
commitment to improving services, with a high profile given to improving
emotional well-being and offering secure permanent placements for children
looked after.
figure has remained constant. The vast majority of these children are over the
age of 11 (approximately 68%) and only 14% are aged under four years. The
local authority has appropriately targeted its plans and services to meet the
needs of these older children while maintaining good outcomes for younger
children.
care unless it is necessary. Decisions are informed by clear analytical
assessments with a good understanding of history and risk. The work of the
Teylu family and pre-birth parenting assessment team is particularly strong.
This team enables parents in higher risk circumstances to have a wellsupported assessment of their parenting in a highly specialised parent and child
foster placement. Appropriate management oversight was seen in the majority
of cases, including thoughtful consideration on contact with birth families.
consistently strong and supported by a skilled legal service. Separate PLO and
care proceedings tracking systems, overseen by senior managers, are effective
in avoiding drift and delay. The legal planning process is effective, supported by
a legal planning checklist and a helpful Parents Guide to Public Law which is
written in straightforward language.
analytical work. With an average of 18 weeks for care proceedings (compared
to a national standard of 26 weeks), Cornwall is one of the top performers
nationally for timeliness. This is underpinned by minimal use of expert
assessments and analytical, well-evidenced social work assessments. The
quality of work seen was consistently good and praised by the designated
judge.
that this happens in a safe and timely way. This work includes good cooperative
relationships with parents, good partnership working and thoughtful and
creative direct work with children, including looking at timelines of family
history. In a small minority of cases, the planning process was insufficient with
the home environment not fully explored and no formal meeting to plan the


move and support plan. For some, the support for the family lost momentum
once the child had returned home (Recommendation).
them well and ensure that their needs, including their emotional needs, are met
well. Clear processes are in place for children looked after to make a complaint.
The recent introduction of a self-advocacy application for mobile phones, Mind
of My Own (Momo), has 64 young people signed up. This was seen in practice
for a young person to raise a concern. Nine young people are matched with
independent visitors who offer enduring support for children, with one child
having had the same independent visitor for ten years.
individual children looked after. Strategy discussions are held and secure
accommodation is used or considered for those at highest risk. In cases seen
during the inspection, risk assessments and action taken were too variable. For
example, some children receive a return home interview on the day of return
and others not at all. More consistency in response, and analysis of push and
pull factors is required to ensure that every childs individual needs are met.
Findings from an audit completed by the local authority in September 2015 and
a sector-led peer review identified many of the deficits seen in this inspection
(Recommendation).
therapists, funded by the local authority in partnership with the childrens
community health provider, meet the health needs of children looked after
effectively. These practitioners balance physical health needs with a clear
understanding of history, trauma and attachment. The team regularly reports
on performance data and the qualitative experience for children through a rate
my health assessment form. Team members are strong advocates for children
looked after, including those placed outside of Cornwall. As a result, in 2015,
under the age of five and 90% of over fives. The local authority reports that the
figures for 2016 are close to these, at 95% and 88% respectively, but have not
yet been adjusted for the end of year.
authority, with 75% of pupils in good or outstanding schools. Risk assessments
are undertaken for those in schools judged to require improvement. Outcomes
for children looked after in early years show that their expected levels of
development are just below what might be expected of them for their age.
Cohort sizes, however, are small and are subject to fluctuation. Outcomes in
reading, writing and mathematics are improving at key stages 1 and 2 but they
are still, overall, below national rates of all pupils.
mathematics is above the national average for children looked after, but below


the national average for all pupils, and is still too low. The local authority has
analysed this, understands where the difficulties are and has put in place
measures to improve the progress of pupils (Recommendation).
closely monitor the educational achievements of children looked after and
report through fixed updates to senior managers and the directorate
management team.
with schools. They provide additional funding when needed and support to
enable pupils to make a successful return to school. The average attendance of
children looked after is above the national and the south west rate and is
evidence of the effective working and strong partnership between the schools,
CiCESS and foster carers. There have been no permanent exclusions of children
looked after during the academic year (2014/15). However, fixed term
exclusions have risen from previous years, to 132 in 2014/15.
monitoring the completion of PEPs. As a result, the quality of PEPs has
improved, along with timeliness and numbers in place, moving from 87% in the
summer term of 2015 to 95% in the spring term of 2016. The virtual head
quality-assures PEPs, which has effectively improved the quality. However,
there is no formal recording of learning from PEPs and further work is required
to ensure that there is greater involvement and understanding of the PEPs
more widely among staff in schools. A regular review of PEPs is one mechanism
for monitoring and tracking, along with regular pupil progress meetings held.
CiCESS teachers and higher-level teaching assistants support individual children
who have had problems with attendance and with transitions from the primary
to secondary phase of their education.
confidence and study skills as well as using the pupil premium for a range of
appropriate activities. The virtual head and the CiCESS have undertaken
effective training with school governors, school staff, independent reviewing
officers (IROs), foster carers and some parents on use of the pupil premium
and the use of the personal educational allowance.
for the majority of children are appropriate and well planned. An audit
undertaken by the local authority in October 2015 showed that nearly 60% of
moves were planned for positive reasons. It also identified further work to be
undertaken to meet the placement needs of adolescents, including the
matching at the time of placement and a shortage of foster carers for this
group.
priority. The local authority has invested significantly to broaden services,


including expanding the GTY service and a plan to train all staff undertaking
direct work with adolescents. The local authority is not yet achieving its target
of less than 14% of children having three or more placement moves. An audit
in October 2015 showed decisions about placement moves relating to younger
children are appropriate. However, the experience for all children is not yet
consistently good and more work needs to be done.
and processes in place. These include monthly senior management monitoring,
a clear placement recruitment strategy and good working relationships with
providers to offer local residential and fostering placements. Creative and
flexible commissioning has assisted in 17 new residential placements being
available, six in Cornwall and 11 just 20 miles outside the local authority
boundary.
actions and agreed outcomes. Reviews take place on time, with the local
authority consistently exceeding the target of 95% of reviews taking place on
time. Care plans are clear, analytical and outline what needs to happen, by
whom and by when. The effectiveness of permanency planning is supported
further by having review meetings every three months for all children under the
age of eight. Consequently, young children have permanence planning
independently overseen frequently and this reduces the possibility of delay or
drift for younger children.
analysis and the balancing of options through the review process. Permanency
is appropriately considered at all second reviews. Inspectors saw clear and
coherent evidence of strong permanence planning underpinned by a helpful
permanence policy to guide practice. The IROs challenge practice when
necessary. However, the management of this service needs to monitor this
formally.
adoption orders, 46 special guardianship orders and 24 agreed permanent
fostering matches, representing a significant proportion of permanent
arrangements for children and a sense of legal and emotional
belonging. Children are prepared well for permanence and are routinely invited
to attend the fostering panel. As part of an agreed protocol with adult services,
up to 10 carers have changed status and become part of the Shared Lives
scheme to continue to offer young people a family experience into adulthood.
county were appropriate. Senior managers only make these decisions when a
highly specialised resource is required to meet their needs, which is not
available within Cornwall. At the time of the inspection, 71 children (16.5%)
lived outside the local authority area. The experience of these children is well
understood and is given a high priority. Social workers visit them regularly and


their progress is closely monitored. They are included in celebration events and
the corporate parenting board fully considers their experience.
underpinned by a good strategic plan. Although more carers left than were
recruited in 201516, the service has not lost any carers due to dissatisfaction
and has a skilled, committed and well-trained group of carers. Delegated
authority is in place and understood and used by foster carers. This ensures
that they make day-to-day decisions to facilitate a wide range of leisure
activities and interests for the children and young people they look after. Foster
carers are trained in the use of the pupil premium and ensure that it is used
effectively to meet childrens and young peoples needs.
where this is in their best interests. Where this is not the case, arrangements
for contact are well considered to ensure that brothers and sisters retain
appropriate and meaningful contact with each other. Good consideration is
given to placing children with family and friends. The vast majority of viability
assessments seen by inspectors were of a good quality. Special guardianship
orders (SGOs) are used effectively as a way to ensure permanence and that
carers continue to be well supported by the family plus team. The family plus
team is actively supporting 82 families where children are subject to SGOs.
their skills in meeting the needs of the children they look after. Foster carers
report that they feel fully included as part of the professional team responsible
for children looked after, and they universally praised children's services for the
high quality social work support for themselves and children.
Cornish identity and the importance of placing children locally if possible. While
more analysis could be undertaken to consider the impact, some exceptional
work was seen in ensuring that individual children had their identity needs met
and supported.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
cannot live with their birth family. The local authority makes timely decisions for
children who need to be adopted. Although there was a small decrease in the
number of decisions to place children for adoption during 20152016 (from 35
to 31), other permanence options increased, such as special guardianship
orders (46) and child arrangement orders (7).
an average of 413 days between entering care and being placed for adoption.
This compares to 593 days for England, 492 days for statistical neighbours and
is 74 days shorter than the national threshold of 487 days. The average time it
takes to place children with their adoptive family has increased to 464 days in
be matched during 20122015 was 162 days. This is better than the England
average at 223 days and statistical neighbours at 187. The number of harder to
place children waiting for adoptive families in Cornwall, including brothers and
sisters, older children and those with extremely complex health needs, has had
a significant impact on this performance. Despite this, the local authoritys
performance remains strong and the local authority continues to meet
thresholds set out in the adoption scorecard.
materials are of good quality and a range of creative marketing approaches are
used to widen coverage. National and regional systems are used early to
strengthen family finding activity. The recruitment team supports adopters
through the initial enquiries stage, as well as undertaking stage one of the
assessment process. Adopters who spoke to inspectors were positive about
their initial contact with the local authority adoption agency. They spoke about
information being clear, the training helpful and the assessment process
thought provoking.
waiting, with an emphasis on seeking to recruit prospective adopters for older
children, brothers and sisters and those with complex needs. The local authority
is actively recruiting prospective adopters for fostering to adopt. Although
numbers of these remain relatively low (with three in place at the time of the
inspection), those seen were providing an opportunity to avoid further changes
should children not be able to return to their birth families.
redesign of the service, independent social workers complete stage two
assessments. Consequently, the timeliness with which assessments are
completed has improved considerably. However, too few stage one


assessments are completed in the required timescales due, predominantly, to
delays in adopters medicals, or in progressing Disclosure and Barring Service
checks. The local authority has taken action to address this by introducing a
tracker system to identify and respond to delays. Despite this work, the
timescales for stage one assessments remain above national targets, at 85 days
at the end of 2015 2016.
adopters, though this has taken considerable time for some children with very
complex needs. As a result, there has been an overall decline in the average
time it takes between the local authority receiving authorisation to place and
deciding on a match, at 276 days. In all cases seen by inspectors where there
had been such delays, these had been purposeful and work had progressed at
the childs pace. Despite this, the overall time it takes between children
becoming looked after and being placed for adoption is good. Once placed,
adoption orders are progressed within appropriate timescales for the vast
majority of children.
permanence. At the time of the inspection, 20 children were subject to a
placement order, with six of these tentatively matched with prospective
adopters. Twenty five prospective adopters had been approved and were
waiting for a match.
approach to adopters assessments. Assessments examine adopters
attachments using adult attachment interviews. Matching uses a range of
approaches, including the use of timeline meetings (similar to life appreciation
days), which map the childs experience. Adopters spoken to by inspectors said
this approach had been invaluable in helping them to understand their
childrens early experiences.
is appropriately constituted, meets regularly and rigorously scrutinises practice.
The panel provides a rigorous quality assurance function for child permanence
reports and prospective adopter reports. The quality of reports has improved
since this process was established, but there is still further work to do to
strengthen the quality of child permanence records. These do not consistently
provide sufficient detail to enable a comprehensive understanding of the impact
of the childs history on future placement decisions (Recommendation).
recommendations to ensure that decisions for adoption are in childrens best
interests and that children are matched to families that will meet their needs.
Decision-making is timely and thoroughly explores wider issues including post
adoption support and childrens ongoing needs for contact. Together or apart
assessments are not used consistently to inform decisions about whether
brothers and sisters should remain together. Consequently, some children may


grow up without an understanding of the rationale for being placed apart from
their brothers and sisters. (Recommendation)
foster care to their adoptive families. The panel medical adviser provides
excellent advice and consultation to prospective adopters when considering
potential matches with children. A further strength is the support provided by
the in-house psychology service, jointly provided with the local childrens
community health provider. Psychological interventions, recovery well-being
plans and attachment workshops provide invaluable support, helping to
improve childrens emotional well-being and preparing them for adoption.
them for adoption. Life story books seen by inspectors were comprehensive and
of good quality, but are not consistently completed early enough for all
children. The local authority had recognised this shortfall prior to the inspection
and was already in the process of recruiting to a post to carry out this function.
placement, with 80 families in receipt of such support at the time of the
inspection. Adoption support is provided swiftly in response to identified need
and there are no adopters waiting to receive a service. Adoption support plans
are thorough and provide sound analysis of childrens and adopters support
needs. Multidisciplinary support is of a high quality, particularly psychological
and paediatric input, which adopters value highly. This support is having a
strong and positive impact for those families accessing the service, reducing the
potential for disruptions in the future.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good
contact with the vast majority (98%). Personal advisers have manageable
caseloads, and they contact and visit young people regularly. Care leavers
spoke positively to inspectors about the help and support they receive,
particularly from their personal advisers.
social worker. This practice ensures a smooth transition to leaving care services
and enables young people to build up a relationship with their personal adviser
prior to case transfer at their 18th birthday. Transition planning for care leavers
who require adult social care begins soon after their 16th birthday, thereby
reducing uncertainty and anxiety for young people. A small number of foster
carers have converted to Open Door and Shared Lives and provide long-term


care to young people with disabilities. A high proportion of care leavers stay
with their foster carers beyond the age of 18, with the number increasing. For
example, in 20152016, 43 care leavers stayed put with carers after their 18th
birthday, an increase from 31 in 20142015.
and breakfast establishments have not been used in the past 12 months and
are only ever used in an emergency for very short periods. A dedicated housing
officer works with care leavers who have access to a range of housing options.
The Open Door project provides an appropriate range of suitable supported
lodgings and similar accommodation for 50 care leavers, enabling a good match
of need to accommodation. An effective media campaign has increased
recruitment of suitable providers. Care leavers told inspectors that they felt safe
where they were living and were positive about the genuine attempts to meet
their preferences.
example, care leavers who are parents spoke positively about the help they
received from the family nurse practitioner, personal advisers and with
assistance to continue with their studies. One care leaver, in higher education,
described their personal adviser as magic for the swift and decisive way she
managed to sort out financial help.
account of the geography and rural nature of Cornwall. Care leavers are able to
drop into offices for help or advice if they wish. However, some of the buildings
are not welcoming to care leavers, or are not conducive to providing on-thespot counselling or support to a young person needing help. Care leavers
receive effective support in their journey towards independence, primarily from
their personal advisers, especially in helping them to understand and manage
their finances. Personal advisers use a well-designed independence toolkit to
aid care leavers and accommodation providers to assess the levels of help
needed. In 201516, 47 accommodation providers received specific training on
independent skills support. Each young person in Open Door accommodation,
a service run by the 16-plus team, receives 12 hours targeted support a week
to help them to build confidence and independence to adulthood.
designated nurse for care leavers provides targeted help for young people
when they need it. For example, by signposting to services for drug and alcohol
services, sexual health and pregnancy support. A compact health passport,
launched more than two years ago and designed by care leavers, is a useful
document, which records all essential information in one place. One young
person expresses its value as helpful and handy, all info in one place.
However, the accessibility of the child and adolescent mental health service
(CAMHS) for care leavers remains an area for further improvement. The recent
appointment of a dedicated psychologist is a positive move to increase the


availability of psychological and emotional support. The impact of this recent
development is yet to be seen.
application for additional funds to the care leavers council. This is a council
where care leavers themselves make decisions based on agreed criteria, such
as quantifying how this would make life better for the young person. Personal
advisers help care leavers to manage their budgets and spend their money
wisely. The vast majority of care leavers are aware of their entitlements. A
leaving care booklet Leap, designed by care leavers in Cornwall, is a lively,
informative guide which clearly and directly sets out legal entitlements such as
financial support, how to complain and rights to health histories in a language
and format that is user-friendly.
good. Partnerships with local providers and local colleges are effective. PEPs
are in place to support the education of care leavers at key stage 4 and key
stage 5. Young people are encouraged to attend taster days at local
universities. Twenty five care leavers are studying at university. Young people
who are harder to engage receive effective targeted support to enable them to
re-engage in education, employment and training. In 2015, 185 (74.3%) of 16
to 21 year old care leavers were in education, employment or training. This is
well above the national rate for care leavers. Personal advisers are in touch
with 36 of the 37 care leavers who are not in education, employment or
training and they know each of the reasons for this.
leavers find that there is often too much information to review and take in. The
plans do not pay sufficient attention to how care leavers might improve their
emotional and psychological well-being and needs. Additionally, the pathway
plans do not give enough attention to the views of care leavers and are written
for young people rather than written with them. Consequently, these limit their
usefulness for care leavers in planning their journey towards adulthood.
Managers acknowledge that this is an area for development
(Recommendation).
there are plans to take more care leavers as apprentices, the local authority has
not previously done enough to increase the opportunities for care leavers to
become apprentices.
with care leavers. Two care leavers sit on the fostering panel and a care leaver
is the vice-chair of the virtual school. An annual celebration of achievement is
held every year during national care leavers week and is attended by senior
managers. Children in care and care leavers are part of a choir, which practises
regularly and performs proudly in public.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Leadership, management and governance are good. The DCS is a strong and
confident leader, effectively supported by the chief executive and the senior
management team. Together, they have worked successfully to continually develop
services for children and young people and have effectively responded to areas for
development identified in previous inspections. As a result, services for children
looked after, children who are adopted and care leavers are much improved. For the
vast majority of children and young people who need protection, action is immediate
and risks are effectively reduced. However, more work is needed in some areas. For
example, to strengthen the management and scrutiny of children and young people
at risk of going missing and at risk of child sexual exploitation, to provide appropriate
accommodation for vulnerable homeless 16 and 17 year olds, and to ensure that all
children in need benefit from an assessment and plan that is tailored to their
individual circumstances.
The early help hub, commissioned jointly with childrens community health services,
is effective in ensuring easy access to the right help from universal and targeted
services. Social work teams are increasingly multidisciplinary, with significant
contributions from educational psychologists.
Significant investment in high quality training for social workers, other social care
practitioners and partner agencies has ensured that there is a whole-system
approach to improving outcomes for children. Social work staff have manageable
caseloads across the services and this ensures that social workers spend time with
children and young people. A particular strength of social work practice is the
comprehensive individual work with children using a variety of creative tools to
enable them to express their views and inform assessments and plans. Staff feel
valued and respected and have access to effective managers who are experienced,
approachable and are regularly accessible to staff. As a result, the workforce is
stable.
The lead member visits staff teams regularly and is well informed and respected for
his energy, passion and advocacy for children and young people. The corporate
parenting board effectively engages with children looked after and care leavers.
Elected members are well aware of the issues affecting children and young people.
Strong performance management systems provide detailed data and analysis for
staff, leaders and partners to monitor and develop services effectively. Clear
governance arrangements between a range of strategic boards, including the Local
Safeguarding Childrens Board, the Childrens Trust, the Health and Well-being Board
(H&WBB), Safer Cornwall Partnership and the Emotional and Mental Health
Wellbeing Board (E&MHWB), ensures that there is clarity of the role for each board
and avoids duplication.


Inspection findings
to children and families since 2011, particularly since the previous Ofsted
inspection in 2013. Social work caseloads have reduced and the workforce is
increasingly stable and skilled. Early help services are well coordinated and
provide good quality, targeted support at an early stage.
services in 2013, and safeguarding and looked after childrens services in 2011,
have been implemented successfully. More work is needed in some areas, such
as ensuring that each child has an individual child in need assessment and plan.
provides an effective front door to services. Early help support for families is
strong and prevents problems re-emerging. Management oversight of practice
in the majority of cases is clear and evident in casework. Staff receive regular
supervision and report good support from managers.
collective responsibilities well. The DCS and the head of service have been in
post since 2010 and 2011 respectively, and have overseen extensive changes in
practice. As a result, services have been refocused and are now firmly
established, and effectively support children and young people.
Childrens Trust Board (CTB) and the LSCB and provides regular briefings to
elected members. He routinely visits frontline teams and children and young
people. Elected members take their role as corporate parents seriously. They
ensure that sufficient funds are in place to support developments and
improvements for children looked after. For example, funds raised from the
selling of a childrens home were used to fund the adolescent edge of care
service (GTY) which is now core funded.
are in place. The role of the DCS has substantially expanded since 2014 and
now includes responsibility for adult social care and public health. However,
there has been no test of assurance. This means that the local authority cannot
be sure that the DCS has sufficient capacity to effectively lead and manage the
range of services for which he has responsibility.
comprehensive and well established. Senior managers scrutinise and analyse
performance, which is disseminated to managers effectively. Managers use
performance information routinely to assess the quality of the work of their
team. This enables shortfalls to be addressed and prompt action to be taken.


from both compliance and the quality of work with children and families to
develop and improve practice. Senior managers require a follow up audit to
identify and understand the reasons for any identified deficits and ensure that
swift actions have been completed to resolve them. A quarterly conference uses
a Turning the Curve exercise with service groups to aid discussion about
specific service areas of performance and agree action to improve practice. The
LSCB chair has an open invitation to attend these conferences. Learning, from
recent deep-dive audits on missing children and child exploitation and external
peer reviews, has been used to address shortfalls systematically. For example,
a renewed and clearer emphasis on child sexual exploitation and children
missing, return home interview processes that trigger a child sexual exploitation
risk assessment, and revised terms of reference for the MACSE meeting,
including the attendance of a police analyst.
corporate leadership teams and by both the Childrens Trust and LSCB. The
lead member and the head of service meet monthly to review performance to
improve understanding of the service. Good use has been made of findings
from a number of peer reviews and internal audits to target areas for
improvement. The local authoritys self-assessment and service plan accurately
reflect the majority of the findings from this inspection, such as data regarding
children at risk of child sexual exploitation and information from return
interviews not being collated and analysed sufficiently (Recommendation).
understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of the service. Links are clear
between the chief executive, the DCS and the LSCB chair, with regular
meetings in place, roles are clearly defined and understood. As a result, the
needs of children are effectively prioritised.
Children and young people attend the corporate parenting board twice a year.
The board has ensured that issues that are important to children and young
people are addressed. These include an apprenticeship scheme for care leavers,
work experience within the council for 15 to 16 year old children looked after
and providing support to children and young people to get home safely from
meetings and social activities. The corporate parenting strategy needs updating
to ensure that priorities are appropriate for the future.
board has five delivery priorities, which are aligned with service improvement
plans. Each priority has identified leads, plans and governance accountability.
The CTB reports to the Health and Well-being Board (HWB). Childrens services
have been at the forefront of integration of social care, education and health in
Cornwall and the governance arrangements have been pivotal in this
progress. For example, the HWB used its position to support the DCS in the
development of the early help hub to ensure that partners met their resource


commitments in a timely way and that the initiatives progressed as planned and
on time.
Cornwall and complements the joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA). The
local authority and partners have identified that the JSNA needs refreshing to
reflect priorities for children, including child sexual exploitation and children
missing.
services for children and young people. Comprehensive monitoring of these
arrangements is in place. Young people participate in the commissioning
process for every commissioned piece of work. Recent management changes in
the Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) have affected the progress of an
integrated commissioning strategy. Existing contracts with health providers for
children and young people are in place and will continue until April 2018.
Court Advisory and Support Service and a good reputation in the local court.
Cases are filed on time and social work statements are of high quality, reducing
the need for expert witnesses and delays for children.
disseminated to staff. Staff work hard to resolve issues before they become
complaints. A self-advocacy tool, Momo, and the high use of advocacy have
made it easier to engage children and young people so that important issues
can be dealt with at an early stage. As a result, no complaints have been
received from children and young people during the period April 2015 to March
supervision. Supervision records seen by inspectors displayed a strong focus on
the lived experience of children with some demonstrating critical reflection in
considering actions needed when insufficient progress is made. The local
authority has invested significantly in a core curriculum for social workers, with
a comprehensive career path for social workers through to team manager level.
A trainee social work scheme has 18 social work trainees at any one time to
establish a social work workforce for the future, and a further assessed and
supported year in employment programme that aims to build up resilience.
Since the schemes started in 2012, 33 of the social workers recruited are still
working for Cornwall. This has reduced vacancy rates from 16.8% in September
consultation with young people who are looked after. Two care leavers sit on
the fostering panel, a care leaver is the vice chair of the virtual school and the
Children in Care Council co-hosted the annual social work conference. Young


people routinely take part in the training of foster carers and the recruitment of
new staff members. The local authority acts upon issues raised by children and
young people. For example, a survey completed by young people in the 16-plus
team found young people required more support to increase friendship groups,
so changes were made to the psychological support available to them and their
carers to promote social relationships.
local authority and rightly has a high profile. The local authority continues to
maintain a tight management oversight on placement moves for children.
Despite continued effort, a small minority of children still have too many
placement moves.
dynamic. Supported through a contract with the voluntary sector, Voice4Us has
a programme of recruiting and training peer mentors and peer befrienders to
ensure that children looked after are supported by each other. Particularly on
social isolation, emotional well-being and attachment.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement

Executive summary
The LSCB is a joint board covering both Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly. The board
requires improvement to be good, but is making substantial progress and is well
positioned to enhance significantly the coordination and effectiveness of
safeguarding arrangements for children and young people in the county. The LSCB is
meeting its statutory responsibilities and has made significant progress in developing
strategic partnerships and shared priorities over the last year. The board has
narrowed its attention to five major priorities, providing a clearly defined pathway for
measuring the performance of partner agencies. The board has addressed gaps in
partner agencies capacity to provide performance information and outcomes,
illustrating how childrens and young peoples safeguarding is central to their
provision of services. Quality assurance and scrutiny panels rigorously challenge all
partner agencies. These processes are transforming partner agencies ability to selfassess and improve their oversight of safeguarding children and young people, while
simultaneously developing inter-agency knowledge and cooperation.
The board has only recently coordinated multi-agency arrangements for responding
to young people at risk of sexual exploitation. This means that the board lacks an
understanding of the prevalence and extent of child sexual exploitation in Cornwall
and the capacity to disrupt and prosecute perpetrators. The boards child sexual
exploitation and missing sub-group is unable to use intelligence from children and
young people who go missing with risks of exposure to sexual exploitation to
evaluate patterns and associations.
The board has not provided a comprehensive multi-agency auditing programme to
test the quality of practice and services to inform improvements. This is being
remedied, but the impact on multi-agency service development and improvement
remains to be demonstrated. The board is not yet systematically evaluating the
effectiveness of early help services.
The influence and participation of children and young people in understanding and
informing board priorities, and providing ongoing feedback, is in its infancy. The
board has a comprehensive multi-agency training programme, ensuring that lessons
from serious case reviews (SCRs) are carefully promoted across partner agencies.
The board has a strong interest in children looked after performance indicators. It
has recently challenged a notable increase in short-term placement instability and
monitors a considerable number of other performance indicators concerning this
group of children and young people. The boards strategic relationship with the
corporate parenting panel could be more precisely outlined to avoid duplication and
confused accountability.


Recommendations

arrangements, a better strategic understanding and response to raising
awareness of, and responding to, child sexual exploitation.
of frontline practice and inter-agency cooperation to safeguard children. Audits
should include frontline practitioners, managers and children to provide
inclusive, comprehensive intelligence and be repeated, where indicated, to
evaluate the rate of progress.
in forming the boards priorities and that feedback from their experiences
regarding multi-agency safeguarding arrangements is well-considered. This
should include methods for an ongoing feedback loop with children and young
people.
partnership.
the board has reached concerning the effectiveness of multi-agency
safeguarding arrangements.
panel, prioritising the safety and welfare of children and young people who are
looked after outside Cornwall and who go missing.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
addressing all recommendations arising from it. The boards presence and
impact in calling to account the childrens safeguarding priorities of other
boards is gaining momentum within the Childrens Trust, the H&WBB, the Safer
Cornwall Partnership and the E&MHWB. The impact of stronger partnerships is
illustrated in an objective to improve the range, quality and access to emotional
and mental health well-being services becoming one of the boards five
priorities.
the board regularly challenges the CCG and the E&MHWB on the pace and
breadth of reforms, influencing the progress of the CAMHS transformation
programme.


local multi-agency safeguarding arrangements have been assertively addressed.
This has been achieved through setting up scrutiny panels in which all board
partners have to demonstrate and evidence the rigour and effectiveness of their
operational safeguarding arrangements. Partners are questioned on six
common core safeguarding themes, including child sexual exploitation and
missing children, the quality of their single agency audits, and how children and
young people are involved in their decision-making. A further set of questions
are tailored to the service priorities of each partner agency. Partner agencies
are required to provide quantifiable evidence in support of their selfassessments.
shortfalls in partner agencies capacity to respond consistently well to indicators
of childrens safeguarding. By contrast, childrens social care standards are of a
higher quality. The majority of agencies scrutinised are found to be needing
improvements with a minority of good practice and services highlighted. This
level of scrutiny has strengthened the culture of multi-agency cooperation and
accountability through peer challenge and public oversight. Recommendations
are closely tracked and scrutiny reports published on the LSCB website.
Partners are expected to make timely progress towards better outcomes. The
boards understanding of the quality of multi-agency safeguarding, while rapidly
developing, is not yet complete.
building awareness and strategic and operational responses to issues such as
modern slavery, radicalisation and female genital mutilation. The board
continues to develop its influence in holding other strategic boards to account.
It has, for example, successfully influenced and increased the content for young
people in the H&WBB Preventing Suicide Strategy for Cornwall and the quality
of safeguarding Together For Families programme (Cornwalls Troubled
Families initiative).
audits to inform its understanding of the quality of frontline practice and
management oversight. An independent multi-agency case audit, linked to
board priorities, was commencing at the point of the inspection. This is the first
audit where a significant volume of cases will be reviewed. The frequency and
quality of single agency audits were identified as weaknesses in the scrutiny
panels, typically confined to testing the quality of referrals to the multi-agency
referral unit. The quality and value of single agency auditing in childrens social
care is more established. Repeat audits will be undertaken where progress
against recommendations is judged too slow and this, in due course, will add to
the boards understanding of frontline multi-agency safeguarding practice.
young people in deciding its priorities, nor sought their contributions to the
evaluation of multi-agency safeguarding. Partner agencies are asked to self-


assess the inclusion of childrens views in their scrutiny panel presentations to
the board, but the impact of consultation with children and young people is yet
to be demonstrated. The LSCB website is not an attractive or interactive
platform for children or the wider public to engage with the board. Plans to
modernise this should be implemented as soon as possible. This will help in the
boards aspiration to achieve an ongoing exchange with children, helping to
understand how safe children feel in their schools and communities.
and missing children is in place but is yet to be fully tested in reducing the
effectiveness of frontline practice. Efforts to tackle this shortfall have been
delayed across key partner agencies and the board has only recently addressed
this concern with sufficient energy. The boards recent changes to the
governance arrangements have strengthened its ability to improve. In
particular, the amalgamation of the child sexual exploitation and missing subgroup, along with the appointment of a police superintendent to chair it,
supported by senior managers from partner agencies, provides the seniority
required to achieve improvements.
sexual exploitation panels operating in Cornwall. Since April 2016, the panels
have been chaired by a police detective inspector to bring consistency and
greater rigour to the quality of chairing, information sharing and analysis of
data and intelligence. The board has been active in improving both the quality
and volume of returns of partner agencies section 11 reports. The large
majority of agencies submit returns and the boards increased engagement,
particularly with schools, has resulted in almost all schools completing section
previously, returning them for further work when required, and conducting
monitoring visits to schools to evaluate compliance in on-site reviews. The
boards scrutiny panel process is aligned with major section 11 themes, adding
a further layer of checks and balances.
through the learning and development group and training contract monitoring
group. A diverse pool of experienced trainers, many with extensive operational
and practitioner backgrounds, deliver well-evaluated courses to practitioners,
first line and senior managers. Careful training needs analyses and emerging
themes from local learning and serious case reviews are considered, allowing
course content to adapt to intelligence from multi-agency practice. Course
capacities and allocations for optimising the attendance of agencies are
carefully planned, and patterns of low attendance from some partner agencies,
particularly adult agencies and the police, are challenged. Certificates validating
professional development are issued three months after attendance, when both
practitioners and managers have completed reflective learning feedback,
demonstrating how learning has informed subsequent improved practice.


through the SCR sub-group, with appropriate and timely recommendations
reviewed and endorsed by the chair. Opportunities for learning from cases not
progressed to a formal review are generated through local learning reviews.
Learning from SCRs is well integrated with lessons concerning fabricated illness
carefully disseminated across health and social care settings following
publication of an SCR in 2014.
from a range of activities. The board is part of a Department for Education
pilot, undertaking reflective analyses of live cases tested in real time to assess
the extent to which core groups are considering well-formed questions in
implementing child protection plans concerning babies and infants. The group
uses a wide range of methods to communicate key messages from SCRs and
learning reviews, by providing well-attended annual multi-agency conferences,
seminars and newsletters.
a well-regarded early help hub, and provides ongoing training of lead
professionals. The boards published threshold document is a helpful matrix
guide for frontline practitioners and managers, exploring and balancing levels of
vulnerability with comprehensive guidance on securing parental consent. The
board lacks data and analysis on the extent to which targeted early help
interventions are reducing the level of demand on the statutory childrens social
work service and improving childrens outcomes at an earlier stage of their
difficulties.
It has recently challenged a notable increase in short-term placement instability
and monitors a considerable number of other performance indicators
concerning this group of children and young people. The boards strategic
relationship with the corporate parenting panel could be more precisely outlined
to avoid duplication and confused accountability. For example, the boards
attention should be primarily on holding the corporate parenting panel to
account on its contribution to the safety and protection of children and young
people who are looked after who live outside Cornwall. The board does not
maintain a separate challenge log, but evidence was seen during the inspection
of the boards tenacious challenge of partner agencies shortfalls in
safeguarding arrangements identified in the scrutiny panel programme. The
chair corresponds with and visits senior managers to address delayed progress.
These have been particularly prominent in the chairs pursuit of shortcomings
and delays by the CCG and police to safeguarding deficits highlighted in their
recent regulatory inspections.
exploitation and missing children, and the quality and lack of timely access for
children to emotional and mental health services. A large number of earlier risks
have been effectively addressed. However, it is important, that the board


maintains a keen eye on some risks that sit outside its five core priorities. The
board was not aware that the practice of only allocating a named social worker
to subject children referred to childrens social care, and omitting their siblings,
might be a factor impinging on reduced re-referral rates which it regularly
monitors. Similarly, the board was not actively scrutinising the Childrens Trust
concerning high numbers of young people, aged 16 and 17 years old,
presenting as homeless who were housed in bed and breakfast
accommodation.
overview panel (CDOP) and actively communicates learning from child deaths
to partners. Modifiable factors in childrens deaths are considered on a
peninsula-wide basis rather than at an individual local authority level. The most
recent CDOP annual report identified that governance arrangements between
the CDOP and CCGs needs to be strengthened and this is now being addressed.
Scrutiny of the panel has also identified that the process for following through
actions and outcomes between the CDOP, LSCBs and Childrens Trusts should
be improved. This work is in its infancy. There were 27 child deaths in Cornwall
during the last reporting year, continuing a sharp downward trend reflecting
national trends.
address how the boards improving oversight and scrutiny arrangements are
contributing to improving outcomes for children and young people across
partner agencies. The last annual report was comprehensive but its content
largely described safeguarding arrangements rather than providing a cogent
evaluation of them.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 11 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Linda Steele HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Louise Warren HMI
Team inspectors: Louise Hocking HMI, Andy Whippey HMI, Janet Fraser HMI,
Stephanie Murray HMI, Donna Marriott HMI, Peter Green HMI, Nick Stacey HMI
Shadow inspectors: Natalie Trentham HMI and Joy Howick HMI
Senior data analyst: Donna Neill
Quality assurance manager: Helen Cawston, Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


