Derby City
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 6 March 201730 March 2017
Report published: 13 June 2017

Childrens services in Derby City are good

Requires improvement

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Derby City are good. The director of childrens services (DCS),
chief executive, senior leaders and members are a strong, collaborative group with a
proven ability to improve services for children and families. Effective strategic
partnerships, aligned strategic needs assessments, clear governance arrangements
and integrated commissioning of services ensure shared priorities and actions to
improve outcomes for children. Investment in services and resources for vulnerable
children has been prioritised, for example by maintaining a broad range of early help
services, recruiting permanent staff to children looked after teams and securing
housing for care leavers.
Performance management is strong at both strategic and operational levels. Local
authority managers collect and use live data and key performance information across
all services, and this, coupled with an extensive auditing and review process, means
that they know their strengths and weaknesses well. Senior managers and leaders
direct involvement in auditing and their interaction with staff enrich their
understanding of frontline practice. When they become aware of service deficits,
they take appropriate action to improve performance. An effective quality assurance
framework means that actions that are set following regular audits are monitored
and responsible managers are held to account for their completion.
Senior managers have had some success in the recruitment and retention of staff,
but more needs to be done. Opportunities for career progression, competitive rates
of pay and mortgage deposit subsidies contribute to an increasingly stable
workforce, and there are no agency staff at team manager level or within the
children looked after teams. However, the caseloads in the reception and locality
teams remain too high, and this has an impact on the quality of work, particularly in
assessments and plans.
Early help services are well established, with families receiving timely support from a
range of services, and this prevents the need for statutory involvement. Partnership
working is well developed, and increasing numbers of thorough assessments are
completed by partner agencies.
The local authority has not been able to maintain the good rating for safeguarding
services that was awarded at its last inspection in 2013, but many aspects of the
service remain strong. For example, children at risk of harm benefit from good
information sharing between agencies, appropriate decision making and a consistent
application of thresholds. Partnership working is a strength, and the strategic and
operational response to children missing from home, care or education, or at risk of
child sexual exploitation is effective. However, the quality of return home interviews
needs to improve. The quality of assessments is variable, and many lack in-depth
analysis and recommendations, which in turn means that planning is weaker than it
could be. Management oversight is evidenced by regular supervision, in most of
these cases, but is not sufficiently reflective or focused on improving the quality of
work.
Private fostering is an area requiring improvement, due to delay in responding to
notifications and completing assessments and reviews. Delays in seeing children and


completing relevant checks on carers mean that a few children may be left in unsafe
situations.
While homeless 16- and 17-year-olds are offered support, it is not always
appropriately considered whether they should become looked after. As a result,
services may not be best meeting their needs.
The local authority has built on the 2011 adequate judgement of its looked after
children inspection to provide good services and improved outcomes for children.
Decisions for most children to become looked after are timely, appropriate and based
on thorough assessments. The Public Law Outline and letters before proceedings are
used effectively, and the quality of reports presented to courts is well regarded by
the local judiciary. Children looked after develop positive relationships with their
social workers, who know them well. They also develop trusting relationships with
their independent reviewing officers, who monitor and challenge social work practice
effectively, when required, to ensure that services are best meeting childrens needs.
The health needs of children looked after, living both inside and outside the local
authority, are increasingly well met. Emotional health needs are now being
addressed by The Keep and the child and adolescent mental health services RISE
projects. This has led to easier access and support, and an associated improvement
in childrens functioning. Although the educational attainment of children looked after
is in line with the national average, not enough are leaving school with a good range
of GCSEs. Personal education plans lack specificity and the focus to ensure that
children progress and have the right support to do so.
Children looked after numbers have fallen, year-on-year, due in part to the effective
work of the Exit from care team that assesses and supports special guardians,
families or connected persons and prepares children to move out of care. Most
children live in stable, well-supported foster placements, but there are insufficient
numbers of foster carers to offer good placement choice and ensure the best
possible match. The corporate parenting committee needs strengthening to ensure
that it has sharper scrutiny and oversight of children looked after, particularly those
with additional needs, and hears and uses childrens voices to shape services.
Adoption services are good, and an increasing number of children are adopted from
a range of ages and backgrounds. Family finding and matching are thorough, with
good use made of the East Midlands consortium to assist in placement choice. Postadoption support services are a strength of the local authority. They offer excellent
support to children, families and birth parents.
Care leavers receive a good service, and staff remain in touch with nearly all leavers.
Care leavers live in safe and suitable accommodation, and are supported to develop
their independence skills. Increasing numbers are in education, employment or
training, and care leavers state that they feel valued by their workers. More attention
is needed for care leavers to have access to their full health histories in order for
their health needs to be fully met.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates seven childrens homes. All were judged to be good
or outstanding at their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements/
arrangements for the protection of children was in January 2013. The local
authority was judged to be good.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
June 2011. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since July 2015.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services and public health.
 The chief executive has been in post since January 2015.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
February 2011.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 58,852 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Derby City. This is 23% of the total population of the area.
 Approximately 23% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 16% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 15% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 29% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
(Asian/Asian British) Pakistani and (Asian/Asian British) Indian.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 25% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 20% (the national average is 16%).

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 6 March 2017, 2,476 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from 2,342
at 31 March 2016.
 At 6 March 2017, 309 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 53 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 314
(53 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 6 March 2017, eight children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from five at 31 March 2015.
 In the two years before the inspection, five serious incident notifications have
been submitted to Ofsted and no serious case reviews have been completed.
 There were two serious case reviews ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 6 March 2017, 427 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 73 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 448 (76 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016. Of the 427 children:
authority area
 three live in residential special schools, of whom 67% live out of the
authority area
 six children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the past 12 months:
 there have been 48 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
 one young person ceased to be looked after and is now living in a house
in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Reduce social work caseloads in the reception and locality social work teams
to enable staff to carry out good-quality direct work with children.


Ensure that assessments are informed by the childs history, research findings
and social work theory, and address all issues relevant to parenting capacity
and unmet need, including those arising from disability, language and
ethnicity.


Ensure that child in need and child protection plans clearly detail the support
to be put in place to effect the changes needed to improve outcomes, and
that they are updated to take account of changing circumstances and
emerging risks.


Ensure that private fostering notifications are responded to promptly and that
children living in such arrangements are seen in a timely way.


Ensure that assessments of homeless 16- and 17-year-old young people are
appropriately offered support under section 20 of the Children Act 1989 and,
when a young person decides to be supported as a child in need rather than
becoming looked after, that they are making a fully informed decision.


Ensure that supervision is regular and reflective, and has a clear focus on risk
assessment and improving the quality of assessments and plans.


Improve the quality of return interviews so that these can better inform plans
and wider intelligence about vulnerable children.


Ensure that all children looked after have analytical and targeted, specific
personal education plans to capture their progress and any support needs.


Continue to prioritise the recruitment and commissioning of a variety of local
foster carers to provide sufficient capacity to best meet the needs of children
looked after in Derby.


Ensure that all care leavers are clear about their own health histories and are
aware of any family health issues that may affect them as they go through
life.


Ensure that the corporate parenting committee strengthens its oversight of
children looked after with additional vulnerabilities and that childrens views
help to shape services.


Summary for children and young people
 Overall, services for children and families in Derby are good. Senior managers
and councillors are determined to make sure that children have the best chances
in life.
 Children are kept as safe as possible, because social workers act quickly to
protect them when they are at risk of harm.
 Social workers, family visitors and childrens practitioners spend time with
children and are good at listening to them to find out what life is like for them, so
that the right decisions can be made for them.
 When children and their families have problems or worries, social workers, family
visitors, teachers, health visitors, nurses, the police and other professionals work
well together to make sure that children have the right help at the right time.
There are plenty of different services that provide good help and, because they
are provided quickly, smaller problems do not become more serious.
 Social workers make sure that children who need support have plans which help
to ensure that their lives improve. However, these plans would be improved if
they stated what it was that everyone involved needs to do and when they need
to do it by, and if there were more regular checks on how well the plan is going.
 After children have gone missing from home or education, they are spoken to by
an independent person. This is so that workers can better understand the
reasons for this, and provide help to prevent it from happening again.
 When children are unable to live with their parents, social workers find them a
good home with caring adults. If it is the right thing to do, they keep brothers
and sisters together and, if it is safe to do so, they make sure that children are
still able to see the people who are important to them. When adoption is the best
plan for a child, social workers help them to understand the reasons for this and
make sure that they know all about their family background.
 Young people leaving care are well supported. They have a choice of
accommodation, including staying put with their foster carers. They receive good
practical support from social workers and personal advisers who assist them with
things like attending appointments, finding jobs, apprenticeships or further
education or training, and learning how to manage money, cook and do
household chores. A group of care leavers have helped to make a guide for other
care leavers so that, when they enter adulthood, they will know what help and
support they are entitled to.
 Senior managers have plans to keep on improving services for children. They
keep a close eye on the work of social workers to make sure that they are all
doing their best for children. Plenty of training is arranged for social workers and
other professionals who work with children to make sure that they understand
the best ways to help children and their families.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement

Children receive an effective response when referred to childrens social care,
ensuring that their safety and well-being are prioritised. Professionals and families
can access social work advice and guidance, which includes identifying the need
for an early help assessment or signposting to early help services. Children at risk
of harm benefit from good-quality information sharing by partner agencies.
Management decision making at the initial stages of social work intervention is
appropriate, in the majority of cases seen. Thresholds are consistently applied and
the rationale for decisions made is clearly recorded.
Caseloads in the reception and locality teams remain too high and have an impact
on the quality of work, such as in assessments and plans.
The quality of assessments across locality and disabled childrens services is not
good. Many assessments are lacking in depth, and analyses are often a summary
of concerns, lacking in clear conclusions. This impedes the establishment of
comprehensive plans and achieving positive outcomes for the children concerned.
Most assessments are allocated promptly, and children and their families are
visited in a timely way and their views secured. Children are seen on their own and
direct work is undertaken. Plans are regularly reviewed by core groups, network
meetings and review meetings that show good multi-agency engagement. This is
not always preventing drift or securing improved outcomes for some children.
A well-established early help service enables access for children and families to the
right support services at the right time. Partnership working is well developed. The
quality of the early help assessments is generally good, and progress against plans
is measured in review meetings and demonstrates improvements in childrens
lives. This prevents the need for escalation to statutory services.
Children at risk of sexual exploitation or who regularly go missing are carefully
considered by complex strategy meetings. Children considered to be at high risk
are further considered by task and monitoring groups, attended by senior
managers from relevant agencies. These ensure that wider intelligence is shared
and provide an additional focus on the effectiveness of the childs plan.
There is delay in responding to private fostering notifications, with delays in
children being seen and assessments being completed and reviewed.
Not all homeless 16- and 17-year-old young people are being assessed as they
should be, under section 20 of the Children Act 1989, leaving some supported as
children in need without the benefits of services for children looked after and later
entitlements as care leavers.


Inspection findings

First contact services respond to all contacts involving a concern about a
child, and most decisions made are appropriate to the level of risk. The
experienced, stable team of non-social work qualified staff, overseen by two
social work-qualified team managers, works efficiently to gather information to
determine the next steps. Consent is secured, where appropriate, and does
not compromise the safety of the child. Where a strategy meeting is deemed
necessary, it is progressed by the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH).
There is also separate telephone advice available to professionals from the
social work reception teams. This provides an additional source of guidance
and support.


The MASH ensures effective information sharing between the police, health,
public protection and childrens and adult social care. This enhances the
quality of decision making. The domestic violence triage process means that
all high-risk domestic violence notifications are subject to an immediate
strategy meeting and referral to a multi-agency risk assessment conference
(MARAC), and those assessed as standard or medium risk are individually
discussed in order to determine the appropriate next steps. In a small number
of cases seen, a delay was evident in the police notification which could
potentially leave children at risk of harm. Although there is good multi-agency
engagement in strategy meetings convened within the MASH, this does not
consistently include a contribution from education. This means that the
meetings do not always have full information about children to assist in
decision making.


Management decision making at the initial stages of social work intervention is
appropriate in the majority of cases seen. Thresholds for assessment and the
need for a strategy discussion, a section 47 child protection enquiry and an
initial child protection conference (ICPC) are consistently applied, and the
rationale for the decision is clearly recorded. In most cases seen, management
oversight is evident and assessments are allocated promptly. Supervision,
though mostly regular, is mainly task and compliance focused and with little
evidence of reflection or a focus on quality. (Recommendation)


Most children and their families are seen in a timely way and their views
secured. Children are seen on their own. Direct work is undertaken by social
workers in the locality teams who develop strong relationships with the
children whom they support. There is less evidence of direct work in the
reception teams, and this impacts upon the strength of the voice of the child
in single assessments.


Where an assessment concludes that a child requires support through a child
in need or early help plan, it is discussed by the relevant localitys vulnerable
childrens meetings. This is a well-attended multi-agency meeting which
allocates the child to the appropriate social care locality or early help team and
agrees the services that are required to enable the delivery of the plan. This
helps to ensure timely and appropriate family support. Children who need to


be stepped up to social care or stepped down to early help are also discussed
and the next steps agreed. Children needing an immediate response are
safeguarded by escalation to social care through the First contact service.

A well-established early help service, with a stable, committed and
experienced workforce, offers a broad range of services. This gives children
and families access to the right support services at the right time. Partnership
working is well developed, with increasing numbers of early help assessments
being undertaken by partner agencies. The quality of the early help
assessments is generally good, but some lack detail in respect of the childs
view. Children and families are fully involved in setting the targets of their
early help plan and through regular team around the family meetings. The
progress against these plans is measured and demonstrates improvements in
childrens lives. This prevents the need for escalation to statutory services.


Although assessments are ensuring that children are safe, they are not yet
good. Increasing referrals are leading to high caseloads, particularly in the
three reception teams. Despite the local authority increasing the capacity of
these teams, the size of the caseloads has yet to be reduced. Combined with
the target 20-day timescale for completion, this is contributing to assessments
that are not thorough enough to identify and address all presenting needs
adequately. There is little reference to research findings or social work
theories, such as attachment, and the graded care profile neglect assessment
tool is not yet well used. Chronologies are of variable quality and, where
present, are mostly simply copied and pasted into the assessment record with
no attempt to link past and present concerns. Some analyses are simply a
summary of concerns, and lack clear conclusions about the strengths and
weakness in the childs situation or the degree and scope of unmet need. This
means that assessments are not highlighting the level of risks or concerns and
what needs to happen to improve outcomes sufficiently. (Recommendation)


Concerns about poor parental mental health, domestic violence or substance
misuse are usually identified and addressed, but in a very small number of
cases reviewed there is no assessment of needs arising from a parents
learning disability or the impact of the childs disability, such as autism or
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Some assessments were not facilitated
by interpreters when they should have been, and childrens needs arising from
ethnicity and culture were not addressed. Where further assessment is
required, this is often not identified in the initial plan established by the
reception social worker. Assessments are not routinely updated as they should
be and are without a thorough, current assessment of risks and needs. This
impedes the establishment of effective plans. (Recommendation)


In most cases, children benefit from regular core groups, network meetings
and reviews. ICPCs, network meetings and reviews are timely and evidence
good multi-agency engagement. Although discussions in planning meetings
are often comprehensive, many plans reviewed were out of date, insufficiently
specific or lacking in timescales. In some cases, this is leading to drift and
delay. (Recommendation)



Practice is variable across the team for disabled children. Some childrens
plans are of a good quality, with evidence of children regularly being seen and
the views of non-verbal children being captured through observations.
However, in other cases, there is evidence of drift and support plans not being
effectively coordinated or reviewed. This means that improvements in some
childrens circumstances are not being progressed as quickly as they could be.


The action taken in relation to the shortfalls identified by the local authority
relating to private fostering arrangements has not yet had a positive impact
upon practice. Although there have been no recent notifications, in cases seen
by inspectors there was delay in responding to notifications, in children being
seen and in undertaking assessments. Some of the necessary safeguarding
checks and reference requests were also subject to delay, and not all reviews
were held within 28 days of notification. This means that the suitability of
private fostering arrangements remains unknown for longer than it should be.
Once the reviewing process has commenced, practice is better, with children
being seen regularly and alone. (Recommendation)


Homeless young people aged 16 and 17 years are assessed under the joint
housing protocol, and 22 are living in independent accommodation, supported
as children in need. Although these children have supported accommodation,
with a multi-agency worker and social worker available to them, this does not
equate to the support available to a child looked after, especially once they
have reached the age of 18 years. Cases sampled did not sufficiently evidence
that, when a young person chooses not to become looked after, they are
making an informed choice. Plans, while addressing the need to develop
independence skills, often do not address the need of the child to restore
relationships with close family members so that alternative sources of support
are available to them in adulthood. (Recommendation)


The out of hours (OOHs) service, Careline, covers both childrens and adults
services, and all OOHs social workers work across the specialisms. This is
particularly helpful when having to respond to children whose parent has a
mental health issue, as the response is then better coordinated. The service is
adequately staffed, with on-call managerial support and decision making. The
cases sampled evidence appropriate responses, with information being passed
to First contact or the relevant locality team to follow up as necessary.


Child protection initial and review conferences are well chaired by child
protection managers. As a group, it is seeking to ensure that the views of the
child are clearly communicated. Child protection managers are also seeking to
improve parents attendance and involvement at meetings by direct discussion
or phone calls to encourage their participation, and are monitoring the use of
conference reports. Child protection managers are using the quality assurance
notification process to highlight concerns. This has significantly improved the
numbers of conference reports being completed on time and shared with the
childs parents in advance of the meeting. This means that children, parents
and professionals attending meetings have more time to consider both the


report findings and their response when making important decisions in
childrens lives.

Child protection managers also chair complex strategy meetings about cases
involving child sexual exploitation, female genital mutilation, forced marriage,
trafficking, radicalisation, children who harm other children and complex
family groups. Children stepped down from a child protection to a child in
need (CIN) plan remain children in need for a minimum of three months, and
the decision to close or step down to early help can only be made by the
three-month CIN review meeting. The first CIN review is chaired by a CIN
reviewing officer, then this responsibility transfers to a team manager who has
no line management responsibility for the case. Where a new referral is
received about a child who was previously the subject of a child protection
plan, a case management meeting is held prior to the ICPC to ensure that,
when the concerns are the same, the Public Law Outline is considered as early
as possible. Children who have been subject to a child protection plan for over
two years are regularly reviewed, and now number only four. Overall, these
are robust processes which help to ensure a consistent approach to the most
vulnerable children that keeps them safe from harm.


Complex strategy meetings ensure a thorough discussion and make clear
decisions that inform the plan for children at risk of sexual exploitation or who
go missing. Children with high levels of risk are further considered at
monitoring groups attended by senior managers from relevant agencies.
These ensure that wider intelligence is shared and provide an additional focus
on the effectiveness of the childs plan. In most cases seen, return interviews
are completed within the 72-hour timeframe, but the content is often of
limited value as it does not impact on the childs plan or wider intelligence
sharing as much as it should. (Recommendation)


Wider partnership groups such as MARAC and multi-agency public protection
arrangements (MAPPA) work well in this local authority. The case sampling
evidenced that decisions made by MARAC are understood by social workers
and incorporated into plans. Practitioners attend MAPPA when they are
involved with a child who is potentially at risk from an offender, and training is
available to ensure that they understand what is expected of them.


The local authority maintains detailed records of children who go missing from
school, and when a child cannot be traced by either the school or the
education welfare officer the case is escalated to other agencies, as
appropriate. When a childs whereabouts are unknown, there are persistent
and wide-ranging efforts by agencies to locate them. Such cases are regularly
reviewed by the Derby missing persons monitoring group to ensure that all
possible action is taken to locate the child. Absence from school is higher in
Derby than in the rest of England (16.6% vs 10.5%). Although the local
authority staff follow appropriate procedures to support the attendance of
these children and young people by working with the early help teams and
through the provision of parenting courses, this remains an area for
improvement for this local authority. Comprehensive records are maintained


on children who are electively home educated, and the local authority
complies with statutory guidance by undertaking annual home visits to see
these children.


Local authority arrangements for considering allegations and concerns about
paid employees or volunteers are effective. In 201516, all cases were
completed within a three-month timeframe. There is prompt and appropriate
engagement from across the professional network in strategy discussions and
meetings. The designated officer tracks all enquiries and allegations, including
the numbers of allegations made by or on behalf of disabled children, which
has highlighted the high level of vulnerability of this group of children.

The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Children only become looked after when it is in their best interests and, when they
do so, decisions are timely and appropriate. The Public Law Outline is used
effectively with families to address areas of concern. Legal permanency through
the courts is achieved promptly and within the government target time of 26
weeks.
Children looked after in Derby benefit from consistent social workers who develop
meaningful relationships and hold high aspirations for them. Most children know
their independent reviewing officers (IROs) well. The IRO service is sufficiently
resourced and is robust in challenging the quality of social work practice and
planning.
Well-coordinated systems and procedures for children looked after who are at risk
of sexual exploitation and/or who go missing ensure a timely response. However,
the quality of return home interviews needs strengthening to ensure that they
support planning for children and are used to inform professionals of trends and
hotspots.
The health needs of children looked after are well met, both inside and outside of
the local authority. Children are increasingly and effectively supported by the
collaborative development of The Keep and the child and adolescent mental
health services RISE projects to meet their emotional health needs and well-being.
Children looked after make progress in education at a similar rate and attain as
well as those across England as a whole, despite the significantly higher proportion
of young people with a statement of special educational needs. However, the
proportion that leaves school with a good set of GCSEs is too low and the quality
of personal educational plans is not good enough to improve outcomes for
children.
Children who need adoption benefit from skilled family finding and matching, and
good support. Prospective adopters are assessed, trained and well supported.
Transitions to adoptive placements are well planned, giving children a positive start
in their new homes through high-quality post-adoption support.
Children in foster care live with dedicated, enthusiastic carers, but there are too
few foster carers being recruited by the authority to provide a range of choice for
children. Children only return to the care of their parents, carers or connected
persons following intensive direct work with families and children, which is
provided by the highly effective, experienced and skilled Exit from care team.
Care leavers live in safe, secure accommodation, participate in education and
employment and develop positive relationships with personal advisers and other
support workers.


Inspection findings

Children and young people only become looked after when it is in their best
interests. Thresholds for entry into care are applied appropriately and are
informed by timely and comprehensive risk assessments.


Care proceedings are progressed in a timely manner and in less than the 26week recommended timeframe. The quality of assessments, plans and
information sharing is good, and is seen by the Children and Family Court
Advisory and Support Service and the judiciary as a crucial component in
minimising delays for children. Cases in the Public Law Outline process show
clear letters before proceedings and well-evidenced court statements.


The number of children looked after in Derby has been steadily reduced over
the past year. This reduction is an indicator of the authoritys commitment to
support families in crisis to keep the family together, the success of the Exit
from care team and the increasing, appropriate use of adoption and special
guardianship orders.


Increasing workforce stability in the children looked after teams is helping to
ensure that children are seen regularly, and seen alone, by social workers
whom they trust. Records of social work visits show a sensitive regard to the
childs lived experience. Several very positive examples of direct work with
children were seen in which children were helped to understand their history
and to be involved in the development of their care plans. The impact of
parental mental health and substance misuse was well explored in
assessments, and childrens wishes and feelings and families views were
usually well represented.


Successful transitions by children from local authority care to the care of their
parents, carers or connected persons, following intensive direct work with
families and children, are enabled by the highly effective, experienced and
skilled Exit from care team. Since April 2016, the team has enabled 19
children to return home, either on a special guardianship order or a discharge
from care. Small caseloads in the team ensure that social workers have
sufficient capacity to concentrate on the direct work necessary both to effect
change and to prepare families and children for the challenges presented
upon returning home. Appropriate support services from a range of health,
education and voluntary agencies are engaged to sustain these arrangements.


When children become looked after, the local authority prioritises planning for
permanence for children effectively by the time of their second looked after
review. Plans for permanence other than adoption are identified quickly due to
a strong grip on court proceedings and timeliness. Well-written, detailed
special guardianship assessments reflect childrens current and future needs
and show that children influence their plans. Connected persons receive the
same level of training as all other foster carers, and this assists in their
preparation for providing safe and effective care. The comprehensive offer of


special guardianship support, similar to post-adoption support, effectively
supports permanence and special guardians throughout a childs lifetime.

Placement stability within Derby is improving, and approximately 8% of
children had three or more moves in 201516. This is in line with statistical
neighbours and better than the national average of 10%. A small minority of
children have experienced more than three placement moves, but the
disruption meetings, reviews and case management discussions collate the
learning from these cases to improve future matching decisions and
assessment practice.


The average caseload of independent reviewing officers is 65 children. IROs
believe this to be manageable and enables them to fully monitor childrens
care plans in-between reviews, as well as to have the flexibility to respond to
urgent requests for review and oversight. The use of informal and formal
escalation procedures when concerns about childrens care plans are identified
are fully embedded and sufficiently challenging. The majority of children
spoken to during the inspection knew their IRO and saw them as a constant
and supportive presence in their lives.


The response to children missing from care or at risk of child sexual
exploitation is well managed and coordinated. From the childrens case files
seen, the majority of children looked after were offered a timely return home
interview to clarify the circumstances of them being missing and the
consequent risks. The quality of the return home interview reports needs
strengthening in order that the information gained is better used to inform
childrens plans. In addition, the information needs to be collated to provide all
partner agencies with information regarding trends and hotspots.


The commissioning strategy for children looked after is comprehensive, but it
is not showing an impact on foster care recruitment. The current sufficiency of
in-house and external foster places is often stretched, with insufficient
placement choice to ensure that children always have the best match.
Recruitment strategies have not resulted in an increase in foster carers. The
success of staying put arrangements has also had an impact on foster care
capacity. Due to the ageing profile of current foster carers, without successful
recruitment the use of carers from independent fostering agencies (IFAs) will
rise. Although these placements are of comparable quality, it may mean that
children have to move further from Derby. The authority recognises these
challenges and that a relentless focus on recruitment will be necessary.
(Recommendation)


Sufficiency of provision is clearly a priority for the authority, with significant
financial investment being made available to support actions identified as
necessary in the sufficiency strategy. The refurbishment of in-house
residential provision is well advanced, and the regional consortium framework
has helped to identify resources. Inclusion in the East Midlands consortium is
currently providing access to a range of IFAs to meet the needs of most of
Derbys children for placements close to home.



An effective and sufficiently resourced system is in place to ensure that
children have the right level of contact with those people who are important to
them. Child-focused contact plans and arrangements for children looked after
were in place in the majority of case files seen, and there was evidence of
review following any increased risk or change in circumstances.


Children are supported to improve or maintain their health by a specialist
team of looked after childrens nurses. Health assessments are completed in
time for 88% of children, but nurses and commissioners report that
improvements are needed to the timeliness of initial health assessments.
When children are in neighbouring authority areas, their health needs are
carefully coordinated and monitored through well-negotiated reciprocal
arrangements. If a child is placed a long way from Derby and has a specific
recognised health need, social workers present requests to the complex case
panel to ensure equity of support. The recent decrease in the proportion of
dental checks undertaken, to 80%, is an area recognised as requiring
improvement, and alternative ways of increasing performance are in progress,
such as training for carers in the importance of oral hygiene.


The emotional and mental health of children is being increasingly and
effectively supported by the development of the emotional health and wellbeing service at The Keep. Since its inception in October 2016, over 100
children have been referred for assessment and support, with subsequent
improvements in childrens functioning and well-being.


Recreational and cultural activities are encouraged by the provision of free
leisure passes and access to theatre tickets. Children spoken to by inspectors
believe that these give them the opportunity to participate in a range of
activities that will help to enhance their physical and emotional health, as well
as their social development. Although childrens hobbies and talents are
encouraged by their carers, the authority could do more to formally celebrate
individual childrens achievements.


Children looked after make progress in education at a similar rate and attain
as well as those across England as a whole, despite the significantly higher
proportion of young people with a statement of special educational needs.
However, the proportion who leave school with a good set of GCSEs is too
low.


Around three quarters of children looked after attend a good or better school.
For those children for whom this is not the case, the choice of school is
usually made for well-considered reasons, such as the need to maintain
particular relationships with school staff. There are clear processes in place for
matching children with an appropriate school when they move to provision
outside of the local authority area.


The quality of personal educational plans (PEPs) is not good enough to
improve outcomes for children. Although reviews take place on time, a
minority of PEPs are not fully completed. PEPs are often characterised by


insufficient analysis of the childs needs, inaccuracies and contradictions, or
targets that are not specific, measurable or fully reviewed. (Recommendation)

The local authority maintains clear records of children who do not attend
school for at least 25 hours per week and supports them well to continue to
learn. Seven of these 12 children are between schools following a placement
move, and five have particular needs that require reduced timetables. In
addition to this, a further five children use alternative provision for at least
part of their studies and are making good progress, which is overseen by the
virtual school headteacher.


The independent visitor and advocacy service, though in the process of
change to a new provider, is embedded with some long-standing relationships
that support children in residential placements. The Children in Care Council is
used to capture childrens views, but more needs to be done to ensure that it
captures all childrens views and to show how these subsequently shape
services.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good


Derby considers adoption for all children in need of permanence outside of
their birth family. There is proactive, tenacious practice, particularly in relation
to older children and those children with additional needs or disabilities. The
number of adoption orders has increased from 25 last year to 47 this year and
this, coupled with an increasing use of special guardianship, means that more
children in Derby benefit from a permanent family. The adoption service is
stable, and staff are dedicated, knowledgeable and highly committed.


Good-quality performance data informs adoption tracking, and an early alert
system is showing improved timescales for children recently placed. More
children are now entering care and moving in with their adoptive family in less
than 16 months. Derbys own performance information for 201617 shows
this to be 61% for currently placed children, which is higher than the national
three-year average of 47%. Some long-standing legacy cases have affected
these figures, but the local authority remains persistent in its efforts to find
adoptive homes for children from minority ethnic groups, older children and
those with additional needs.


A small number of children experience delay in finding their adoptive family
as, when other permanence options such as placement with relatives are
considered, there is a lack of focus on a parallel adoption plan. Sequential,
rather than concurrent, assessments of family members add to the delay, as
when these prove unsuccessful the adoption planning starts again from
scratch. This means that permanence by use of adoption is not secured as
quickly as it could be. The local authority has recognised that more needs to


be done and is in the process of developing a permanence team to commence
adoption work at the earliest opportunity. This, along with courts now making
placement orders at the same time as care orders, should further assist in
speeding up the adoption process.

Family-finding activity is strong and mitigates the earlier delay. Family-finding
social workers know children well, meaning that children benefit from carefully
considered matches. Once matched, good adoption placement planning
means that children move to their family quickly. Good-quality together or
apart assessments ensure that children are able to live with their brothers and
sisters when this meets their needs. Although matching reports, as standalone documents, do not reflect how well prospective adopters will meet
childrens needs, the overall quality of matching is good and there have been
no disruptions in the past 12 months.


Foster to adopt is always discussed as part of the assessment of prospective
adopters, but there has been only one placement in the past 12 months.
Another placement is due to be made in the near future, and the local
authority needs to build on this to ensure that more children benefit from
early permanence arrangements.


Childrens permanence reports are mostly full, detailed and sensitively written,
showing consideration and assessment of alternative options to adoption.
Assessments of contact and changing needs are clear, with a focus on what is
right for the child, both now and in the future. A dedicated birth family
support worker in the post-adoption team works directly with birth families
throughout care proceedings, but the take-up of this service is low. The birth
family support worker also offers support in letterbox contact, which results in
adopted children receiving high-quality letters.


The quality of life-story books and later-life letters is variable, but most are
good. Most books are colourful, age-appropriate and informative, and are
enhanced by the use of a childs own words and drawings. Some later-life
letters use too much formal language but, overall, both letters and books
assist children in understanding their history and why they cannot live with
their birth family.


Derby City has a rolling recruitment programme and holds monthly
information sessions. Enquirers receive a very prompt response, and staff in
the adoption service understand the profile of children waiting in Derby,
ensuring that the right adopters are recruited to meet their needs. Derby City
has eight adopters currently waiting, five of whom can offer homes to older
children and to brothers and sisters. There are currently 19 children waiting
for placements, nine of whom already have matches identified. The remaining
extensively to identify matches. The adoption register is not routinely used, as
approved adopters details are shared within the East Midlands consortium,
after three months of approval. As part of the regionalisation of adoption, a


pilot starting in June 2017 will see all waiting children and prospective
adopters shared across four local authority areas, which include Derby City.

Assessments of prospective adopters are comprehensive and timely. They are
clear on adopters skills and experience, and are perceptive about how these
translate to meeting the needs of an adopted child. All adopters spoken to
spoke highly of the service and the assessment process, and many had
chosen Derby over other adoption agencies. Adopters feel listened to, and
they gave examples of influencing service development, such as the content
and delivery of training.


A highly experienced, knowledgeable chair provides good leadership to the
adoption panel, whose membership includes people with direct experience of
adoption. Panel minutes reveal a sensitive yet probing approach, resulting in
well-considered recommendations and advice to the agency and applicants
alike. The agency decision maker and panel chair meet regularly, and both
confirm mutual challenge and respect. The agency decision maker is confident
in the recommendations made by panel and responds promptly to any issues
raised.


Post-adoption support is good, and creative, sensitive work, particularly with
older children, helps families to manage challenges. Adoptive families benefit
from a wide range of services, and the team makes good use of the adoption
support fund. Thirty-five children are receiving post-adoption support and 10
adults are receiving birth records counselling. A strong relationship with The
Keep means that families continue to access therapy for as long as they need.
It is an ambitious service which has a renewed focus on prevention, rather
than responding to crises. Adopters in contact with the post-adoption support
service describe it as responsive, supportive and brilliant help.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good


Local authority staff work hard to remain in contact with care leavers, and
consequently are in touch with almost all of them. For the very few with
whom they have lost touch, workers are persistent in their attempts to reestablish contact.


Workers encourage those in care to remain looked after until it is appropriate
for them to become more independent. As a result, only nine of 119 (7.6%)
currently 21, remain in staying put placements. When a care leaver expresses
a wish to live independently, workers assess their readiness and discuss the
options with them.



The vast majority of care leavers who move into independent or semiindependent accommodation live in suitable and safe properties. The local
authority provides access to a good range of supported accommodation and
gives assistance to young people living in private housing. Staff prioritise care
leavers access to the local authoritys own housing stock, and will make an
offer of a property to care leavers before it becomes more generally available.
Houses in multiple occupancy are only used when this is the young persons
preferred option, and only then after the suitability is fully assessed.


Local authority staff provide good support that helps care leavers to maintain
successful tenancies. When tenancies do break down, personal advisers help
young people to secure safe alternative accommodation. A partnership
arrangement means that the local authority can access up to 30 emergency
beds when needed.


Care leavers receive appropriate support to help them to develop the skills
that they need to live independently. Those who move into supported
accommodation receive help to develop skills such as cooking, cleaning and
managing their own finances. Where young people remain in a foster
placement, personal advisers support and encourage their carers to help them
to develop independence skills.


Personal advisers understand how to access a range of support services for
drug and alcohol misuse. In the small number of cases in which drug use has
been a problem, they have provided appropriate support that has resulted in
substantial improvements in the young persons well-being. Personal advisers
are also knowledgeable about the potential risks of sexual exploitation and
take appropriate action where this is a concern.


Personal advisers review care leavers pathway plans on time and at
appropriate intervals. Almost all pathway plans are clear and detailed, and
focus appropriately on the themes most likely to have a positive impact on
each young persons life, including their health, education and relationships
with others. Care leavers describe how reviews of their plan help them to
focus on the things that they need to improve, although they find the plans
themselves of limited value. In a few cases, young people choose not to
participate fully in their reviews, but personal advisers work tenaciously to
engage them.


Personal advisers understand the health needs of their young people and
usually document them clearly in pathway plans. Almost all care leavers
register with medical services such as doctors and dentists and, where
necessary, their personal adviser ensures that they access services when they
need to. Personal advisers provide effective support for young people who
need specific help with, for example, their mental health, and there are
examples of personal advisers advocating for them when the service that they
have received has not been good enough. Disabled young people receive a
good standard of care and support.



The proportion of care leavers who participate in education, employment and
training has risen. The figure reported to inspectors of 64.6% is higher than
the England average of 49%, and most participate on a full-time basis. Around
half of children looked after access additional careers advice and guidance
during Year 11, and this helps them to make appropriate post-16 choices.
Relationships with local post-16 providers are good, and enable local authority
staff to successfully support both the young person and the provider when
difficulties arise. Currently, 13 care leavers are studying at university.


Staff provide training sessions to help care leavers who are not in education or
employment to prepare for work and find suitable education or employment
opportunities. The local authority has begun to prioritise care leavers for its
own apprenticeship vacancies through a guaranteed interview scheme. It
currently employs four care leavers as apprentices, two of whom joined
through the authoritys traineeship programme. One care leaver who has
successfully completed an apprenticeship now works for the authority on a
permanent basis. Two care leavers are undertaking a traineeship programme
with a view to moving into an apprenticeship.


Care leavers receive the documents that they need to begin their adult lives,
including their birth certificate, national insurance number and bank account
details. Not all receive a passport, but work is underway to remedy this. Care
leavers do not always receive details of their full health histories or those of
their birth families, meaning that they may be unaware of susceptibility to
health risks or conditions as they go through life. (Recommendation)


Care leavers receive appropriate advice that helps them to understand the
support and benefits to which they are entitled. The local authority has
worked with care leavers to produce a guide that is available both in print and
online. Personal advisers explain entitlements to young people during pathway
plan reviews and when they become eligible for, or in need of, a particular
benefit.


Most care leavers feel good about themselves. They state that their personal
advisers genuinely care about them and are proud of their successes. The
local authority holds events to celebrate their achievements, such as a recent
event in which care leavers were presented with certificates in recognition of
the progress that they had made in various aspects of their lives, such as
living independently, education and improving their health and well-being.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Leadership is strong and the local authority has significant knowledge about itself
which is used in a constant drive to improve childrens experiences. Coordinated
governance structures and a healthy approach to challenge between partner
agencies support improvement, further strengthened by the effective, independent
challenge provided by the chair of the Derby Safeguarding Children Board.
High-quality performance reports and an effective quality assurance framework
give leaders and managers confidence in their oversight and knowledge of the
quality of the experiences of children and families who are receiving the services.
Senior managers respond quickly to identified deficits in practice following regular
audit activity and put action plans in place. Closing the loop reports hold
managers to account for the implementation of actions to improve services and
outcomes for children.
Corporate financial commitment to early help and an edge of care service
contribute to positive outcomes for children. A strong early help offer and the
development of an effective Exit from care team are contributing to the gradual
downward trend of numbers of children looked after. The recruitment of
permanent staff at team manager level and across the children looked after teams
enhances consistency in services and enables children to develop positive
relationships with social workers.
Children receive coordinated help and support from well-developed integrated
commissioning arrangements between the local authority and health partners. The
development of services to improve the emotional health and well-being of
children is evidence of recent success. The corporate parenting committee is not
strong enough and requires a sharper oversight of services for children looked
after, including those with additional vulnerabilities. Their voice and involvement
need strengthening to ensure that their views fully inform priorities and service
development.
The quality of childrens assessments and plans, particularly in help and protection
services, is too variable. Senior leaders recognise that improvement is hampered
by high caseloads in some teams and that a focus on quality, as well as
compliance, now needs to be implemented. Staff access regular supervision, but
have inconsistent opportunities for reflective practice. A revised workforce strategy
and staff training opportunities are in place, but variations in practice remain. For
example, the graded care profile is not established across all services and
therefore is not yet consistently improving the quality of practice.


Inspection findings

An impressive strategic director for childrens services has significant
knowledge and experience of childrens social work, and provides exceptional
and consistent oversight of childrens experiences. His involvement in regular
auditing and meetings with staff ensures that he has a good grasp of social
work practice. This appointment, following major structural reorganisation in
adults services with public health. An experienced and strong chief executive
officer holds the strategic director appropriately to account. Due to the
director of childrens services (DCS) holding responsibilities for childrens and
adults services and public health, the chief executive arranged a local
government association test of assurance review in November 2016 to ensure
that all these services were equally effective and well managed under one
director. The review reported positive findings on the effectiveness of the
governance arrangements at the political, organisational and partnership
levels.


The leadership team and managers have a realistic understanding of service
strengths and weaknesses through the effective use of good, evaluative selfassessment. They demonstrate a constant willingness to embrace internal and
external challenge and scrutiny to improve services for children. This
ambitious approach to learning led to a creative peer review in April 2016 that
identified areas requiring improvements in the front door, including
thresholds, decision making and management oversight of referrals and
assessments. Swift action taken by senior managers alongside the
implementation of a strong multi-agency safeguarding hub in June 2016
means that there is now an efficient and effective response to referrals for
children in need of help and protection.


Ownership of childrens priorities is embedded across the local authoritys
political and corporate governance arrangements. The children and young
peoples plans four key priorities are governed by the Children, Families and
Learners Board (CFLB) trust arrangements and the Derby City and
neighbourhood partnerships, which also oversee the overarching Derby plan
children and a think family approach to service design and financial
investments. Intelligence is supported by effectively coordinated joint strategic
childrens needs assessments. Needs assessments accurately identify
inequalities in neighbourhood deprivation and growth in diverse populations,
resulting in appropriate plans and design to meet future demand for services.


Senior leaders promote a transparent process and open culture in internal
challenge that complement the effectiveness of the arrangements of the
Inspiring Young People Scrutiny Board. Additional regular meetings between
the Health and Well-being Board chair, strategic director and lead cabinet
member for children, young people and safeguarding support effective
information sharing outside of formal meetings. Monthly safeguarding
assurance meetings between the lead cabinet member, strategic director,


chief executive officer and the chair of the Derby Safeguarding Children Board
(DSCB) give additional independent oversight of the progress of childrens
priorities. A specific and detailed challenge log records clear and robust
decision making, and the progress of agreed actions is tracked effectively.
These safeguarding meetings help senior managers and the DSCB chair to
hold each other to account, give an opportunity for updates on operational
practice and help to plan future audit activity.

Multi-agency partnerships work successfully together, and implement
recommendations from internal and external audits and reviews to achieve
positive outcomes for children. A good example of this is evident in the
outcome of the local government association child sexual exploitation
diagnostic peer review in July 2016. This thorough analysis of the
effectiveness of the local authoritys and partners strategic and operational
approach has resulted in all recommendations being implemented. Quick
identification and intervention help and protect children subject to and at risk
of child sexual exploitation, including those presenting with additional risks
and vulnerabilities. This includes children missing from home, care and
education, supported through effective individual and strategic plans. Partners
appropriately share intelligence such as information passed to the police from
return home interviews. Resources are also shared, and the film, Kayleighs
Love Story, which has been translated into a number of different languages,
is an example.


Strong strategic partnerships, aligned strategic needs assessments and
integrated commissioning of services ensure the implementation of childrens
plans to meet shared priorities and improve outcomes. This can be seen in the
Future in Mind local transformation plan (201520) to improve access,
provision and support for childrens and young peoples mental health.
Childrens involvement in the design of mental health pathways and the
development of a single point of access to services are working well. A child
and adolescent mental health services RISE innovation project provides an
effective rapid response service which has resulted in a 40% reduction in
hospital admissions in recent months and a positive impact on childrens
mental health and well-being.


Senior managers have confidence and assurance in a co-located integrated
commissioning team that is able to respond flexibly to childrens needs. For
example, devolved budgets and use of an outcomes framework model in
service specifications have resulted in commissioning a successful new
emotional health and well-being service pilot, The Keep. This service supports
children looked after and children in need of targeted therapeutic support, and
has helped over 100 children effectively since implementation in November


A comprehensive quality assurance process within an accessible learning and
improvement framework is a significant strength in Derby. This provides
senior leaders with a cogent line of sight on the quality of the experiences of
children receiving services. Repeated and consistent scheduled audit activity


means that leaders have a secure knowledge and understanding about what is
happening in practice and hold managers to account by tracking the
effectiveness of changes to childrens outcomes. Quality assurance extends
from focused audit activity to regular direct observation of operational practice
by senior managers, including the strategic director, and is enhanced by lead
cabinet members unannounced visits to frontline teams. Investment in a new
post in the quality assurance team demonstrates a commitment to improving
the quality and quantity of reports. This has led to 88% of planned audits
being completed this year to date, improving on 77% last year.

A financial commitment and the implementation of a new childrens social care
recording system in 2015 have resulted in better-quality, accurate and wideranging performance management information that complements this
effective quality assurance process. Senior managers can access live data
from the business intelligence launch pad and key performance information to
understand the impact of services to children, identify areas of progress and
implement action plans in service areas that need further improvement. The
launch pad holds 158 detailed management information reports across the
service, including early help, adoption and children looked after, dashboards,
childrens profiles, the involvement of teams and scheduled reports. This
oversight has, for example, led to increased timeliness of completion of return
home interviews and coordinated strategic work with courts and the Children
and Family Court Advisory and Support Service, leading to increased numbers
of permanence arrangements.


Senior managers investigate performance to understand the story of the
children behind the data anomalies and trends. They recognise that the drive
for improvement is continuous, with managers being held accountable for
implementation of change, tasked with closing the loop on recommendations
from audit activity and presenting progress reports to the improvement board.
The gradual reduction in the number of children looked after is relentlessly
audited, checked and analysed to inform cause, effects and impact on other
service areas. A turning the curve analysis concludes that effective and
strong early help, a proactive Exit from care team, increasing numbers of
children adopted and higher than average numbers of children leaving care at
improving childrens outcomes overall.


Corporate parenting responsibilities are well understood and shared in Derby
City. All directorates promote and support a revised children looked after
pledge, resulting in positive opportunities for children. Examples include
significant investment and pride in the childrens home regeneration
programme and housing priorities for care leavers, alongside leisure and
apprenticeship opportunities. However, the corporate parenting committee
needs to demonstrate more effectiveness in holding its members and partners
to account. Meeting minutes do not evidence sufficient challenge or show, in
particular, how children looked after with additional needs or vulnerabilities
are having their needs met. In addition, further work is needed to increase the


voice, involvement, range and influence of children in care and care leavers in
the corporate parenting committee and scrutiny process, already identified as
a significant area for improvement by senior managers. (Recommendation)

Senior leaders self-assessment of children in need of help and protection
accurately identifies the areas requiring improvement identified by inspectors.
They have focused on improving compliance and now recognise the need to
address quality. It is too early to determine the impact of some recent plans.
For example, the implementation of assessment tools, including the graded
care profile, is beginning to improve assessment quality and analysis, but it is
not yet in full use by all teams.


Childrens social workers in some teams have caseloads which are too high.
The necessity to use agency social workers, in response to increasing
demands and a higher than average staff turnover, is recognised by senior
managers as a significant factor that has an impact upon the quality of service
that children and families receive. Investment in good initiatives to mitigate
these challenges include career pathway opportunities, a mortgage deposit
subsidy scheme, a regional memorandum of understanding with neighbouring
local authorities on the recruitment of agency workers and a recent job
evaluation that implements new pay grades for senior practitioners and social
workers. The absence of agency staff in team manager posts or workers in
the children looked after service demonstrates that these strategies are
beginning to have a positive impact on the childrens workforce.
(Recommendation)


Inspectors have seen that, for the vast majority of staff, supervision is regular,
but does not always include reflection, sufficient assessment of risk or how to
improve the quality of assessments and plans. The quality of childrens
records reflects that this is an area needing further improvement.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is outstanding
Executive summary
Derbys Local Safeguarding Children Board is making a sustained and significant
positive difference to how well the agencies in the city protect children and
promote their welfare. It is a highly influential strategic partnership. The board is
very well led. A culture of respectful challenge, in which enquiry is expected and
there is no place for complacency, is modelled by the boards highly capable and
experienced independent chair, is owned by board members and is used to drive
continuous improvement. Suitably senior representatives of all key agencies sit on
the board. They are clear about the responsibilities and expectations of a board
member.
The boards evaluation and analysis of performance is well focused and rigorous.
An active board and effective sub-groups make sure that extensive audit activity
and performance monitoring are not only well targeted but also continue until
sufficient improvement is achieved. This work is aligned with the ongoing
evaluation and targeting of training on priority areas for improvement. For
example, a November 2016 audit of the multi-agency safeguarding hub and first
response team led to the completion of a training needs analysis and the delivery
of additional targeted training to improve knowledge and practice. One review of
progress has been completed and a further audit is planned to ensure that the
desired improvements are fully achieved. A similarly rigorous approach has been
taken regarding work to tackle neglect. When audit and performance information
analysis showed an insufficient pace of improvement, the board more than
doubled the number of training courses on neglect that it runs and introduced a
specific neglect element in key mandatory multi-agency safeguarding courses. A
further audit is planned for December 2017 to assess the impact of this additional
training on improving practice. Although the board engages well with children in
aspects of its work, their feedback is not used to understand performance as
consistently as it could. This is an area for development that the board is aware of.
The board has a clear oversight of work to tackle the danger to children from
sexual exploitation, going missing and related risks such as radicalisation, and
provides strong leadership. Awareness-raising and preventative work with children
and young people in schools, driven by a very active education sub-group, is
particularly effective. Increasingly effective engagement with faith settings is
helping to promote not only broader safeguarding awareness but also more
specific knowledge of the risks posed by dangers such as child sexual exploitation
and radicalisation. This work is exemplified by safeguarding sermons preached by
the imam of a large local mosque.


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) provides consistent, welltargeted and highly effective challenge and leadership to the partnership of
agencies. A culture of respectful challenge in which enquiry is expected and
there is no place for complacency is modelled by the boards highly capable
and experienced independent chair, owned by board members and used to
drive continuous improvement. All key partner agencies play an active role in
the board. New board members receive an induction that makes clear the
expectations for, and responsibilities of, board members. The board is
sufficiently financed and well structured, with a full range of active subgroups. The board benefits from the long-standing engagement of two
capable lay members.


The LSCB works closely and effectively with other relevant boards, including
the Health and Well-being Board (HWB), Children, Families and Learners
Board (CFLB) and the Adult Safeguarding Board. This supports the board not
only to discharge its statutory responsibilities but to be an effective critical
friend to partner agencies. During the course of the inspection, the
independent chair attended the CFLB on behalf of the LSCB and secured an
agreement to update the joint strategic needs assessment and the children
and young peoples plan to better reflect the needs of children in new
communities in Derby, such as the growing Slovak and Roma communities.
This is to be followed up in the independent chairs regular meetings with the
health and local authority joint commissioning manager.


Through the independent chair, the board provides regular challenge to the
local authority at a senior level to ensure that the peoples directorate, which
provides services to both children and adults, keeps a sufficiently sharp focus
on the needs of children. This challenge is exercised through monthly strategic
safeguarding assurance meetings that are attended by the independent chair
and senior local authority leaders, including the director of childrens services
(DCS) and lead member for children. This meeting considers a full range of
performance and quality assurance information, and uses a challenge log to
ensure that areas for improvement receive ongoing attention until the
necessary progress is achieved.


The LSCBs 201516 annual report is a very high-quality and detailed health
check for agencies. The boards 201617 priorities of combatting the risks
from child sexual exploitation, going missing, domestic abuse and neglect, and
continuing to improve early help, stem from this report and provide a solid
basis for the 201617 business plan. Progress against the plan is regularly and
effectively tracked by the boards sub-groups. New or unexpected priorities
that arise are considered by the relevant sub-group and raised at board
meetings, at which an action log is used well to track progress.


Regular and rigorous monitoring of frontline practice through audit and
performance monitoring is well targeted and used effectively to understand
performance and to drive improvement in the quality and impact of services


provided by partner agencies. For example, a multi-agency LSCB audit of the
work of the first response team and MASH in November 2016 led to
undertaking a training needs analysis with staff and the delivery of additional
bespoke training to improve knowledge and practice in identified areas of
concern. A review of progress took place in January 2017, and a further audit
is planned to ensure that the desired improvements are fully achieved. The
board does not just provide challenge at a local or regional level, but also at a
national level when this is appropriate. For example, when the LSCB was
scrutinising and challenging the local authority about how well it assures itself
of the welfare of electively home-educated children, the local authoritys
response, detailing the limitations to its statutory powers, led to a letter from
the independent chair to raise the issue with the Secretary of State for
Education.

The LSCBs analysis of the quality of services and their impact on improving
childrens lives is strong, because it is based on good triangulation between
quantitative performance information and qualitative learning from such
sources as audits and practice observations. The board does not limit its
oversight of practice to its priority areas and those children receiving
mainstream safeguarding services, but focuses on early help and on
particularly vulnerable groups, such as disabled children, children looked after
who are placed out of the local authority area, those who are vulnerable to
radicalisation and those with emerging mental health problems. The feedback
from children and their families is not fed into this process as consistently as it
could be. This is an area for development of which the board is aware.


A thorough and effective section 11 process ensures that partner agencies are
discharging their statutory responsibilities, and highlights areas where
agencies could do better. This is complemented by a section 175 audit that
has successfully engaged almost all schools. The audit has been driven by the
boards highly successful education hub. This group has engaged many
schools, and extensive work with them and the wider school network has
been successful in driving up both the awareness and the quality of
safeguarding in schools. Work to counter child sexual exploitation and
promote online safety has been commendable. Children and young people
have been engaged well in the process of creating and disseminating learning
materials that have directly led to greater awareness and the prevention of
harm, such as the short film Alright Charlie. A group of Year 6 girls used their
learning from watching this film to protect themselves from harm and to
provide evidence to the police that supported the successful prosecution of a
perpetrator. The board also promoted a similar film, Kayleighs Love Story,
targeted at secondary-aged children, which also received very positive
feedback from teachers and pupils alike. As a result of this, one young person
said of their social media use, I think I will unfollow all the people I dont
know.


A reciprocal arrangement whereby the serious case review (SCR) panel is
chaired by a senior manager from another local authority brings not only


relevant knowledge but also objectivity and transparency to the process of
decision making. This brings real benefit to complex and challenging
discussions, particularly when partner agencies may have differing
perspectives on how best to learn from childrens individual circumstances.
Importantly, the board has not waited for the completion of SCRs or learning
reviews to use the lessons learned to improve agency practice. For example,
initial learning from the case of a child about whom it has only very recently
been agreed to carry out a SCR led to an LSCB audit of the cases of children
who came off a plan at their first child protection review conference and, in
turn, to updated and improved procedures and guidance. The LSCB learning
and improvement framework is compliant with statutory guidance and is
detailed, clear and up to date. It provides a well-structured framework for
undertaking SCRs, learning reviews and related activities, and for the
dissemination of the learning that arises from them.

The child death overview panel is appropriately constituted and carries out its
function well. It links to the SCR sub-group when necessary, oversees rapid
response arrangements for when children die unexpectedly and promotes
public health messages about relevant issues such as safer sleeping, the use
of smoke alarms and nappy sack safety. This means that the board is doing all
that it can to ensure that awareness is raised in the local community in the
hope of preventing further deaths.


The board has effective oversight of the quality of work to tackle child sexual
exploitation, the risks arising from going missing and related areas of
vulnerability, such as radicalisation and female genital mutilation. As a result
of this and strong agency buy-in, the board has been able to drive up the
quality of agencies practice through disseminating good-practice learning,
awareness-raising materials and by exercising effective challenge and
leadership. Robust challenge to the local authority about the quality of return
home interviews and the low number that were completed within 72 hours
has led to a significant improvement in their timeliness and an ongoing focus
on improving their quality. The board is also engaging well with faith settings
to promote not only broader safeguarding awareness but also more specific
awareness of the risks posed by dangers such as child sexual exploitation and
radicalisation. This work is exemplified by safeguarding sermons preached by
the imam of a large local mosque. It has recently been bolstered by the
boards multifaith strategy, developed over the past year with significant
mosque, Hindu temple, church and gurdwara consultation.


The board provides a broad range of relevant training of which social workers
speak highly. While driven by statutory expectations and the boards priorities,
the volume and content of training are updated on an ongoing basis to reflect
new priorities. An audit to assess the impact of the LSCBs neglect strategy on
improving frontline practice showed that it had not been as successful as had
been hoped in promoting the use of the graded care profile, a tool to identify
and assess the severity of neglect. As a result of this, the LSCB not only
amended multi-agency procedures to make the use of this tool compulsory in


certain circumstances but also more than doubled the number of training
courses on neglect that it runs, and has introduced a specific neglect element
to key mandatory multi-agency safeguarding courses. An audit of the quality
and impact of services for children who are suffering from neglect is planned
to assess the impact of this additional training on improving practice.

A well-thought-out validation process is being successfully used to drive up
and assure the quality of single-agency training. Good evidence of the impact
of training on improving practice is being provided by three month on
telephone interviews that are carried out with a selection of training
attendees. While this is positive, the overall findings from this ongoing
evaluation process have not been analysed to gain greater value from them
and to identify any specific themes that could be used to support further
improvement. Learning from the last two SCRs in Derby, published in January
and February 2014, informs the content of training. Social workers interviewed
by inspectors are overwhelmingly aware of the key messages from these
SCRs. However, their knowledge of the specific details of the two reviews is
not consistently good.


The LSCBs website is clear and user friendly, and contains a broad range of
information and guidance for professionals, children and their parents. This
includes a full range of appropriate policies and procedures, relevant research
and information on important national and local issues, such as child neglect.
It also has helpful advice to children and parents on matters such as child
sexual exploitation and online safety. The LSCB policy and procedures subgroup ensures that policies and procedures, including a clear and wellpresented threshold document, are kept up to date. Many policies and
procedures are shared with Derbyshire to help to ensure that children receive
a consistent response from agencies, such as police and health, that provide
services to both the city and the county.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Karen Wareing
Deputy lead inspector: Julie Knight
Team inspectors: Carolyn Spray, Stella Elliott, Rachel Griffiths, Russ Henry, Dawn
Godfrey, Dominic Stevens
Senior data analysts: Stewart Hartshorne, Judith Swindell
Quality assurance manager: Nick McMullen


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance, Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2017


