Derbyshire County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and Care Leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 19 November 2013  11 December 2013
The overall judgement is good.
The Local Authority leads effective services that meet the requirements for good.
It is Ofsteds expectation that as a minimum all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

Good


Good


Good


Good


Good

The judgement for the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board (LSCB) is requires improvement.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of Local
Authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents

Section 1: the Local Authority


Summary of key findings


What does the Local Authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this Local Authority area


Inspection judgements about the Local Authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the Local Authority
Summary of key findings
This Local Authority is good because:
 When agencies have worries about children and young people, they know how to
contact, and make a referral to Children and Younger Adults Services (CAYA) to
ensure that children are helped and protected.
 Children and families who are assessed as needing early help and support receive
good services from locally based Multi-Agency teams (MAT). The support provided
and coordinated by a range of professionals helps improve the lives of children,
young people and their families.
 Social workers assess childrens needs for help and protection well. Children are
always seen and asked about how they feel and what they need to keep them
safe and well. The assessments highlight any risks to children and young people
and are used to support social workers in making decisions about how to keep
children safe. When necessary, there is a direct offer of help to address any needs
that have been identified.
 Social workers are effective at using different ways to develop good relationships
with children and young people. For example, social workers trained in systemic
practice have been able to engage families who have found it difficult to work
with professionals. The relationships social workers develop with families help
them to protect children from harm.
 Leaders and managers have been successful in improving services for children
over a sustained period of time. They have clear plans for further improving
services based on a thorough understanding of their current strengths and
weaknesses.
 The council and partner agencies have ensured that they have provided funding
for the help and protection of children. This has helped agencies work together to
respond to children in need of support and protection. For example, the police
have seconded six police sergeants to work as team managers in the MATs.
 The Local Authority has very high expectations; because of this, outcomes for
children and young people are improving. Social workers are clear about the high
standards of professional practice required by senior managers and are working to
achieve good outcomes for children.
 The Local Authority has a vibrant Children in Care council that is well supported
and has helped improve the experience of looked after children. For example, by
developing more child friendly ways of recording looked after reviews.
 Social workers work well with judges and the Children and Family Courts Advisory
Service (Cafcass). This means that when there are continuing concerns, legal
decisions are made quickly to ensure children are safe, and there are plans to
achieve permanence.


 Children who become looked after are well matched with their carers and are well
cared for. When children cannot live with their own families, social workers work
hard to find and match children to permanent families.
 When a young person is ready to leave care, there is a good range of
accommodation and supportive living arrangements to ensure that young people
have a wide choice about where they live. This includes the Staying Put
programme which enables young people to remain with their foster carers after
they reach 18.
 Senior managers want the best for children who live in Derbyshire and make sure
they regularly visit social work teams. This helps them maintain a good
understanding of how social workers are helping children and what is needed to
improve services.
 The Local Authority is highly committed to ensuring services are responsive and
staff are well trained. Additional social workers have been recruited and the
workforce is sufficient to meet the needs of the volume of children. The Local
Authority has effective commissioning arrangements, which ensures that services
are responsive to local needs. Examples of this include developing short breaks for
disabled children and ensuring services are provided to work with perpetrators of
domestic violence.

What does the Local Authority need to improve?
Areas for improvement
 Ensure that management oversight and decisions, including the rationale for
decisions, are always clearly recorded on all childrens files to inform practice and
ensure a full and accurate record.
 Ensure that there is a consistent approach to the recording of strategy meetings
so that actions, and responsibility for actions, are clearly recorded and minutes of
meetings are always available on the childs electronic record.
 Develop systems for gathering feedback from children and families who have
experience of child protection services to inform the development of services.
 Collate and evaluate information on the health needs of looked after children to
inform the development and targeting of services.
 Develop the role of the virtual headteacher in challenging and supporting school
leaders to ensure the progress of looked after children at Key Stages 1 to 3 so
that their attainment improves to at least the levels expected for their age.
 Ensure that Independent Reviewing Officers (IROs) meet all the requirements of
statutory guidance on the function of IROs. This is particularly in relation to case
management and review for looked after children, and includes meeting the child
before the first review, receiving copies of all relevant court documents and being
kept fully informed of the progress of the childs case, during and at the
conclusion of the proceedings.


 Ensure that pathway plans for young people aged 16 and 17 are of a consistently
good quality and ensure all Care Leavers receive a copy of their health history.
 Ensure that sufficient adoption placements are available for children with
disabilities and complex needs, and that children move to live with these adopters
as soon as they are ready.
 Ensure good quality adoption support plans are consistently included in childrens
and adopters records, and are responsive to their changing needs throughout
their childhood.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other, and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the Local Authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people it is trying to help, protect
and look after.
The inspection of the Local Authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) was carried out under
section 15A of the Children Act 2004.
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of Local Authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Fiona J Millns
Team inspectors: Linda Steele, Wendy Ghaffar, Shirley Bailey, Robert Pyner, John
Mitchell, Carolyn Spray and Christine Williams.


Information about this Local Authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 155,797 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Derbyshire. This is 20% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 16.4% of the Local Authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
in primary schools is 15.3% (the national average is 18.1%);
in secondary schools is 12.2% (the national average is 15.1%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 4.1% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Mixed and Asian and Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
in primary schools is 1.6% (the national average is 18.1%);
in secondary schools is 1.1% (the national average is 13.6%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 4410 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 March 2013, 588 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 552 at 31 March 2012.
 At 31 March 2013, 7 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from 18 at 31 March 2012.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 664 children were being looked after by the LA (a rate of 43
per 10,000 children). This is a decrease from 700 (45 per 10,000 children) at 31
March 2012:
Of this number 176 (or 26.5%) lived outside the Local Authority area;
authority;


The Local Authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


lived out of the authority area, 482 lived with foster families, of whom
Fewer than 5 children (exact number suppressed) were unaccompanied
asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months there have been:
subsequently returned to be looked after;
moved on to independent living;
are now (at 31 March 2013) living in houses of multiple occupation.

Other Ofsted inspections
 The Local Authority operates 13 childrens homes. Nine were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent full Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Derbyshires safeguarding arrangements was in May
 The previous inspection of Derbyshires services for looked after children was in
May 2011. The Local Authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of Derbyshires Adoption services was in October 2011.
The Local Authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of Derbyshires Fostering services was in March 2012.
The Local Authority was judged to be good.

Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since September 2011.
 The Chair of the LSCB was appointed as interim Independent Chair for Derbyshire
Safeguarding Children Board (DSCB) on 14 November 2012, then as permanent
Independent Chair on 1 March 2013.


Inspection judgements about the Local Authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
are good.
 When safeguarding and child protection issues are identified, they are responded
to in a timely manner by the Children and Younger Adults Service (CAYA). This
includes when concerns arise out of hours. Effective coordinated work is
undertaken to ensure the safety and well-being of children and young people.
Cases are allocated promptly and at the time of the inspection there were no
unallocated cases. Once children are identified as at risk of significant harm, child
protection enquiries are prioritised. There are good arrangements with the police
to undertake child protection enquiries and these are conducted by suitably
qualified and experienced social workers.
 Strategy meetings and discussions are timely and the decisions made are
appropriate. As a result, actions are taken to identify and address childrens
protection needs. There are, however, inconsistent approaches to the
management and recording of these meetings. This lack of consistency could lead
to significant information not being readily available to the out of hours service.
Moreover, inconsistency in recording could lead to confusion around the actions
required to ensure children are adequately protected.
 A good range of early help services supported by a clear and recently refreshed
threshold document, mean that children and parents can access services
appropriate to their differing needs. Partner agencies report that they understand
thresholds for access to childrens social care. Partner agencies know that if they
need to discuss concerns they can contact Call Derbyshire or the local duty team
to speak to a social worker.
 Robust arrangements for the screening of domestic abuse notifications to the
police in the Central Referral Unit ensure that high risk cases are immediately
referred to childrens social care. Good information sharing, (including with
health, schools, and pathways of referral to the Multi-Agency Risk Assessment
Conference) enables a coordinated multi-agency response. This information
sharing also reflects a clear shared understanding and approach to risk in relation
to children living in households where there is domestic abuse.
 Nearly all assessments are of good quality and some are very good. They are
timely, comprehensive and proportionate to risk. The majority of assessments
seen are child focused. Historical context and risk factors are considered
effectively in most assessments. For the purpose of both initial and core
assessments, children are seen and seen alone. There is evidence of observation
of children's presentations and relationships with parents, as well as thorough
consideration of the impact of parental behaviours, (such as substance misuse
and domestic abuse) on children's emotional well-being and safety. Clear and
thorough analysis of risk results in appropriate decisions and planning, with a
direct offer of help to address identified needs.


 There is an effective and comprehensive early help offer delivered by the MultiAgency Teams (MAT) and childrens centres, which is having a significant and
positive impact on outcomes for children and young people. A locality based
service is now established, which involves a range of professionals, including
childrens services staff, health visitors, schools and members of voluntary and
community groups. This means that when concerns are first identified, support
can be offered to different family members according to age and need. The
common assessment framework (CAF) is used to assess and support early help
for children and families. There are examples of CAF being used well, such as in
planning to protect children missing and at risk of sexual exploitation.
 MAT workers receive a good range of support, supervision and training. This
includes consultation from senior practitioners as well as children and adolescent
mental health services, to help them effectively address childrens needs.
 Social workers use a range of creative techniques to establish and develop
constructive relationships with children and young people and reduce risk.
Children are visited regularly in accordance with plans. Additional visits, including
evening and unannounced, are made when necessary. Most case records are up
to date and demonstrate that children are seen, and seen alone, where
appropriate. Children and young people do not participate as fully as possible in
the child protection planning process. There are low levels of attendance by
children and young people at core groups and case conferences. There is no
advocacy service available to children who are subject to child protection plans,
although the Local Authority has clear plans to introduce this service from
January 2014.
 Case files demonstrated that the individual and diverse needs of children,
including needs arising out of disability, ethnicity, language, gender and sexual
orientation, were being addressed well. Social workers identified where there
were specific needs to be considered to ensure that any support and intervention
was effective, for example, in initiating life story work and direct work to support
childrens self-esteem and build their resilience.
 The quality of children and young peoples written plans varies greatly. Examples
were seen of good plans but others lacked clarity on actions and timescales. In a
few cases there were too many actions, making it difficult for families and
professionals to identify the key area of risk to be prioritised. A new format for
plans has been in place since 1 October 2013, providing more clarity in terms of
actions, timescales and responsibility for actions and outcomes. Despite the
varied standards of written plans, overall the work undertaken was timely and
effective. Core groups and conferences are timely and purposeful, and are usually
well attended by partner agencies that provide written reports. However, there is
no system to improve service provision by collating feedback from families and
young people on their views and experiences of child protection processes.
 Whilst there has been some development to the electronic recording system to
promote consistent use of chronologies to inform planning and assessment, these
still vary in quality and, in a small number of cases, chronologies had not been
completed. Some chronologies, especially those for court work are of a good


standard, others are basic in content, which can make it more difficult to gain a
clear understanding of a childs history from their case records. The Local
Authority is aware of this and has introduced a programme of district based
training for frontline staff and managers.
 Children, young people and families benefit from stable relationships with social
workers. In many cases social workers work with families from the
commencement of an initial assessment and remain the key worker, unless the
child becomes looked after. There are good arrangements for the transition of
cases between teams, including both escalation and de-escalation when childrens
circumstances and needs change, as well as effective use of co-working. Close
working arrangements between the MAT and children and families teams ensure
a timely and smooth transition between the teams and good continuity for
children and families.
 There are some very good examples of social workers working effectively to
engage families who have been resistant to professional intervention. Inspectors
saw some good examples of systemic practice approaches being applied to build
relationships and support positive change within families. The authority is rolling
out the use of this approach across its social care workforce. Parents talked
positively about the quality of their relationships with social workers, who they
report to be open, honest and respectful.
 The recording of management decision making varies greatly in quality. In the
majority of cases this was adequate. Some examples were seen of very good and
timely recording by managers, which clearly identified the required actions to
ensure children are protected and the rationale for decisions made. In other
cases, management decision making is not routinely recorded, and in some, the
reasons for management decisions is not evident in case recording. This
inconsistency can result in important information not being readily available to
inform actions and interventions.
 The authority has suitable arrangements for identifying and tracking young
people who are missing from home, care or education, as well as those at risk of
sexual exploitation. A child protection manager from childrens social care is colocated within the police central referral unit. This ensures effective and timely
information sharing between the police, childrens social care, education and the
youth offending service. Risks are identified and well managed. The Vulnerable
Young Peoples Panel and High Risk Panel provide forums for multi-agency
information sharing and planning to reduce risk for those young people most at
risk. Looked after children who are assessed as being at risk of child sexual
exploitation are effectively managed with clear and appropriate use of child
protection processes. As a result, in cases seen by inspectors there is evidence of
effective and timely information sharing, and of clear planning and actions to
reduce risk and provide support to young people.
 Schools know about their responsibilities and take appropriate action when a child
or young person is missing from education. A Children Missing Education
Coordinator is located in the police central referral unit ensuring that information
is shared promptly and any safeguarding concerns are addressed.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence are good.
 In nearly all cases, decisions to look after children are timely, proportionate and
based on a multi-agency analysis of risk. Edge of Care panels provide effective
management oversight to ensure only those children who need to be looked after
come into care.
 Pre-proceedings work is appropriately focused and the vast majority of cases
enter the court arena at the right time for the child. There are strong strategic
and operational partnerships with the judiciary and the Children and Family
Courts Advisory Service. There has been steady improvement in timescales for
court proceedings. The current average of 22 weeks consistently exceeds
expectations outlined by the Family Justice Board and significantly reduces delay
for children. Social work assessments of childrens attachments are of good
quality and are used to inform care planning decisions, thus reducing reliance on
expert witnesses.
 Children are consulted regularly about their wishes and feelings. They are
encouraged through a variety of means to make sense of their present and past
experience. Creative and often inventive ways are used to assist younger
children, and children with communication difficulties, to make their feelings
known. Innovative multi-agency work undertaken with disabled children is of a
high standard, leading to children meeting and sometimes exceeding
developmental, social and educational expectations.
 Looked after children have appropriate levels of contact with parents and their
brothers and sisters. Good quality assessments of the needs of individual children
within brother and sister groups, and their attachments to each other, are
undertaken. These are used to match children to suitable placements and ensure
that children, who cannot live together because of conflicting needs, retain
appropriate and meaningful contact with each other.
 The introduction of systemic models of practice has led to a greater
understanding of the importance of contact with adults who are not related to the
child. An example of this is children being assisted to keep in touch with previous
foster carers.
 The requirements of statutory guidance on the functions of IROs in relation to
case management and review for looked after children are not fully implemented.
For example, they are not provided with all relevant documents for children in
court proceedings, and sometimes do not see children before their first review
due to time constraints.
 The timeliness of looked after children reviews has significantly improved.
However, the impact of the reviewing process in achieving the right outcomes for
young people at the right time is not evaluated.
 There is clear evidence of IROs challenging arrangements and plans for children
on an individual casework basis, leading to real improvements in the lives of the


children concerned. However, a formal dispute protocol has only recently been
agreed. The Local Authority has taken positive steps to ensure IROs play an
increasingly strategic role however the services ability to measure performance,
identify themes and to hold services to account is not yet sufficiently robust.
 The Local Authority has a sufficiency action plan that is informed by a detailed
understanding of the profile of its looked after children. Identified gaps in its own
provision and in commissioned services are being addressed through a variety of
means. This includes rapid viability assessments of potential family and friends as
carers, as well as an ambitious ongoing foster care recruitment strategy targeted
at carers for priority groups, including disabled children, teenagers, and brother
and sister groups. Imaginative solutions are being used to retain and recruit
carers, for example, providing home extensions to facilitate a commitment to
permanent homes for young people.
 The Local Authority has good arrangements for the commissioning of placements
for looked after children. This has contributed to a reduction in placement moves
for looked after children, with those experiencing three or more moves in a 12
month period reducing from 10.2% in 2010-2011 to 6.6% during the 12 months
ending September 2013.
 Whilst there are challenges in providing sufficient in-house foster carers there are
clear and effective priorities for children to live closer to home. As a result there
has been a 9% decrease in the last 12 months of children living more than 20
miles from their home. Out of authority placements are governed by the East
Midlands commissioning framework. There is a cross border protocol in place to
ensure that placements meet required standards. Standards within the Local
Authoritys own childrens homes are improving with nine of the 13 Local
Authority childrens homes judged to be good or better overall (two are
outstanding).
 Standards of foster care assessment and review are robust. Foster carers receive
regular training that is relevant to the children they care for and participation is
high. Carers are fully included in planning for children and have delegated
authority in the majority of cases to make day to day decisions, such as whether
children can stay overnight with friends. New foster carers receive support from
mentors, who are experienced foster carers. This enhances the quality of care
provided to children and young people and increases the confidence of foster
carers. Foster carers generally felt that they, and the children they look after, are
well supported by the fostering liaison officers and childrens social workers.
 There is effective risk reducing partnership work between CAYA and the police in
individual cases relating to children who are missing or absent from care. The
numbers of children reported missing from home and from care has fallen. The
police missing persons officer undertakes preventative work by forming links with
children's homes. There are robust systems based on liaison with schools, police
and MATs for identifying and locating children missing from education.
 There are effective systems for ensuring children missing from care including
those placed outside the Local Authority area are visited within appropriate


timescales upon their return and any triggers or patterns for children going
missing are identified and addressed. If there are concerns regarding child sexual
exploitation, children missing from care are managed under child protection
procedures.
 Appropriate systems are used to ensure that children placed outside of
Derbyshire have suitable and timely arrangements made for their health,
education and contact with their families. However, when placements are
unplanned or when children have complex ongoing health or education needs,
there are occasionally delays in putting services in place.
 Derbyshire has high aspirations for the educational achievements of looked after
children. The Children in Care Education Service ensures that looked after
children are in appropriate education settings. Most looked after children attend
schools that are judged good or better by Ofsted. However, attainment outcomes
for pupils in the Early Years and key stages 1, 2 and 3 are only in line with
national averages for looked after children. However, 2013 results for five or
more GCSEs, including English and mathematics at Key Stage 4, show significant
improvement over the previous year, closing the gap with all Derbyshire pupils.
The recently appointed virtual head has a clear strategic view of current strengths
and weaknesses; consultation is underway with headteachers to drive action
planning to improve outcomes for all looked after children. Fixed term exclusions
have reduced by 25% since 2010-11 and there are no permanent exclusions for
looked after children during 2012-13. Effective systems are in place to ensure
early warning of any potential exclusions for looked after children, and managed
moves to other schools are used well for individual cases.
 The number of children who receive regular health and dental examinations
fluctuates. Nearly a quarter of children looked after for more than a year in 201213 had not had a health or dental check. This has been identified as a priority
and appropriate plans are in place to improve attendance and to reduce the age
that children receive their first dental check.
 Currently there is no overview of some of the most basic information about
looked after childrens health, such as whether they smoke or the level of
teenage pregnancy. The Local Authority and its partners are aware of this deficit
and have well developed plans for systems to collect and analyse this data.
 There are good arrangements in place for health notifications for looked after
children who move in and out of the county. This means that the transfer of
health arrangements can be expedited and delay in continuity is minimised.
Derbyshire undertakes reviews of childrens health on behalf of other local
authorities at the point notifications are received. It also funds specialist services
for children placed out of authority if they are not part of the commissioned
services in that local area.
 Children who return home from care continue to receive effective multi-agency
monitoring and support that is stepped up or down appropriately, depending on
childrens changing needs. As a result re-admissions to care, unless as a planned
programme of respite, are low.


The graded judgment for adoption performance is good.
 Purposeful planning and effective oversight of childrens cases mean that
numbers of children leaving care through adoption have steadily increased, well
above national average rates.
 Approaches to family finding are creative and include the use of national systems
and collaboration with voluntary agencies and other authorities as a regional
consortium. This has resulted in adoptive families being recruited from a wide
range of backgrounds and circumstances to address the diverse needs of children
who need a permanent alternative home. Older children are being adopted in
greater numbers than in comparable authorities, and more brother and sister
groups are now able to remain together.
 Children whose final plan may be adoption are identified prior to their initial
health assessment; the assessment undertaken is sufficiently rigorous to be used
to serve as an adoption or permanence medical. As a result children are not
submitted to unnecessary medical examination or delays in decision making
about their future, due to a lack of medical information.
 The authority is responding well to the challenge of providing families for the
greater number of children with an adoption plan. Social workers and their
managers are focused on minimising delay for children. Good assessments and
effective tracking of childrens cases have helped achieve a steady reduction in
the length of care proceedings, which is now well below the national average. As
a result, the overall time taken between childrens admission to care and moving
in with their adoptive families is better than the national average.
 However, the time taken to match children with suitable families has increased,
so that the number of children awaiting adoption has risen. This particularly
affects children with more complex needs. Managers are aware of this and are
planning a targeted campaign specifically to recruit more adopters for this group.
 Black and minority ethnic children are less likely than their peers to leave care
through adoption, although numbers overall are small and Derbyshire has
narrowed the gap to a smaller difference than the national average.
 Support for adopted children and their families is generally good, although
support plans are not always well documented in childrens records. Adoptive
parents reported that their children were doing well. The large majority of
adopters spoken to are aware of how to get help if they need it. Most hold the
service in high regard, even when they had encountered difficulties. One parent
told inspectors we have had an amazing experience with Derbyshire. From the
very first moment they were open and honest with us, so we knew what to
expect.
 The adoption panel reported that as greater numbers of children are being
adopted there have been increasing demands for support. Consequently, a
strategy has been developed with emphasis on family finding and assessment to
ensure that prospective adopters understand the demands they will face and
services available to support them. The range of services is being further


developed and incorporates specific individualised packages as well as the use of
early help and multi-agency teams. A duty system of adoption social workers
within the support team ensures a timely response to adopters.
 The Adoption Panel chairs meet regularly with the authority and provide
appropriate support and challenge. For example, they have highlighted issues
about report writing and the need to ensure adequate resources for adoption
support and regularly give feedback to social workers about the quality of their
assessments, plans and reports for children.
 Recruitment and assessment of prospective adopters have been strengthened in
response to greater numbers of children in care for whom an adoption plan is
made, with additional social worker posts created in the adoption team. As a
result there has been an increase in the number and diversity of approved
adopters. Nearly all adopters spoken to were positive about the recruitment and
assessment process. However, the overall number of children who are waiting for
a family remains high (86 at the end October 2013) and the authority recognises
that some children with complex needs are waiting too long before moving in
with an adoptive family. In response it has plans for a targeted recruitment
campaign and to commission additional external support to address this shortfall.
 In the majority of cases sampled, children had benefited from good support from
social workers and other staff who took time to work with them, including
providing life story work. Furthermore, letterbox contact arrangements enable
adoptive families to exchange news with childrens birth families where this is
part of the agreed plan for the child.
The graded judgment for the experiences and progress of Care Leavers is
good
 Most Care Leavers are positive about the support they receive. Those who spoke
with the inspector were clear that considerable support is offered to them and
that staff were readily available to help them develop their independence.
Relationships between Care Leavers and workers from the commissioned service
provider, Barnardos, are particularly strong. Care Leavers recounted how key
workers had ensured accommodation was appropriate, and the allocation of
setting up home allowances was available to them and, where appropriate,
higher education bursaries. Several noted the guidance they had received to gain
employment or apprenticeships.
 Case file scrutiny confirmed that Care Leavers support is available, effective and
often achieves very positive outcomes. However, support for Care Leavers to
manage their health and promote healthy living is not consistently available or
effective. Most current Care Leavers have not been provided with a copy of their
health history. However, action has been taken to address this. The designated
nurse for looked after children has consulted Care Leavers about their health
information. Care Leavers had no concerns about their health and all had been
reminded to register with general practitioners and dentists.


 A good range of accommodation and support ensures that young people leaving
care have a real choice about their living arrangements. This includes the Staying
Put programme through which Care Leavers can remain with their foster carers
after they reach 18.
 Effective support from key workers helps young people to live safely and they
know with whom they should speak if they have problems with their
accommodation. Young people who spoke with the inspector feel safe in their
accommodation and were able to highlight instances where key workers had
supported them with specific accommodation issues. Strong and developing
partnerships with housing associations means that the range of accommodation
options is increasing.
 A good number of Care Leavers are supported into further and higher education.
Additionally, for future Care Leavers, the Uni-fi project is working well to increase
the aspirations of younger children in care. The virtual school is piloting a
personal education plan to support young people in their options for education
and training post 16. Appropriate financial support is made available to Care
Leavers in order to help them continue in education. This includes support
available during university vacations where needed. Currently, there are 25 Care
Leavers studying at university.
 The current format for pathway plans, (developed by Barnardos, following
consultation with young people) is very comprehensive and won an award for
clarity, the Care2Work quality mark 2013. There are some excellent examples of
plans which demonstrate strong engagement with young people and identify
clear targets and actions. The best plans show very effective and focused
solutions for individual issues and practical, realistic targets for the young person
and support worker. Pathway planning for Care Leavers aged eighteen and over
is consistently good. However, this is not always the case for some younger
people on their approach to leaving care; the quality of pathway planning is
varied and consequently effective planning for the transition to adulthood is not
as evident for some young people.
 The Local Authority has been very effective in developing employment, education
and training for Care Leavers. This improvement has meant that the number of
Care Leavers who are not in education, employment or training, has declined
significantly over time. Care Leavers in education, employment or training shows
an improving trend from 76% in 2010 to 82% in 2012, which was substantially
better than national averages or statistical neighbours. The performance for 2013
to date shows a dip to 74%, but this is still well above the national average.
 The Local Authority has gained an award for its Care Leaver Employment Project
and is currently supporting 14 apprentices working for private companies and a
further five working directly for the Local Authority.
 Consultation with Care Leavers resulted in a Care Leavers Charter. A DVD was
developed following the consultation and presented by Care Leavers to ministers
and the Corporate Parenting Committee. It is also used in training events for
workers.


Leadership, management and governance are good
 The determined commitment of the Local Authority has led to the improvement
of services for children and young people. The council has a good understanding
of its strengths and weakness and how these impact on service delivery. Elected
members and partners have high aspirations and set ambitious targets for
improving services for children, which are delivered through robust planning
processes.
 The Director of Childrens Services (DCS) and the senior management team have
been successful in creating a culture of learning, support and challenge within
Derbyshires children and young peoples services. All leaders have a strong
presence within frontline services, making regular visits to teams and ensuring
that they meet with children and young people to inform and evaluate practice.
In addition, corporate parenting extends to the wider council functions, resulting,
for example, in a number of high quality apprenticeships being made available to
Care Leavers.
 Derbyshire is an innovative Local Authority, demonstrating its commitment to
children, young people and families through its investment in staff to ensure a
better qualified workforce. An effective workforce strategy is in place, ensuring
the workforce is proportionate and affordable with the right skills and knowledge.
Human Resource (HR) and senior managers have successfully addressed
performance management, leadership succession planning and introduced My
Plans. Capacity within social work teams across the county has increased. The
Local Authority is committed to further improving outcomes for children through
the use of systemic practice across frontline teams and the social pedagogy
model within residential care. This is already having a positive impact on
outcomes for children. For example, the social pedagogy model has resulted in
reductions in the need for restraint and a reduction in the numbers of children
missing education. It has also been effective in improving staff morale and
reducing sickness levels.
 The council and its partners make good use of external and internal scrutiny and
have recently been assessed and awarded Customer Service Excellence for the
MATs. Partnerships and collaborative working have been promoted through
Senior managers introduction of district Challenge Days. The challenge days
included police and health representatives, and have led to changes to practice
and procedures, as well as the introduction of ten service priorities. For example,
one districts step up step down arrangements were identified as good practice
and subsequently have been endorsed across the county to ensure children and
young people receive the appropriate level of service.
 The Local Authority continues to review its approach to delivering services in
response both to local analysis and national initiatives. It is, for example,
currently reviewing its Call Derbyshire service and is working towards the
implementation of a single assessment process. The recent appointment of a
Principal Social Worker has increased management and supervisory capacity,
and enhanced the quality of professional practice through supporting staff in


systemic practice, developing reflective supervision skills for senior practitioners
and linking practice to senior management. Group supervision observed by
inspectors showed tools from systemic training being used effectively to enhance
work with children and their families.
 Most of the key recommendations from the Safeguarding and Looked After
Children inspection in 2011 have been successfully implemented although some,
such as the recording of management decisions and effective use of chronologies,
remain as work in progress.
 The Childrens Trust, the Performance Improvement Board and locality planning
and commissioning partnerships provide effective and joined up leadership for
children's services. Clear accountabilities and responsibilities exist between senior
officers, the lead member and the Chair of the DSCB. Robust commissioning is
informed by a comprehensive joint strategic needs assessment, with effective
engagement of statutory and voluntary sectors and clinical commissioning
groups. Detailed information and analysis on areas of high deprivation and
vulnerable children is used flexibly and effectively to inform the allocation of
resources and service delivery. There is a strong emphasis on user involvement to
shape services. For example, young people were consulted to help shape the
specifications for new care leaver accommodation. Users are not, however, fully
engaged in evaluating and improving child protection services.
 Case files are regularly audited by managers at all levels to ensure the quality of
practice and services. However, the learning from these audits is not collated or
disseminated through strategic partnerships or to staff. This limits the authoritys
ability to improve services as a result of case auditing.
 The Local Authoritys positive partnership working ensures a strong multi-agency
approach to planning and delivering services to meet the needs of children,
young people and families in Derbyshire. The secondment of six police sergeants
to the role of MAT manager illustrates the commitment to pooling resources,
partnership working, developing effective working relationships and enhancing
professional understanding of roles.
 Newly qualified social workers receive good support which includes induction
training, protected caseloads and shadowing experienced colleagues. In-house
training is comprehensive with high rates of staff attendance. Staff are motivated
and enthusiastic about working for Derbyshire, which is reflected in their
commitment to, and the quality of, direct work with children.
 Performance management and quality assurance arrangements are well
established, with good reporting to the Childrens Trust, DSCB and to individual
teams through the line management structure. Staff are regularly consulted on
policies, development and improvement plans. A culture of continuous challenge
and improvement is evident throughout services.
 Effective oversight by the Chief Executive of the DSCB has not yet been fully
embedded. An independent audit of the DSCB in January 2013 identified that the


DSCB annual report and business plan were not reported to the Chief Executive
or lead member of the Council. The DSCB Annual Report for 2012-13 had been
recently published at the time of the inspection but the 2013/14 Business Plan
had not yet been published. It is acknowledged though that the priorities had
been agreed by the Board but good practice would have been to publish the
Annual report and Business Plan earlier and at the same time.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The effectiveness of the LSCB requires improvement
Areas for improvement
 Ensure that the DSCB membership fully meets the requirements of Working
Together 2013.
 Increase the influence of the Board by strengthening the relationships with
other key strategic groups, such as the Health and Wellbeing Board and the
Local Safeguarding Adults Board.
 Ensure the work of the Board is informed by clear agreed priorities and an up
to date and well-structured business plan.
 Improve its oversight of strategic work to protect children at risk of going
missing and of sexual exploitation.
 Analyse and use the findings from case file audits in order to drive
improvement.
 Ensure the Board is effectively monitoring arrangements to safeguard children
placed in Derbyshire by other local authorities.
 Establish processes that ensure the experiences of children, young people and
families inform service improvement and training.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
 The recent appointment of a new, experienced Independent Chair to the
DSCB has improved partner engagement with the work of the Board, and led
to more robust governance arrangements. The Annual Report for 2012-13 has
now been published but the DSCB business plan for 2013/14 has only recently
been agreed. This means that the work of the Board has not been
underpinned by clearly identified shared priorities. A threshold document has
been re-launched and partners are well engaged with safeguarding training.
 Although DSCB members are sufficiently senior and able to commit their
agency to provide resources, not all partner agencies regularly attend the
DSCB. For example, there is insufficient engagement from district and
borough councils and further education. This limits the ability of the Board to
influence and hold to account these agencies.


 The DSCB has no lay members, which weakens its ability to develop public
and community engagement. The DSCB has recognised this and are looking to
recruit two representatives to become independent board members.
 An independently commissioned audit of the work of the DSCB has identified
several areas for improvement. An action plan has been developed to address
these.
 Links with the Childrens Trust are established with regular attendance by the
DSCB Chair. However, links with the Health and Wellbeing Board and the
Safeguarding Adult Board are not yet defined or embedded, with no formal
protocol in place to drive improvement.
 The new Independent Chair has established a culture of accountability and
challenge. Section 11 audits have been completed, with themes identified and
actions taken. Plans to monitor and evaluate the quality of multi-agency
frontline practice, including early help, are in place. However, as
implementation is at an early stage, these plans are not yet leading to service
improvements. Furthermore, current processes do not ensure that the
experiences of children, young people and families inform service
improvement or training programmes.
 Learning from a recent Serious Case Review (SCR) has highlighted failings in
some adult agencies understanding of, and compliance with, child protection
procedures which had not previously been identified or addressed by the
Board. A robust action plan has now been put in place to address these
shortcomings.
 Learning from this and other SCRs has been comprehensively disseminated to
staff across childrens services and partner agencies. An example is the
distribution of posters, leaflets and mouse mats promoting lessons learnt and
the Think Family charter launched at a multi-agency conference. The DSCB
has also developed an e-learning package which focuses on lessons learnt
from SCRs.
 Practice to identify and support children at risk of sexual exploitation is good.
However, there is no formal child sexual exploitation (CSE) strategic overview
of patterns and trends in relation to children at risk of sexual exploitation. As a
result the DSCB does not have a clear understanding of the numbers and
circumstances of children and young people in Derbyshire who are at risk of
CSE.
 Systems to monitor the safeguarding of children placed in Derbyshire by other
local authorities are underdeveloped. As a result the DSCB is not able to
identify concerns or promote improvements in practice which lead to improved
safeguarding of these children.


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, workbased
learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and
other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications, please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


