London Borough of Ealing
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 13 June 2016 to 7 July 2016
Report published: 26 August 2016

Childrens services in Ealing are good

Good

permanence

Good


Good


Outstanding


Good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Ealing are good. Senior leaders and elected members show
aspirations, passion and commitment to improve childrens lives. Building on the
safeguarding and children looked after inspections of 2011, services continue to be
good and some, such as those for care leavers, are outstanding.
Corporate parenting is outstanding, showing real passion, ambition and creativity to
ensure that children reach their full potential. The regular and effective engagement
with children by leaders and elected members is central to service development and
enhances their knowledge of front-line practice. Corporate parenting responsibilities
are well embedded at all levels across the partnership. Leaders are ambitious to
develop services further through the implementation of the Brighter Futures
programme. This intensive multi-agency working is showing early signs of success
and has been well received by staff, children and families.
Performance management is strong at strategic and operational levels. Management
oversight, monitoring arrangements and supervision provide clear guidance to
workers regarding progression of actions and timescales. However, the local
authority does not systematically collate and analyse data on the numbers of children
and families attending child protection conferences and core groups, whether
advocacy is offered and accepted, and the impact of these experiences. Alongside
this, child protection conference chairs are not able to show clearly how they
escalate concerns and what impact this has for children and families.
Senior managers are taking effective action to improve the recruitment and retention
of staff. The local authority works with Frontline, a social work training agency, and
offers Step up to social work, both of which support the recruitment of newly
qualified social workers. Ealing also collaborates with other London boroughs to
address high numbers of agency workers through measures such as pay capping.
Many of Ealings agency workers have been in post for several years due to the high
staff morale, manageable caseloads and the valued supervision and support from
managers.
Children and families benefit from a wide range of early help services. Referrals to
the Ealing childrens integrated response service (ECIRS) are managed effectively
with thorough assessment of risk, clear decision making and management oversight.
There is a good range of support services for children and families living in
households with domestic violence, mental health concerns and substance misuse.
Thresholds are well understood and applied across partnerships, but arrangements
to investigate allegations of abuse or poor practice against professionals are not
sufficiently robust. Notifications of private fostering arrangements are low, and
activities to raise awareness have had limited impact.
Strong partnership working ensures that multi-agency practice is strong in
addressing the needs of children missing from home, care or education, at risk of


sexual exploitation, radicalisation, gang affiliation and female genital mutilation. The
profile of children at risk of child sexual exploitation is well understood, with
interventions and disruption activities carried out alongside awareness raising within
local communities. The quality of return home interviews is too variable.
Effective multi-agency working supports families on the edge of care. When children
become looked after, decisions are appropriate, based on thorough assessments and
with effective and timely use of legal planning meetings and the Public Law Outline.
Permanence planning commences swiftly for those children who cannot return home,
with regular management oversight to prevent drift and delay. Children who do
return home do so after thorough assessment and planning, and with support.
Effective social work practice, which is monitored and overseen by managers, is
leading to good outcomes for children. Children are seen regularly, listened to and
their wishes and feelings are well recorded. However, in a small number of cases,
social workers are not spending enough time with children to develop trusting
relationships.
Despite mainly good outcomes for children, assessments and plans show some
variation in quality. Diversity is not always well explored and most plans are not
sufficiently specific, timely or focused on outcomes. The quality of child permanence
reports is improving, but many do not contain relevant and detailed information for
children to gain a real sense of their birth family and history.
The needs of children looked after are well met for those children living in or outside
of the borough. Health needs are addressed well. The psychology service for children
looked after has a real impact on improving childrens emotional well-being. Most
children live in stable, well-supported placements. However, two thirds of children
looked after live outside of the borough, due to a shortage of foster carers. The
Horizons education and achievement centre is outstanding in assisting children to
transform their lives and increase their knowledge and skills, aspirations and self
esteem. The centre offers an accessible, inclusive safe haven for children looked
after and care leavers for as long as it is needed. Some work of the virtual school
team with designated teachers in schools is exceptional in improving outcomes.
Adoption services are good, with staff being tenacious in pursing adoption for
children. Matching is well considered, but too many children move in with adopters
without a life story book or later life letter and do not understand the reasons why
they cannot live with their birth families. Post-adoption support is a strength, with
good support offered to children, adopters and birth families.
Services for care leavers are outstanding. Staff remain in touch with large numbers
of care leavers and most care leavers live in suitable accommodation. Health needs
are addressed and high numbers are in education, employment and training. Care
leavers gain independence skills, succeed and become role models, learning mentors
and advocates for others. Their voice is clearly heard and incorporated into service
delivery.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)




Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection


The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two childrens homes. Both were judged to be good
at their most recent Ofsted inspections.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
May 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in May 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since August 2015.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services and public health services.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since April 2016.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 80,700 children under the age of 18 years live in Ealing. This is
 Approximately 23% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 14.5% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 17.0% (the national average is 13.9%)
 Children from minority ethnic groups account for 64.5% of all children living in
the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children in the area are Indian and Black
African.
 The proportion of children who speak English as an additional language:
 in primary schools is 64% (the national average is 19%).
 in secondary schools is 54% (the national average is 15%).

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data, where this was available.


 Sixty-one per cent (32,573) of pupils in Ealing schools do not speak English as
their first language.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2016, 5,536 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 March 2016, 306 children were the subject of a child protection plan. This is
a reduction from 364 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 March 2016, nine children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from 11 at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, nine serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted, one serious case review has been completed and one was ongoing at
the time of the inspection. The local authority is contributing to two serious case
reviews in other local authorities.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2016, 372 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 46 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 355 (44 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015.
Of this number:
authority area
 four live in residential special schools,3 of whom all live out of the
authority area
area
 eight live with parents, of whom one lives out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 11 adoptions


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


returned to be looked after
 one young person ceased to be looked after and moved on to
independent living
multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Improve the designated officer arrangements to investigate allegations of
abuse or poor practice by professionals.


Ensure that all assessments and care plans are of a consistently high standard
and that care plans are easy for children to understand.


Improve the quality of children in need and child protection plans so that they
are sufficiently thorough and detailed to enable children and their families to
understand what they have to do to achieve positive outcomes.


Ensure that when children go missing from care, return home interviews are
consistently well recorded and that the information gathered is used
effectively to safeguard children, both individually and collectively.


Ensure that social workers spend enough time with children to develop
positive and trusting relationships, and that changes of social worker are kept
to a minimum.


Improve childrens participation in child protection conferences and core
groups by strengthening advocacy arrangements. Collate feedback from
families, children and child protection advisers about the effectiveness of the
help provided to further strengthen and inform practice.


Improve awareness raising of private fostering across the partnership and
wider community.


Ensure that all children are helped to understand and make sense of their
personal histories and the events that led to them becoming looked after,
including through timely life story work.


Ensure that there are sufficient numbers of foster carers, with the right skills,
knowledge and experience, to meet the current and future demand for foster
placements.


Ensure that quality assurance mechanisms are sufficiently rigorous so that
important issues such as allegations against professionals and private
fostering arrangements are fully reviewed.


Summary for children
 Services for children in Ealing are good, and the service for care leavers is
outstanding.
 Managers and council leaders are determined to provide good services for
children and families, and they are doing a good job.
 When people report that they are worried about children, staff act quickly to help
keep children safe.
 Most social workers meet children regularly and spend a lot of time with them to
find out what their lives are like and what worries them. This helps social workers
to make the right decisions for the children whom they work with.
 Children and families get the help and support that they need when they are not
managing well or are having difficulties.
 Social workers, police officers, teachers, foster carers and many other people all
understand what they need to do to keep children safe if they go missing or if
they are at risk of sexual exploitation.
 When children cannot live at home, the right decisions are made by social
workers. Children are placed with people who look after them well and help them
to do well in their education and hobbies.
 The Horizons centre is excellent at helping children to succeed in education, and
to develop skills and interests. Young people help and support each other. They
make friends, feel safe and have fun.
 Senior managers and leaders are outstanding corporate parents. This is because
they meet regularly with children to hear about what works well and what needs
improving. They are interested in childrens lives and do whatever they can to
help children to do well, stay healthy, learn and enjoy themselves.
 Social workers work hard to find the right family for children who can no longer
live with their own families. Some children do not have enough information about
their life stories when they are adopted or are placed away from home.
 Young people leaving care receive an outstanding service. Staff keep in touch
with them to provide plenty of help and support to keep healthy, stay in
education or find a job. They help them in finding somewhere to live which is
safe and offer support in learning how to live independently and manage their
own lives.
 Managers and leaders want to improve services further, with workers from
different backgrounds such as health, education and youth work all working well
together in the same teams to help children and families.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Most children and their families are helped to achieve positive outcomes due to
effective and well-coordinated services. Well-embedded and wide-ranging accessible
early help services, reflecting the diverse needs of local communities, provide welltargeted help and support.
Children referred to social care are appropriately and effectively managed by Ealing
childrens integrated response service (ECIRS). Information sharing is timely and
risks are assessed well. The multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) provides
thorough analysis and decision making for higher-risk referrals.
Thresholds are well embedded and applied consistently in most cases, leading to
proportionate action to protect children. Management decision making and oversight
are strong. Timely and clear direction provided to staff ensures that drift and delay
are avoided, in most cases. Social workers build strong relationships with children
and engage them in purposeful activity.
Timely, thorough and effective multi-agency action is taken to safeguard the large
majority of children who are considered to be at risk of significant harm.
Assessments are of high quality and capture childrens views well, but the analysis
and impact of diversity are more varied. The majority of plans are not sufficiently
thorough or detailed. However, effective oversight by the professional network and
managers ensures that, for most children, positive outcomes are achieved.
Effective arrangements are in place to tackle child sexual exploitation and children
who are missing from home and school. Work to protect children from female genital
mutilation is strong and at the forefront of national practice developments.
Arrangements to respond to 16- and 17-year olds at risk of homelessness are well
understood and implemented effectively.
The small number of children known to the local authority who are privately fostered
are comprehensively assessed and supported. However, arrangements to raise
awareness across the partnership have not been sufficiently well targeted.
Arrangements to investigate allegations of abuse or poor practice by professionals
are not sufficiently robust.


Inspection findings

The local authority and its partners have invested in prevention and early
intervention services. This is making a significant and positive difference in
improving outcomes for many children and their families. There is a wide
range of early help support available to families when needs are first
identified, which is delivered well by a range of services. These include the
family intervention service, the early help and Supportive action for families in
Ealing (SAFE) teams, the family nurse partnership and childrens centres.


Childrens centres offer a range of highly effective services, including bespoke
parenting programmes that have been adapted to meet the needs of a diverse
community. Parents are very positive about the difference that this has made.


Think family plus (TFP) is Ealings response to the Troubled families
initiative, and during the first phase was reported to be successful, with 880
families turned around. The TFP employment offer supports two Department
of Work and Pensions co-located work coaches who offer pre-employment
support, as well as proactively matching individuals with job opportunities.
This work is valued by colleagues and is highly effective in assisting parents to
find work, with all the associated benefits of employment.


The majority of early help assessments and plans (EHAPs) are timely, concise
and reflect the family history and reason for referral. The best assessments
seen capture the experience of the child well, though a few fail to reflect the
childs wishes and feelings fully. In a small minority of cases, targets and
timescales resulting from early help assessments are not sufficiently clear.
Numbers of early help assessments increased by 13% between 201415 and
agencies currently not completing early help assessments.


The SAFE service is comprised of multiple agencies working in a collaborative
manner, with the family at the centre. The service incorporates a range of
professional perspectives to intervene in an effective, transparent and nonstigmatising manner at the earliest opportunity, in order to prevent childrens
needs escalating. This is proving to be successful, resulting in a decrease of
In cases tracked and sampled by inspectors, the level and complexity of work
within these teams is high. The local authority is aware of this and is seeking
additional resources to enhance the support offered.


The well-established Ealing childrens integrated response service (ECIRS)
manages referrals into social care effectively. Information sharing is timely
and understanding of thresholds is well embedded across local partnerships.
Thresholds are consistently applied and proportionate action is taken to
protect children.



A systematic, clear, risk assessment process is consistently applied in ECIRS,
with cases prioritised as blue, green, amber and red. Daily management
decisions on all enquiries and referrals, step up of lower level enquiries and
step down to SAFE and other early help services are thorough and
appropriate. The multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) functions effectively
and efficiently to process and manage the amber-rated cases. The
contributions of experienced police and health colleagues, who provide a clear
overview of all referrals for children and families, are particular strengths.
Decision making by managers for the highest red risk cases is immediate,
leading to transfer within 24 hours to the locality teams, ensuring that children
are safeguarded appropriately.


Arrangements to investigate allegations of abuse or poor practice by
professionals are not sufficiently robust. Thresholds for referring to the
designated officer are not consistently well applied or understood across the
partnership or within social care. Alongside this, mechanisms to monitor
performance in this area are under developed. Inspectors found a lack of
management oversight, fragmented case recording and a poor quality annual
report. (Recommendation)


Outside of working hours, a well-organised emergency duty service is in place,
staffed by experienced social workers. Appropriate responses to child
protection matters are progressed and there is effective coordination with
daytime services.


Social workers build positive and consistent relationships with children. They
see children regularly and alone, and direct work is purposeful and sensitive.
Social workers report that they are well supported and have access to relevant
professional expertise and training to undertake their work effectively.
Caseloads are manageable. Management oversight is thorough and clearly
recorded. Supervision notes detail progress against actions to keep cases on
track. Within the multi-agency support team (MAST), group consultation and
supervision arrangements enhance management oversight.


In cases where children are considered to be at risk of significant harm, child
protection enquiries are timely and proportionate. Strategy meetings for the
large majority of children are held promptly and there is routine use of
complex strategy meetings for children subject to sexual exploitation or going
missing. Step up decisions to progress to initial child protection conferences
(ICPCs) are timely and based on consultations with child protection advisers.
During 201415, 79% of ICPCs were held within 15 days of section 47
enquiries starting, which is similar to statistical neighbours (78%) and London
(71%). For a few children in cases seen, strategy meetings and timeliness of
section 47 enquiries were subject to some delay, but this did not have a
significant impact on outcomes.


For the majority of children and their families who are subject to child
protection plans, risks decrease and good outcomes are achieved. This is due


to strong multi-agency working, regular statutory visits to children, and good
engagement by professionals and parents at core groups and conferences.
Staff and managers are persistent in their attempts to work with families who
are harder to engage and consider how to respond differently or overcome
cultural differences.

Performance data reflects that fewer children are becoming subject to child
protection plans. Current figures show 306 children at 31 March 2016,
compared to 364 at 31 March 2015, which is a similar number to statistical
neighbours. The percentage of children with a second or subsequent plan is
also decreasing. Recent scrutiny by a quality assurance panel of child
protection plans that are open for longer than 18 months is helping staff to
focus on improved outcomes.


Child protection advisers (CPAs) are experienced, and offer a consistent and
timely service to children and their families. The number of child protection
cases reviewed within timescales was 100% in quarter three of 201516.
Conferences are well managed and the strengthening families approach has
led to better parental engagement.


Arrangements for getting feedback from children and families regarding the
effectiveness of the help that they have received or their experiences of child
protection conferences are under developed. Few advocates are used to assist
children in participating at conferences and core groups. Escalation of
professional issues and challenge from CPAs are individually progressed but
not centrally collated, therefore trends and patterns regarding practice issues
are not fully known. (Recommendation)


Children and families who are subject to child in need or child protection plans
benefit from appropriate and extensive services which mitigate against
domestic violence, drug and alcohol and adult mental health issues. Specific
domestic violence workers undertake direct work. Strong practice in the SAFE
team of continuing to work with adults, even if risk escalates to a child in need
or child protection level, offers continuity and the chance for family behaviours
to change. There is effective use of specialists to focus on skilling up the
social care workforce by sharing practice and expertise.


For the large majority of children, high-quality assessments are timely, use
historical information and routinely capture their views. Families are well
engaged and understand what is expected of them in order to evidence
change in behaviours. Some assessments are less strong, as they fail to
address individual needs and lack analysis or engagement with families.


The majority of plans are not sufficiently thorough or detailed to address the
actions and work needed to improve outcomes effectively. Cases show a lack
of contingency planning, detail or specific, measureable and timely actions.
Despite this, oversight by the professional network and managers ensure that,


for most children, positive outcomes are monitored, tracked and subsequently
achieved. (Recommendation)

Children are well protected by strong and effective partnership working.
Regular attendance and participation at all levels of the child protection
system inform decision making, information sharing and joint planning. Multiagency risk assessment conferences (MARAC), multi-agency public protection
arrangements (MAPPA), and other partnership groups are very well attended.
Staff show commitment to collaborate and share expertise to manage risks
and improve outcomes for children and families.


Arrangements to support children with disabilities are comprehensive. The colocation of education, health and other specialist services enables positive
information sharing. Child protection thresholds are well understood and
applied. Investigations are completed within the team to ensure consistency of
worker as well as management oversight. In most cases, assessments and
plans are of adequate or better quality, with timely reviewing mechanisms in
place. The intensive therapeutic short-breaks service is a particular strength.
This work ensures that children on the edge of care and their families receive
well-targeted support and a break, as well as advice on coping strategies and
behaviour management techniques.


New ways of working with children and their families within the MAST teams
make a positive difference to outcomes. For some children on the edge of
care, the multi-agency approach and intense work had achieved positive
change, where previously no improvements had been made.


Significant progress has been made to tackle child sexual exploitation and to
respond to children who go missing from home. Children who are missing are
appropriately and effectively identified. In cases seen by inspectors, return
home interviews were used effectively to reduce risk and inform planning.


Swift identification, robust monitoring and tracking are in place for children
who go missing from school. Reporting by schools is clear and processes are
thorough. The large majority of children missing education for significant
periods of time are located promptly and accounted for. Where serious
concerns are expressed by schools or the local authority, protocols are well
known and cases accelerated to the ECIRS and, ultimately, the children
missing multi-agency panel, if necessary.


Currently, 185 children are being electively home educated. The local
authority has tight procedures in place, and schools make notifications as soon
as they are aware that children are being removed from school to be home
educated. Data is routinely updated and scrutinised by the children missing
from education team. Guidance is issued to all home educators, and families
are encouraged to cooperate and engage, particularly with regard to health
and safety and safeguarding procedures. Most parents cooperate with the


initial home visit, but if there are concerns about the safety and well-being of
children the local authority takes swift action to address them.

The recent appointment of a child sexual exploitation and missing coordinator
has been effective in improving awareness of child sexual exploitation in the
community, and particularly with schools.


Children who are at risk of sexual exploitation are properly supported and
protected by the use of complex strategy meetings, risk assessments and
multi-agency plans. A strong and committed multi-agency sexual exploitation
(MASE) panel works well to ensure that child sexual exploitation is
appropriately profiled and that children are safeguarded effectively.
Governance arrangements are appropriate. There are strong links with the
police, youth service and MARAC, including detailed and specific work linking
child sexual exploitation with gang members and activities. This results in
good information sharing and a well-coordinated and fast response to
identified risks. For example, the police were effective in closing down a local
hotel known to be a hotspot for child sexual exploitation.


Work to protect children from female genital mutilation is strong, effectively
prioritised and at the forefront of national practice developments. Data
reporting by health professionals is well embedded and 150 school staff are
now trained. Awareness raising is beginning to show positive results, as police
referrals have increased to 15 in the last year.


Children who are privately fostered are comprehensively assessed and
supported. A coordinated, multi-disciplinary response to private fostering is
delivered through the private fostering development group. While responses
regarding individual children are mostly robust, arrangements to raise
awareness across the partnership and wider community have not been fully
developed. For example, independent schools, hard-to-reach community
groups and some faith groups have not been sufficiently targeted. The annual
report on private fostering is not comprehensive and does not report on
performance information, for example the timeliness and quality of
assessments or the frequency of social work visits. It also fails to provide a
good analysis of the effectiveness of awareness raising. (Recommendation)


Arrangements to respond to 16- and 17- year olds at risk of homelessness are
set out within a clear protocol. Thresholds are well understood, and young
people receive a swift and decisive response to their need for accommodation.
Most young people are placed in supported accommodation with on-site
assistance available.


The population of Ealing is highly diverse and there are higher numbers of
children from minority ethnic groups with children in need plans and child
protection plans. Professionals are aware of this and understand that this is
due in part to the complex needs of new families arriving in Ealing, large
families within some cultural groups and the impact of deprivation.



Within the work seen by inspectors, there was variable practice in the
understanding and analysis of the impact of diversity. For some children, it is
strongly and sensitively reflected, with the use of interpreters and community
links to enhance workers understanding of different cultural backgrounds.
Conversely, for other children, the impact of culture and religion, family and
community beliefs are not fully explored. In some cases, the lack of availability
of interpreters delays the progression of work. Identity issues for White British
children are not well explored or recorded.


The partnership approach to prevent children from being drawn into terrorism
is well established. Cases referred to the Channel panel are appropriate and
show that connections are being made to child sexual exploitation, children
going missing, female genital mutilation and gang involvement. For cases not
deemed appropriate for Channel, consideration is given to referral to the
vulnerable adolescents panel. All referrals are assessed in the ECIRS by staff
who have training in identifying and responding to risk. The schools adviser
for Prevent works effectively with schools to support early identification of
risk.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Children are well looked after, whether they live in Ealing or are placed elsewhere.
The local authority is delivering improved health, education and emotional well-being
outcomes for children.
Arrangements to safeguard and protect children on the edge of care are effective.
Good use is made of the Public Law Outline to effect change or, where it is not
possible for children to live safely with their birth parents, to secure permanent
alternatives for them with minimum delay. Thresholds are applied appropriately.
Children do not become looked after unnecessarily.
Most children live in settled, stable family placements, are seen regularly and are
listened to. Care plans, which are informed by childrens wishes and feelings, are
regularly reviewed. The vast majority of reviews are timely, with high levels of
participation by children. Children are helped to understand their rights and know
how to complain.
Foster carers talk very positively about the support and supervision that they receive,
particularly from the psychology service for children looked after which, by providing
effective wrap-around support, is helping to increase placement stability. However, a
shortfall in local foster placements means that currently two-thirds of children looked
after are living outside of the borough.
The quality of assessments and care plans is variable. The impact of diversity in the
lives of children is not always fully explored and life story work is not always timely.
In a small number of cases, the quality and timeliness of management challenge,
including the challenge provided by independent reviewing officers, are not
sufficiently rigorous or robust. Return home interviews are not consistently well
recorded.
The two Children in Care Councils are lively, well established, have extensive reach
and are increasingly influential.
The local authority is tenacious in pursuing adoption for children where this is
considered to be in their best interests. Progress in achieving permanence is robustly
monitored. Assessments of prospective adopters are thorough and clearly identify
what applicants have to offer children who need adoptive families.
The support that care leavers receive is outstanding. The vast majority of care
leavers live in suitable accommodation, are supported to develop their independent
living skills, are encouraged to aim high and to do well in education, employment or
training, and have comprehensive information about their health histories.


Inspection findings

The vast majority of children become looked after as a result of timely and
proportionate decisions based on a thorough assessment of their needs and
circumstances, and then only with the explicit approval of a senior manager.
The legal planning panel maintains rigorous and effective management
oversight, regularly and systematically reviewing progress to avoid drift or
delay. Only those children who need to be looked after come into care.


The Public Law Outline is used effectively and well. Legal planning meetings
carefully consider whether and when to initiate legal proceedings. Preproceedings letters are clear and unambiguous, ensuring that parents and
carers understand the issues and concerns, as well as the likely consequences,
if change is not achieved.


Good use is made of family group conferences to explore family-based
solutions for children and families. The kinship team promptly assesses
extended family members or friends as potential long-term carers for children
who are unable to live safely with their birth parents. Early planning for
children includes consideration of special guardianship and child arrangement
orders. Parallel plans are used well to ensure that children achieve
permanence with minimum delay.


Social workers produce good quality assessments and reports which are
accepted by the courts. Effective working relationships with the Child and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), the family courts and
the local family justice board, and good use of legal case managers have
enabled the local authority to reduce the average length of care proceedings.
In quarter four of 201516, the average length of care proceedings was 28
weeks, two weeks shorter than the London average. This means that children
are not waiting longer than is necessary for key decisions to be made.


When children return home, either following a period of accommodation under
section 20 or as a result of a decision made by the court, they do so with
good support and effective safeguards in place. Reunification is a product of
thorough assessments and careful planning including, in most cases,
comprehensive contingency planning. In the vast majority of cases, these
placements are successful, and few children become looked after for a second
time.


Most children looked after are seen at regular intervals in line with statutory
guidance. Social workers use a range of different methods to communicate
with children in order to make sense of what they are thinking and feeling.
Childrens wishes and feelings are well recorded. However, foster carers have
noted lack of continuity for some children in teams which have experienced
frequent staff changes. Additionally, some social workers are not spending
enough time with children in order to get to know and understand them
properly. On occasion, this leaves children feeling isolated or alone. The local


authority is addressing this with its continued investment in the Brighter
Futures programme, which includes a reduction in social workers caseloads
and thus provides more time for developing relationships with children.
(Recommendation)

Children, including children with disabilities, are helped to understand their
rights, know how to complain and have ready access to good quality advocacy
support. In 201516, 59 children were supported by advocates to participate
in their reviews. The local authority takes childrens complaints seriously.
Although most complaints are resolved informally, the corporate parenting
panel carefully considers the implications for policy and practice of the lessons
learned from complaints.


Strong partnership working between schools, the youth service, childrens
social care, foster carers and placement providers ensures that children are
safeguarded and protected from bullying, including cyber-bullying,
homophobia and hate crime.


Good awareness of child sexual exploitation, and the risks associated with
children going missing from care mean that, when issues and concerns are
identified, strategy meetings are used effectively to share information and
develop appropriate protective responses. However, although return home
interviews are being offered and/or completed in the majority of cases, they
are not being consistently well recorded. Recognising this, the local authority
has set up a group to consider how best to record return home interviews and
collate and use the information generated by them. (Recommendation)


Whether they live in the borough or elsewhere, children looked after who
misuse substances receive appropriate help and support. Last year, 36
children looked after and care leavers were identified as needing an
intervention ranging from targeted advice to a treatment programme.


The number of children looked after who are in receipt of a custodial sentence
has fallen from 5% in 201314 to 3.5% in 201415. All but one of the 10
young people who are currently serving custodial sentences became looked
after by virtue of their age at the point at which they were remanded. While
they are in custody, young people receive good support. A dedicated worker
for children looked after in the youth justice service ensures that there are
good links and regular communication with social work teams.


The local authority and its partners are conscientious in ensuring that the
health needs of children looked after, regardless of where they are living, are
identified and addressed. The timeliness of initial and annual health
assessments (92% and 97% respectively), dental checks (92%) and
immunisations (94%) has improved significantly. A monthly health panel,
attended by health and social care representatives, ensures that the individual
health needs of children looked after are monitored and tracked effectively.



The local authority is equally responsive to the emotional well-being and
mental health needs of children looked after. Ninety-four per cent of strengths
and difficulties questionnaires (SDQs) are completed within timescales. Team
managers are required to review, at regular three-monthly intervals, the case
of every single child looked after to identify whether they have any significant,
unmet emotional needs. The multidisciplinary SDQ and emotional well-being
panel (SEW) use this information to ensure that children, looked after in
Ealing or elsewhere, receive a timely and effective response. Waiting times for
access to child and adolescent mental health services in the borough are
good, at between six and eight weeks maximum.


The educational progress and attainment of children looked after are given a
high priority. The virtual school head provides strong strategic leadership. The
virtual school is effective in monitoring, tracking and promoting the
attendance, progress and attainment of children looked after. Some of the
work done by the virtual school team with designated teachers in schools for
children looked after, both in and out of the borough, is outstanding. This
ensures that there is a strong focus on improving outcomes for children
looked after. Headteachers speak very highly of the quality of training,
support and guidance provided by the virtual school team and the difference
that it is making.


Attainment at key stage 2 is strong, particularly in mathematics and reading,
and the gap between children looked after and their peers has narrowed. This
is now in line with all children nationally. Children do less well at secondary
school. This is largely because a disproportionately high number of children
looked after aged between 14 and 16 years require significant additional
learning support in response to identified special educational needs or, having
come in to care later, have complex emotional and behavioural needs. As a
consequence, the numbers achieving five GCSEs at A* to C including English
and mathematics are low. A clear strategy is in place to improve attainment at
key stage 3 and key stage 4.


The virtual school head closely scrutinises the use by schools of the ringfenced pupil premium plus grant. This ensures that the funding is used
appropriately, and often creatively, to motivate children and target their
specific learning needs.


Nearly all children looked after attend good or better schools. Excellent
recording and monitoring systems not only rigorously track progress and
achievement, but also record attendance. Close attention is paid to punctuality
and absences, ensuring that there is a swift response if, and when, concerns
arise. Current data shows consistently high levels of attendance by children
looked after, in and out of the borough.


Those children who cannot attend a mainstream school are placed in a range
of alternative provision. Robust commissioning arrangements and regular
visits by local authority officers ensure that all such provision is rigorously


quality assured. All children have at least 25 hours of education per week,
unless there are clearly assessed reasons for a more bespoke programme of
education.

The quality of personal education plans (PEP) is good or better in most cases.
Most children looked after already have a PEP. Plans are in place to ensure
that, by the end of the 2016 summer term, every child or young person, from
early years to key stage 5, will have a PEP.


The highly successful My education mentoring scheme is encouraging
increasing numbers of care leavers to become learning mentors to younger
children in care. Inspired by the success of care leavers, many of whom are
studying at university, children are encouraged and supported to believe in
themselves, aim high and develop the skills and knowledge that they need to
succeed.


Children looked after are encouraged and supported to participate in social
and recreational activities. Where necessary, the local authority provides
additional funding, over and above the childs element of the fostering
allowance, to enable children, for example, to join the cadets or take up
boxing.


The large majority of children live in stable family placements. Most
placements are of a good standard and are meeting childrens needs.
Delegated authority is clearly addressed in childrens and young peoples initial
placement plans. The percentage of children who have had three or more
placement moves within the last 12 months has fallen from 11.7% in 201314
to 8.5% to the end of December 2015.


The Connect team, which works intensively with children looked after,
provides good wrap-around support to placements, particularly to those
involving children with complex needs or whose behaviour can be challenging.
Currently, 71 children have a named worker from the psychology team for
children looked after. Many more are being helped indirectly, as a result of the
training that the team provides, and the individual and group consultation that
it is able to offer. Foster carers speak very positively about the Connect team
and the support from the psychology service, and are able to give practical
examples of their impact.


The quality of care plans, and of the assessments on which they are based, is
variable. Half of those seen by inspectors required improvement. Recognising
this, the local authority is in the process of reviewing its childcare planning
template. Care plans are subject to regular scrutiny by one of two panels, one
focusing on children looked after and the other on care leavers. This ensures
that the quality and effectiveness of placements and packages of support are
being continuously monitored. Although placement disruptions, including
disruptions involving adoption placements, are relatively rare, learning from
them is systematically used to inform future practice. (Recommendation)



Social workers actively ensure that, in most cases, contact with parents,
brothers and sisters and extended family members is carefully assessed, wellmaintained and reviewed appropriately. However, some foster carers are
critical of the level of communication with the supervised contact centre, not
least because of the potentially devastating impact on children when parents
or brothers and sisters repeatedly fail to turn up for pre-arranged contact
visits.


Lack of sufficient local foster placements, particularly for brothers and sisters
and older children, means that two-thirds of the looked after population are
living out of borough. Currently, too many children looked after are living
away from their home area. (Recommendation)


Processes and procedures for the recruitment, assessment and approval of
foster carers are robust. However, although the local authority is making good
use of the skills, knowledge and experience of existing foster carers as part of
a fostering recruitment campaign, none of the 56 expressions of interest that
this has generated to date has progressed to an assessment.


Foster carers are well supervised and supported. They speak very positively
about the support that they receive from their supervising social workers,
particularly at times of crisis. Foster carers, including kinship carers, have
good access to a comprehensive range of high-quality training. This includes,
for example, training on nurturing attachment. Annual reviews are timely and
robust. The retention of foster carers is good.


The local authority is rigorous in its pursuit of permanence for children, in
whatever shape or form that might take. The legal planning panel routinely
reviews the case of every child who has come into care as part of a voluntary
agreement eight weeks after they become looked after. The permanency
panel ensures that permanency plans are robust and that progress in
achieving permanency is maintained. The number of cases identified by the
permanency panel, where there are concerns either about the robustness of
the permanency plan or about the speed with which permanency is being
achieved, has fallen from 29 in May to 17 in June this year.


A group of strong, committed and experienced independent reviewing officers
act as passionate advocates for children and, in most cases, offer appropriate
challenge. The timeliness of reviews is good, as is the level of participation by
children. In the period April to December 2015, 94.6% of reviews were
completed on time. By the end of February 2016, that figure had risen to
participated in their review.


In a small number of cases, the quality and timeliness of management
challenge, including the challenge provided by independent reviewing officers,
are not sufficiently rigorous or robust. On occasion, this has contributed to
drift or delay. Additionally, life story work is not always timely, which makes it


difficult for some children to understand their long-term plan or why they are
in care. The local authority has taken action to address this. In October last
year, it organised a conference for social workers, foster carers and
independent reviewing officers on the importance of life story work in
preparing children for independence. (Recommendation)

The two Children in Care Councils are strong, dynamic and influential. This
reflects the excellent support and encouragement that the Junior Council and
the Horizons Shoutout Council receive. As well as undertaking a survey
involving over 140 children, the results of which are being used to shape and
inform the development and delivery of services, both councils have been
actively involved in developing age-appropriate information for children about
their rights and what it means to be looked after.


The impact of diversity in the lives of children is not always fully explored. In
some cases where children are living in residential or foster placements which
do not reflect their ethnic and/or cultural background, insufficient
consideration is given to making sure that they are helped to develop a
rounded understanding of their heritage and identity.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good


Adoption is considered for all children unable to return home to their families.
This includes children over the age of five years, brothers and sisters, children
from minority ethnic groups and those with complex health needs. Eleven
children were adopted during 201516, which is a slight increase from the 10
adoptions during 201415. Ealing is one of eight London boroughs and two
voluntary adoption agencies that constitute the West London adoption and
permanence consortium. Numbers of adoptions remain low across the
consortium but, within this, Ealing has achieved the second highest number of
adoptions for the past two years.


The number of children leaving care on special guardianship orders has risen
over recent years, but dropped to 22 during 201516. This is a reduction from
figure is declining, it mirrors the increase in the number of older children
becoming subject to care proceedings. During 201516, 13 children aged 15
or 16 years became subject to care proceedings, compared with only one in
the same age group during 201415. These older children are less likely to be
considered for adoption or other permanence options.


Adoption managers effectively monitor children with an adoption plan through
six-weekly permanency planning meetings. These commence as soon as an
adoption plan is considered at the second looked after child review or, in some
cases earlier, if there has been recent involvement with the family.



The local authority has been successful in recruiting a range of adopters with
diverse backgrounds to meet the needs of children waiting for adoption.
Twenty-four adopters were waiting for a match at the time of the inspection,
and some of these are second-time adopters with Ealing. A recruitment
strategy has recently been revised and targets adopters willing to take
children who are harder to place. Adopters are prepared and trained to a
high standard, with the prospective adopter reports (PARs) evidencing a
consistently high quality of assessment. The needs of previously adopted or
birth children in the family are fully considered. Panel reports show that, for
most cases, timescales for completing the two-stage assessment process are
not met, but most are prolonged at the request of the prospective adopters or
due to delays in receiving checks from abroad. Adopters who spoke to
inspectors were positive regarding their experience of adopting through
Ealing. Despite having a choice of nearby boroughs to approach, many
adopters said they would recommend Ealing to others.


Adopters are well supported by the adoption team while they wait for the right
match. The use of the Adoption Register and Link Matters are promoted to
increase adopters potential for a match. Foster to adopt and concurrency are
discussed with every adopter as part of their assessment, and a small number
are willing to consider foster to adopt arrangements. The first foster to
adopt placement since 2013 was made during the inspection, with a further
two matches planned. Post-approval training is also provided to enhance
adopters understanding and ability to meet the needs of children with more
complex needs.


Managers and staff demonstrate a strong commitment to securing adoption,
and are tenacious in seeking placements for older children, brothers and
sisters and those with complex needs. At the time of the inspection, five
children were waiting to be matched. Of these, one child had a parallel plan
for reunification and a family group of three had a potential match. Adoption
social workers take a lead role in family finding and have a comprehensive
knowledge of those adopters waiting. Due to the complexity of some
childrens needs, it can take some time to secure a successful match, but
social workers do not give up in their efforts to find families.


The adoption scorecard for 201215 shows that children in Ealing waited on
average 517 days between entering care and being placed for adoption. This
is better than the England average of 593 days, but is 30 days outside of the
national scorecard threshold of 487 days. Performance figures reflect the time
that the local authority takes to find families for those children who are
harder to place.


In the period April to December 2015, 75% of children were adopted within
show that the average number of days between the local authority receiving
court authority to place a child and deciding on a match was 200 days. This is


better than the England average of 223 days, but outside of the national
threshold of 121 days.

Child permanence reports (CPRs) are variable in quality. The local authority
has taken steps to improve this by introducing a new report format in January
workers offer advice to social workers on completing CPRs and this, combined
with effective quality assurance from the independent panel adviser, is having
a positive impact.


Matching between children and adopters is thorough, with matching reports
and support plans of a high quality. Managers monitor the progress of
matches through supervision, with reasons for any delays clearly recorded.
Life appreciation days assist adopters to gain and understand childrens
histories and their needs. This preparation ensures that adopters feel
equipped and supported to meet the challenges of placements. The low
numbers of disruptions suggest that matching is effective.


Seven children have had a decision changed away from adoption during the
past year, and all were appropriate.


In cases seen by inspectors, not all children were well prepared for adoption.
Examples were seen of creative direct work being completed by some social
workers, but delays in providing life story books and later life letters are not
assisting children and adopters to understand childrens histories and the
reasons why they cannot live with their birth families. In one case of an older
child, the lack of a life story book had an impact on the adopters ability to
answer some fundamental questions for the child, resulting in additional
support being required from the adoption team. The adoption team is
compensating for the lack of life story books and later life letters by
completing these as part of support packages. Some examples seen of life
story books and later life letters were of a high standard, with information
provided in an accessible format for children. (Recommendation)


Post-adoption work is a strength in Ealing. The local authority has made a
number of successful applications to the adoption support fund to secure
funding for commissioned services such as therapeutic support. The adoption
support team assists families waiting for services by the use of educational
psychologists, mentors for adopted children and funding for respite care. At
the time of the inspection, Ealing was supporting 40 adoptive families and
using the services of 18 providers. Adopters spoke highly of the support
received and of the level of communication from the local authority
throughout the process.


The local authority also supports 136 letter box arrangements, with the
adoption support team helping birth families to produce letters when required.
Ealing also commissions a service providing an outreach surgery once a month


for birth families requiring advice and support, as well as adults who have
been adopted.

The adoption panel is well managed, appropriately constituted and with a
diverse membership who bring a range of knowledge and skills to the
meetings. The independent panel adviser provides information and challenge,
where needed, and feedback from adopters and workers attending panel
contributes to the panels quality assurance process. The panel chair provides
six-monthly reports to the local authority; these provide a comprehensive
overview of panel activity and learning points regarding cases presented.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is outstanding


Services for care leavers in Ealing are outstanding. Care leaving staff maintain
a clear focus supporting care leavers to make decisions about their lives that
will keep them safe and will help them achieve their full potential. The team is
experienced and culturally diverse, reflecting the cohort of young people well.
Staff convey real passion and pride in their work and in the young people
whom they serve. Strong relationships between staff and young people are
built on mutual respect and trust. This is borne out by the fact that the service
is in contact with all but two care leavers. Young people talked enthusiastically
about the high quality of care and help that they had received from their key
workers and personal advisers. One 20-year-old said: The workers are
awesome. Nothing is too much trouble  they really get how I feel and how
things dont always work out for me.


Most care leavers are in suitable accommodation and are receiving excellent
advice, support and guidance to help them move positively towards
independence. High numbers (68%) of younger care leavers are choosing to
stay in care at their 18th birthday and currently 28 are requesting to stay put
with their foster carers.


Pathway plans are comprehensive and are very well targeted. Risk is carefully
assessed to ensure that care leavers feel safe and stay safe. Reviews are
timely and plans demonstrate very good engagement of young people
wherever they live in the country, each one ensuring that their wishes,
feelings and aspirations are clearly expressed. Plans and assessments are
regularly reviewed and updated to reflect changes in circumstances and
actions taken to address individual needs. Management oversight is robust
and decisions are regularly scrutinised by managers in supervision and in
reflective practice sessions, which workers value highly.


Care leavers health needs are thoughtfully and frequently reviewed. A
minority have highly complex needs and high-level resourcing has been


provided by the borough to ensure that these individuals receive the most
appropriate care, and that transitions into adult services are clear and
efficient. Planning for transition to adult services is very well managed and has
been further enhanced with quarterly professionals meetings to review each
case forensically, to ensure that the best outcomes can be achieved. A
growing number of care leavers have mental health needs. In response, the
service has worked diligently to ensure that young people have very good
access to a range of health and well-being services, including targeted
psychology, therapeutic and counselling services.

Health needs are considered consistently in reviews and assessment meetings,
and services are very well signposted and used. For example, care leavers are
aware of and access local genito-urinary medicine clinics, drug and alcohol
services and family planning clinics when necessary. Care leavers have been
actively involved in the review of a health passport. A care leaver summary
has been added to the health records of all care leavers, and this provides
young people and future health providers with a clear and concise overview of
young peoples health needs throughout their journey in care.


Care leavers are routinely encouraged to aim high and to do well in education,
employment or training. The local authority is highly ambitious for its care
leavers and its ongoing commitment to significant funding contributes to very
good outcomes for a growing number. In 201415, of 214 care leavers aged
(EET). This is higher than comparators and the national average of 48%. Of
these, 20% (43) are still in higher education. This is high, and well above the
national average of 6%. This is set to improve further in the next academic
year.


Vocational programmes have also been prioritised and an increasing number
of pre-employment training schemes are available to care leavers through the
local authority. These are highly effective in preparing care leavers for
apprenticeships and further training. Ten care leavers are currently in
apprenticeships in the borough, three of whom are with the local authority,
and all have completed pre-employment courses prior to accessing
apprenticeship placements. Forty-seven care leavers are unaccompanied
minors and are taking courses in English as a second language or access to
learning programmes at local colleges.


The local authority closely monitors those care leavers who are not in
education, employment or training (NEET), including those who live outside of
the borough. Thirty-three per cent (70) were reported to be NEET, which is
below its comparators and the national average of 39%. All those who are
NEET are closely tracked and, where possible, signposted to the post-16
virtual school teacher and the personal adviser at the Horizons centre for
individual support, advice and guidance. They are encouraged to participate in
bespoke programmes brokered through Horizons and delivered by training
providers locally so that they can improve their functional skills in English and


mathematics and, ultimately, access to employment. Care leaver learning
mentors work as influential advocates and positive role models, particularly
with the NEET cohort, encouraging their peers to follow their example and to
get involved. One 21-year-old care leaver said: Its really good that I can turn
up here (at Horizons) at any time, including the weekend, and someone will
be there to listen to me or make me a drink and help me sort out a problem.

Key workers attached to semi-independent housing in and out of the borough
are also very active in supporting those who are NEET to plan towards positive
outcomes.

authority to find the right accommodation match for care leavers in and out of
borough. The large majority (81%) of 19- to 21-year old care leavers are in
suitable accommodation including foster care and semi-independent housing,
and independent living with tenancies, supported lodgings or supported
hostels. New foster placements for care leavers are more difficult to find, even
though demand remains high. The remaining care leavers (19%) are either in
custody or are no longer requiring accommodation. No one is in bed and
breakfast accommodation. Risk and protective factors regarding a young
persons safety and well-being are given precedence in the decision-making
process, and workers go to great lengths to ensure that every young person is
safe and protected from potential harm. Care leavers have a choice of
accommodation, but this is negotiated to ensure that risks and needs are
addressed. Houses of multiple occupation are closely monitored and risk
assessed, with regular announced and unannounced visits. Those care leavers
who have been at risk of sexual exploitation are moved to a location away
from potential risk and where they will receive structured support. Seven had
recently been removed from the child sexual exploitation risk matrix as a
result of successful interventions by the team and partner agencies.
range of supportive life-skills programmes. Managing money, learning to run a
home and developing cooking skills, for example, are compulsory elements of
programmes delivered by accommodation providers across a range of
settings. Additional programmes are offered through the Horizons centre and
all care leavers who are eligible to receive a council tenancy must attend the
compulsory money management scheme, where they learn budgeting, bidding
for and managing a tenancy, and using the leaving care grant. These activities
ensure that all young people become more confident and competent as they
move towards independent living. Young people noted the good support that
they receive to manage their lives, and welcome the visits from their workers.
service very well to complain if they have concerns, particularly when living
out of the borough. They know their entitlements regarding assistance, such
as bursary payments at college, and all are well supported financially into
semi- and independent accommodation, apprenticeship schemes and when


they wish move on to higher education. They are encouraged to be curious,
independent, and to challenge decisions and actions if they believe that they
are detrimental to their well-being. Strong evidence of this was demonstrated
in a number of pathway plans and in discussions with young people. Young
peoples views have been instrumental in developing a learning mentors
programme to ensure that care leavers have a voice and can act as advocates
for others. Some have also become trainee youth workers to assist care
leavers in holiday programmes and activities.
awards ceremony, where they receive awards for progress, achievement and
special accomplishments. They are often requested to come to this event as
motivational speakers. Their personal experiences and life stories are
showcased at conferences in schools, youth centres and in events across the
borough throughout the year. Care leavers who spoke to inspectors were very
determined that their experiences should be shared with others so that
services would continue to improve the life chances for all care leavers.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Effective political and senior leadership ensures the provision of high-quality social
work intervention and services to meet the needs of vulnerable children. Services for
children who need help and protection, children looked after and children who are
adopted are good. Services for care leavers are outstanding. Senior leaders and
elected members know the quality of frontline practice and are committed to
improving services further through the implementation of the Brighter Futures
programme. However, arrangements for investigating allegations against
professionals are not robust, and awareness raising of private fostering
arrangements is not sufficiently comprehensive.
The partnership is mature and communicates and collaborates well, leading to
shared priorities and strong multi-agency practice. Established relationships between
partner agencies enable a confident, strategic response to children at risk of
radicalisation and extremism, sexual exploitation, gang affiliation and female genital
mutilation.
The local authority knows its community well and commissions a number of
effective, accessible services and interventions to meet needs, ranging from early
help to targeted approaches specific to the diverse communities in Ealing.
The local authority is an outstanding corporate parent, ambitious, aspirational and
proactive in championing the needs of children looked after and care leavers.
Corporate parenting is highly effective, innovative and creative, and delivers real
opportunities for children looked after and care leavers to aspire to and reach their
full potential. Children are fully involved in decisions about services through active
and meaningful engagement.
There is a strong performance management culture. Data is used intelligently and
forensically to understand performance. Management oversight is of sufficient
seniority in relation to key decisions made about children. Management supervision
of cases is strong and provides timely and clear guidance to workers, thus avoiding
drift and delay. Effective support helps to resolve issues at the earliest opportunity.
Lessons learned from representations and complaints improve policy and practice,
informed by the experience of young people.
The workforce feels valued and well supported. Staff report that the working
environment, manageable caseloads and effective management support are the
reasons why morale is high. Staff want to and are proud to work for Ealing. The
diversity of the workforce is reflective of the local community.


Inspection findings
children and families in Ealing and strong cross-party political and senior
leadership ensures the provision of high-quality social work intervention and
services to meet the needs of vulnerable children. The leader of the council,
lead member for childrens services, chief executive and the executive director
for children, adults and public health are passionate and knowledgeable about
issues for vulnerable children. Effective scrutiny arrangements hold officers
and elected members to account for delivering high-quality, cost effective
services.
authority and across the partnership that enable strong strategic ownership
and rigour in understanding and addressing key areas of risk. The partnership
is mature and communicates and collaborates well, leading to shared priorities
and strong multi-agency practice.
strategic leaders to prioritise childrens issues in Ealing. The deputy chair of
the HWB is the chair of the clinical commissioning group, demonstrating
strong health commitment across the borough. The HWB receives an annual
report from the schools survey to hear from children about issues important to
them, such as online safety.
services; Housing and Safer Communities; Violence Against Women and Girls;
schools; and police. This provides a confident strategic response to children at
risk of radicalisation and extremism, sexual exploitation, gang affiliation and
female genital mutilation. Committed strategic leads for child sexual
exploitation identify those children most at risk through a multi-agency
problem profile and comprehensive performance management information.
Effective interventions and disruption activity include using tenancy workers,
park rangers, licensing applications, health and safety legislation and close
working with colleagues in the Home Office.
raising and consultation, particularly with schools, resulting in confident
identification of risks. Support and training have increased the use of the risk
matrix, and improved gatekeeping has led to a growing number of young
people identified at risk being appropriately referred to the multi-agency
sexual exploitation (MASE) panel.
clearly identifies specific needs of Ealings population and assesses the
effectiveness and impact of services provided across the partnership. The local
authority knows the local community well and commissions a wide range of
accessible services and interventions to meet needs, from early help to more


targeted approaches specific to the range of communities in Ealing. This
includes domestic violence intervention project (DVIP) perpetrator
programmes; women and girls specialist workers for those at risk or subject
to sexual exploitation; Southall Black Sisters, which works with families who
have no recourse to public funds; and the Somali youth crime project, which
works intensively with young people involved in and at risk of gang-related
activity. Commissioned services are effectively quality assured to ensure that
they continue to meet the needs of children and families.
manager in Ealing, has been successful in improving the quality and quantity
of services through effective collaboration. Successful brokering by WLA
secured a competitive funding formula with independent fostering agencies
that enabled 10 young people to remain with their carers under staying put
arrangements. This provides continuity and stability for young people.
aspirational and proactive in championing the needs of children looked after
and care leavers. The corporate parenting panel, chaired by the leader of the
council, is highly effective, innovative and creative, and delivers real
opportunities for children looked after and care leavers to aspire to and reach
their full potential. Children are fully involved in decisions about services
through active and meaningful engagement. This includes holding meetings at
their venue, the Horizons centre, which enables a relaxed atmosphere in
which to present their views. Children looked after who are placed out of
borough also contribute and give their views directly to the chair of the
corporate parenting panel via a video link. This has resulted in positive
changes for children, such as improved contact arrangements between
brothers and sisters.
public health. This enables effective continuity in safeguarding across the
three directorates. There are close links and joint working between the
executive director, the director of children and families and the Ealing
Safeguarding Children Board (ESCB) chair through regular monthly meetings.
The ESCB chair reports to the chief executive to ensure a clear line of sight
and accountability for effective partnership working for vulnerable children in
Ealing. A newly appointed ESCB chair has brought improved focus and priority
to key areas of multi-agency practice.
and forensically to understand performance across all performance indicators.
A good and clear performance management infrastructure enables monthly
data to be accessible to managers at team level to focus on key areas for
improvements. This enables healthy comparison and shared learning of best
practice between teams. However, key weaknesses are evident in the
oversight of performance with regard to private fostering and the designated
officer service.


shortfalls in practice are identified and acted upon. The quality assurance
annual report 201516 comments on a full range of quality assurance activity,
including external review and senior manager scrutiny. Identified areas for
improvement appropriately reflect aspects of high risk practice areas, for
example, child sexual exploitation and children who go missing, and
encompass feedback from parents and young people. However, during the
inspection, a small number of areas identified for development in an
independent case file audit completed in March 2015 were still evident. These
included better consideration of the impact of the childs ethnicity, culture and
religion, and reflective supervision in line with the supervision policy. In
addition, oversight of the designated officer service has not been sufficiently
comprehensive, meaning that senior managers were not fully aware of the
lack of rigour in the service. (Recommendation)
sufficient seniority and accountability in relation to key decisions made about
children. Management oversight of practice is evident in most cases seen by
inspectors and provides timely and clear guidance to workers in progressing
the case, thus avoiding drift and delay. Case management is generally well
recorded, but not all records meet high practice standards by showing
sufficient detail, analysis and focus on the child. A group supervision observed
by inspectors evidenced consideration of theoretical models, practical ideas
and reflection by the social worker, leading to clear guidance and actions to
support the child and her carers.
support helps to resolve issues at the earliest opportunity. Children have been
instrumental in reviewing and producing high-quality information to support
children looked after and care leavers to know and understand their rights and
to make representation if they are unhappy. Information is available in Braille
and Makaton for children with disabilities and in different languages, where
required. Those who access the Horizons centre are encouraged to raise
issues. Staff trained in conflict resolution and mediation ensure that a large
number of complaints are resolved early. In 201516, almost all complaints
were resolved at stage one. Lessons learned from representations and
complaints inform quarterly reporting to the corporate parent panel, which
considers policy and practice changes that are informed by the experience of
young people.
Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) are effective and positive. The district
judge describes appropriate and timely care applications and good-quality preproceedings work. Social work statements and assessments are robust,
resulting in reduction in the use of expert witnesses. Good international work,
particularly with the Polish embassy, has reduced delays for Polish children
where assessments of family or statutory international checks are required.
Cafcass reports that the local authority is proactive and purposeful in case


management progression and, as a result, current performance has
successfully reduced to 28 weeks in quarter four of 201516, compared to the
London average of 30 weeks.
challenge in Ealing. There is a clear commitment from the leader of the
council to explore opportunities to address the need for affordable housing in
the borough. In order to attract and retain local authority staff, a recent
collaboration with a property developer has seen 28 affordable one-bedroom
flats built for purchase by key workers in the area. This innovative and
creative thinking has yet to demonstrate improved recruitment, retention, and
workforce stability.
memorandum of understanding for 31 London boroughs puts effective
measures in place to provide a consistent approach to standardising
references, quality assuring the agency performance and capping agency
rates. The workforce development strategy, Brighter Futures 201516, sets
out the local authoritys approach to reshape and redesign the social care
workforce, with an emphasis on promoting a culture of listening to children
and families, and working holistically with partners. Existing staff are
enthusiastic regarding this new way of working and it is hoped that it will
encourage staff to take up permanent positions.
and talents of their staff. For staff who meet the required level of competence
and experience, the successful implementation of Brighter Futures has
produced opportunities to apply to be part of phase one of the programme.
However, the transitional arrangements for staff in implementing Brighter
Futures has resulted in an imbalance between permanent and agency staff in
posts. This has created some instability in teams and changes of worker for
children.
and development programme is available for all social work staff. This includes
the implementation of evidence-based training via the family partnership
programme. The local authority is a key partner in Frontline, a social work
training agency, and currently has two Frontline units in place, as well as
supporting Step Up students for the last four years. Support to newly
qualified social workers through the assessed and supported year in
employment is comprehensive, with progress checkpoints at three and six
months being considered by a panel to ensure consistency. Managers attend
workshops to enable effective oversight and support to newly qualified social
workers, who report positively about the help that they receive, opportunities
for co-working and learning from experienced social workers, and protected
caseloads.


inspectors report that the working environment, manageable caseloads and
effective management support are the reasons why morale is high. Staff want
to work for Ealing and are proud to do so. The diversity of the workforce is
reflective of the local community, and staff use their culture and ethnic origins
to build effective relationships with children and their families.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
The Ealing Safeguarding Children Board (ESCB) requires improvement to be good.
The board meets all of its statutory functions as defined in Working Together 2015
and, through its coordination of partnership working, has influence on frontline
practice. It is appropriately constituted to include two lay members. However, it has
carried out its monitoring function with a lack of rigour. This inhibits its ability to
understand the overall effectiveness of safeguarding services fully and to ensure the
coordination of all multi-agency safeguarding functions.
The board has recently appointed a new chair who has identified, with partner
agencies, aspects of the work of the board that require improvement. This includes
proposed consolidation of sub-group structures and, as a priority, revision of the
annual report and business plan.
The ability of the ESCB to act as a critical friend to partner agencies is compromised
by insufficiently broad and rigorous performance monitoring and auditing
arrangements. Although a new multi-agency dataset has recently been agreed,
progress to develop this has been slow and requires refinement.
The inclusion of young people via a shadow board, Young Ealing Safeguarding
(YES), ensures that the childs voice is central to identifying and prioritising the
safeguarding concerns of children, and is a significant strength. The board is active
in ensuring that policies and procedures are in place, and that it influences the
development of practice. These procedures include recent updates regarding female
genital mutilation and the Prevent duty. The threshold guidance is used well and is
embedded. Awareness raising regarding private fostering arrangements is not
sufficiently strong. The ESCB provides effective leadership in tackling child sexual
exploitation at both a strategic level and an operational level. This ensures that work
focuses well on the most vulnerable children.
Training is well regarded by professionals, and is sufficiently broad and focused to
improve practice. There is currently one serious case review (SCR) underway, and
the board can demonstrate the effectiveness of action plans to improve practice
through previous SCRs and learning reviews.


Recommendations
understanding and addressing local needs, a rigorous assessment of the
performance and effectiveness of local services, and evaluating progress made
in achieving improved outcomes for children.
progress against its key priorities.
in monitoring and evaluating practice.
practice and inter-agency cooperation to safeguard children. Audits should
include frontline practitioners, managers and children to provide inclusive,
comprehensive intelligence, and should be repeated to evaluate practice
improvements.
children who are privately fostered are identified and supported.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
has been in post since March 2016. She has quickly undertaken an
assessment of the boards current functioning and is working with partners to
bring about improvement. The existing ESCB structure of 10 sub-groups
presents a significant challenge to the stretched capacity of all partner
agencies, therefore the consolidation of existing structures is a priority.
Proposed changes are designed to address current shortcomings regarding
the level of practice focus and critical enquiry. (Recommendation)
established, with the ESCB chair meeting regularly with the executive director
for adults, children and public health and the chief executive officer to ensure
that the authority is fulfilling its safeguarding responsibilities. The ESCB chair
is a member of the health and wellbeing board, which helps to ensure that
safeguarding children is appropriately considered and reflected within the joint
strategic needs assessment.
safeguarding board and is proactively considering the opportunities this new
arrangement may create to promote joint work. This includes Think family
initiatives, such as a coordinated approach to consider the impact of the toxic
trio, thereby building resilience for children and their families. The ESCB is
generally well attended by sufficiently senior officers from a wide variety of
relevant agencies. Political oversight is strengthened with the lead member for


childrens services sitting as a participating observer. Two lay members are
involved at board and sub-group level.
Building upon mature existing partnerships, they give a high priority to
safeguarding. A timely multi-agency review following the recent concerns
regarding Medway Secure Training Centre, to ensure that young people from
Ealing in secure settings were safe, provides a cogent example of a rapid,
child-centred coordinated response. There is evidence of effective challenge.
For example, following proposed changes to the school nursing service,
assurances were sought to ensure an evaluation of the impact of attendance
at child protection conferences. Similarly, when changes to health service
arrangements suggested that health visitors would work in an increasingly
remote manner from primary care services, robust intervention saw the
development of a bespoke electronic communication system. This ensures
that relevant health information is shared to safeguard children.
with a young peoples shadow board known as Young Ealing Safeguarding
(YES). This highly articulate, motivated and confident group of young people
works with the board to promote and resolve safeguarding concerns of young
people. The group itself has achieved commendable success in promoting
issues pertaining to e-safety, female genital mutilation and grooming. The
group is currently engaged in a programme to teach teachers how to teach
personal, social and health education. YES members reported to inspectors
that they feel that they are listened to and that their contribution to the
safeguarding agenda is important.
sufficiently rigorous or transparent analysis of safeguarding activity across the
borough. The report does not include a comprehensive range of feedback
from the board, sub-groups and partners, nor does not it pull it together into
an overall assessment of the effectiveness of local services. This limits the
reports usefulness as a tool to understand what works well and what needs to
change. Although priorities are reflected in the accompanying business plan,
the ensuing actions are insufficiently specific, measurable or time bound. At its
most recent meeting, the board identified these failings. It has agreed, as a
priority, to revise the annual report and business plan in July 2016 to ensure
that there is clarity and appropriate focus for future safeguarding activity.
(Recommendation)
heavily on self-reporting, and has not always challenged agencies sufficiently
to provide evidence on the basis for their declarations. The new chair
recognises that more needs to be done to strengthen the cross-referencing of
the section 11 audits, including through multi-agency audit findings, staff
surveys and more rigorous scrutiny. The board undertakes some effective,
albeit limited, deep-dive audits that are thematic. However, it does not


regularly undertake a broad enough range of multi-agency case auditing
activities to assess the effectiveness of multi-agency child protection practice
and inform the monitoring of local performance. A recent independent audit
commissioned by the board was effective in providing assurance that
thresholds at the front door were embedded and appropriate.
(Recommendation)
focused on childrens social care and has lacked a broad range of data from
other agencies to give a full picture of the difference that agencies are making
for children and areas for improvement. Agencies are beginning to offer an
accompanying narrative in order to provide a more qualitative analysis and an
understanding of the story behind the data. This work has only recently
begun, so it is too early to assess how effectively this will assist the board to
monitor safeguarding practice. (Recommendation)
understand what is happening at the front line, given the limitations of the
dataset. Frequent presentations, for example from early help services, have
enabled them to keep up to date and, in some cases, information presented to
the board has allowed them to identify gaps and areas for improvement or
challenge. The lack of clarity about the effectiveness of safeguarding services
which has resulted from the poor quality of the data has meant that the board
has had limited influence on the planning and commissioning of services. This
means that the board cannot influence the direction of improvement in a
systematic way regarding priorities and identified gaps.
and understands child sexual exploitation in Ealing. Work around child sexual
exploitation has a sharper strategic focus, with better coordinated activity to
pull together information, data and intelligence that is used to build up a
picture of activity across the borough. Work with the clinical commissioning
group, police and the Safer Ealing Partnership has improved understanding,
awareness and effective multi-agency practice. This has enabled a focus on
those children who are the most vulnerable.
concerns, disseminating information and sharing good practice between
schools and board partners. Its scope has recently been strengthened
following proactive liaison with a high number of link officers.
statutory partners which sets out how it will monitor and review practice, and
capture learning to improve service provision. The board has a standing panel
to monitor and review critical incidents and consider if the criteria are met for
a serious case review (SCR). It also assesses whether other action short of a
full SCR should be taken to address concerns about practice. During the
course of the year, the board participated in an SCR led by the tri-borough of


Westminster City Council, London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham, and
the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea. Immediate concerns regarding
transience and the transfer of cases cross-borough were quickly recognised
and acted upon. A child practice review was also carried out, following a
disclosure from a teenage girl that she had consumed a noxious substance. An
action plan has been developed to raise awareness of escalation policies, and
to recognise the capacity and limitations of agency practice. The
implementation of the plan is regularly reviewed by the SCR sub-group. More
recently, the board has decided to conduct an SCR following the death by
suicide of a young person. It is too early yet to identify and capture the
associated learning.
range of training provided by the board. During the period between April 2014
and March 2015, over 60 courses took place, involving over 1,200 attendees.
Training is responsive to changing needs, and trainers incorporate lessons
from SCRs and other learning into current programmes. Training is evaluated
using the pan-London three-point evaluation methodology. The training subgroup recognises that this is not working well and it remains an area for
development. Awareness of safeguarding issues across partners and the local
community is supported by a range of information published by the board,
including through its accessible and informative website.
has a group of trained professionals who are available to undertake home
visits following a death. Cases are reviewed in a timely way, and good
information sharing means that decisions can quickly be reached about the
preventability of deaths. Trends are analysed and causes of deaths are broken
down into relevant categories such as age, gender and postcode. A review of
all deaths led to active awareness raising, regarding safer sleeping.
localised when necessary and reviewed regularly. These are accessible via the
ESCB website. The threshold document has recently been revised to reflect
changes in policy and priorities, for example female genital mutilation and the
Prevent duty. Generally, thresholds are well understood and consistently
applied. The creation and update of the yellow book is a commendable
achievement. This book details the safeguarding roles and responsibilities to
be used by all organisations and groups in the voluntary and community
sector, including faith-based organisations. It is of note that other local
authority areas have adopted this approach, and ESCB has been happy to
share learning.
safeguarding children in private fostering arrangements. While there has been
some awareness raising activity, this has not led to an increase in
identifications or referrals. (Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children who have needed or
still need help and/or protection. This includes children who are looked after, and
young people who are leaving care and starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children. Wherever possible, they talked to children, young
people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to understand what
the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well it is doing and
what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help, protect and look
after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted
and one additional inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Karen Wareing
Deputy lead inspector: Marcie Taylor
Team inspectors: Louise Warren, Nigel Parkes, Linda Steele, Emmy Tomsett, Stella
Butler, Sean Tarpey, Tara Geere, Claire Hummerstone
Senior data analyst: Patrick Thomson
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children, and in education and skills for learners of all ages. It
regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and Family Court
Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further education
and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other secure
establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after children,
safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


