East Sussex County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 14 January 2014- 5 February 2014
The overall judgement is good
The local authority leads effective services that meet the requirements for good.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

Good


Good


Outstanding


Requires
Improvement


Good

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is
good.
The LSCB coordinates the activity of statutory partners and has mechanisms in place
to monitor the effectiveness of local arrangements.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the local safeguarding children board


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority is good because:

Elected members, who are well informed, and a highly effective senior
management team provide a range of good quality services to children and
families. They know their service well based on a wide-ranging performance
and monitoring framework that has helped to identify effectively areas of need
across the county.


Focused investment in early help services effectively targets the most
vulnerable families. The support provided identifies those families who do not
have the capacity to change. This enables the local authority to seek statutory
intervention much earlier to protect children and secure permanence
arrangements for them.


A good range of support services for children and young people are targeted in
areas where they are most needed. For example, Wise (What is Sexual
Exploitation), a mentoring service to support 13-25 year olds who are
experiencing or who are at risk of experiencing sexual exploitation.


Social workers are confident and skilled in assessing childrens needs and
protecting them from harm. Looked after children told inspectors that they both
feel safe and are safe, where they live and in school, and that they enjoy good
relationships with their social workers.


Concerns about children are managed well through two area based multiagency hubs. The system for receiving and screening contacts and referrals is
timely, robust and clear. Thresholds for services for children and families are
known and understood across the partnership. This means that children are
better protected and the risk to them identified early and managed through
effective partnership arrangements.


Child protection enquiries are thorough and timely. Information-sharing is an
effective part of the assessment process. Inspectors saw good use of
chronological information in case files to inform current practice and decisionmaking.


Care proceedings are properly focused on those children who are unlikely to
remain living with their families. The requests for specialist assessments are
made at an early stage in the legal process. Good quality assessments are now
beginning to support earlier conclusions to care proceedings. As a
consequence, decisions to protect children and secure stable homes for them to
live in are more timely. Effective decision making about children becoming
looked after are founded on a thorough assessment of need and risk. The right
children are identified as needing care.



Social workers work hard to secure permanent and stable homes for looked
after children when they can no longer live with their own families. Effective
communication between social workers and specialist family finding teams
results in securing timely permanence arrangements for children.


Managers and staff of the adoption service have an excellent understanding of
adoption and its complexities. Staff explore innovative ways to achieving
permanence and adoption as evident in their fostering to adopt initiative, the
no detriment policy and DVD recruitment days. They are well qualified and
demonstrate a strong and driving passion for achieving excellent outcomes for
children and their adoptive families. A significantly higher number of adoptive
families are waiting less than three months from the date of approval until the
date when they are matched to children. As a result, children are moving into
adoptive families much sooner.

authority. More children are now living in stable, long-term family placements
as a result of this.
support to children and a responsive consultation service to social workers and
carers. This means that looked after children are supported in developing and
sustaining meaningful relationships with both their carers and their peers.
now receiving a better response to their health needs, with their annual health
assessments completed on time.
and addressed early. There is a good coordinated response across the
partnership to children going missing, and extensive awareness training has
been provided to professionals on child sexual exploitation.
good GCSEs, and are making their expected progress. Childrens progress is
carefully tracked, and good packages of individual support are provided if
looked after children fall behind in their studies.
children and young people. It is well supported by elected members and senior
managers, and as a result looked after children are able to influence decisions
made in respect of them.
young people to influence the services that they use. They are passionate
about the work they do and can clearly see that their inspections make a
difference.


case reviews and complaints to support improvement in social work practice.
Action plans as a result of serious case reviews are well constructed and
monitored to ensure that learning is embedded in practice. For example, as a
result of a recent serious case review, better recording systems have been put
in place to support the role of the Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO).
work practice. The quality of chronologies and assessments are examples of
where social work practice has significantly improved and is now of a good
standard.

What does the local authority need to improve?
Areas for improvement
not immediately possible strengthen management oversight of risk and
vulnerability issues.
vulnerable young people, to avoid the continued use of bed and breakfast
provision as a last resort.
comply with statutory guidance, to enable senior managers and elected
members to properly consider how this service effectively challenges childrens
care planning arrangements
planning for care leavers aged 16 and 17 is improved so that the plans are
clearer and are much more meaningful to help in supporting young people as
they move towards independent living.
professionals is recorded on family assessments. Where a child is at immediate
risk and a decision has been taken to dispense with parental consent, this
should be recorded with a full explanation of why such a decision was made.
from the advocacy service should they wish to make a complaint and that this
includes care leavers.
available for post-18 care leavers.
them with sufficient skills to help them to live independently.


families the diverse needs of the community and workforce are appropriately
considered.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) one
contracted inspector and a shadow inspector from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Helen Cawston HMI
Team inspectors: Karen Mckeown HMI, Bill Wallace HMI, Dominic Stevens HMI, Janet
Fraser HMI, Adesua Osime HMI, Nick Stacey and Anji Parker


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 104,285 children and young people under the age of 18
years live in East Sussex. This is 19.8% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 17.4% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 15.7% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 12.4% (the national average is 15.1%)
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 8.7% of
all children living in the area, compared with 16.3% in the country as a
whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are of mixed ethnicity and Asian or Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 4.9% (the national average is 18.1%).
 in secondary schools is 4.1% (the national average is 13.6%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 4,863 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a
reduction from 4,901 at March 2012.
 At 31 March 2013, 546 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is a reduction from 674 at 31 March 2012.
 At 31 March 2013, 19 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from 17 at 31 March 2012.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 600 children are being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 57 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 620 (60 per
 Of this number 70 (or 12%) live outside the local authority area


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


authority area


authority area

area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 45 adoptions
subsequently returned to be looked after
moved on to independent living.
now (at 31 March 2013) living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates 6 childrens homes. All were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of East Sussexs safeguarding arrangements was in
January 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of East Sussexs services for looked after children
was in January 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Other information about this area
 The Interim Director of Childrens Services has been in post since June
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since June 2010.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
are good.
understood plan for early help and the reconfiguration of services in East
Sussex. The strategys overarching aim is to support children and families
through a comprehensive range of early help services. It is clearly having a
positive impact on improving outcomes for children and families. Investment in
early help services, targeting the most vulnerable children and families, has
contributed to a significant reduction of up to 40% in the number of referrals to
childrens social care over the last year. The number of re-referrals is reducing.
It is an effective strategy which shows that a growing number of children and
families are receiving help and support at a much earlier stage. As a direct
consequence of high levels of investment, statutory interventions are declining
overall. There has been an overall decrease in the number of children subject
to a Section 47 child protection enquiry, fewer children are on child protection
and children in need plans and there is a steady fall in the number of looked
after children.
childrens social care where safeguarding concerns or requests for early help
are being raised about children and families. Social care and early help
managers, including health partners are part of the daily hub meetings and
contribute effectively to the sharing of information and the decisions being
made about the level of help required to support children and families. This
leads to a prompt offer of early help or assessment of their needs. The
continuum of need, a threshold for services document endorsed by the
partnership, is well-embedded in practice. It provides clarity and a common
language for all professionals to use in order to assess need and risks in
families. As a result, professionals across the partnership are clear at what point
a service is required to safeguard children and know how to refer children for a
service. There is a consistency in practice, and the risk to children is identified
early and acted upon.
trained and skilled Family Keyworkers deliver high quality early help support
packages. They act as a single point of contact for the family, providing direct
support and coordinating additional interventions from a range of services and
organisations. Early help assessments are effective in determining the level of
need and are suitably outcome-focused. As an example, parents spoke to
inspectors about the skills they had gained from attending parenting courses
which help them to support and parent their children more effectively.
allocated promptly following good decision-making by managers. Where
allocation is not immediate, as was seen in 14 cases in the Youth Support


Teams, those cases were managed through duty visits with support from
partner agencies. This has meant that in the short-term some children and
families have experienced some delay in accessing a timely service to meet
their assessed need. Management oversight was observed on these cases and
risk was managed effectively, although the quality of recording of actions taken
was too variable. This has been acknowledged by childrens services as an area
for development, and a review of the current policy for the transfer of cases is
being undertaken by the service.
seen, it was not always clear from the recording in case files if the necessary
agreement and consent had been given by parents for this to happen.
identifying where children and young people may be at risk. Notifications are
immediately discussed with professionals in the hub so that a full assessment of
risk is undertaken to safeguard children and other vulnerable adults living in the
house. Links with adult social care are clear and information is appropriately
considered across the service where there are perceived risks. Multi-agency
Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA) arrangements across the partnership
are working well to identify those children and families most at risk. The
response to domestic abuse is effective, with Multi-Agency Risk Assessment
Conference (MARAC) meetings being used as a multi-agency planning forum to
reduce the risks to those families where such abuse is a significant risk.
acted on immediately. Strategy discussions are always undertaken with the
police and, where necessary, other professionals engaged with the family. This
process has been strengthened considerably over the last twelve months
following the recent findings from a multi-agency management review where
procedural shortcomings in the process were identified. The outcomes of the
discussions are now recorded well, and actions are agreed to ensure the safety
of the child or young person. Inspectors saw consistent practice in all strategy
discussions. In complex cases, strategy meetings are convened and include
other professionals to ensure that investigations are either undertaken jointly
between the police and social workers or as a single agency investigation.
enquiries. Safety plans are put in place at the first opportunity so that parents
are clear about the risks to their children and what they need to do to protect
them and prevent harm. The large majority (95%) of initial and review child
protection conferences are held within statutory timescales. Managers closely
monitor any shortfalls in meeting statutory timescales through monthly
performance data, and take effective action to minimise any delays.
for the work that is required to effect change and reduce risk to children. Plans
are workable documents for both the family and for a range of professionals.


They are used to monitor the progress being made. However, timescales for
achieving compliance to ensure the plan is working could be clearer in some
cases. In a small number of cases children have been on plans for over two
years. However, there is effective management oversight to review the
progress and consider alternative ways to support the children. Statutory visits
are regular and case recordings show that children are seen and seen alone.
Child protection conferences observed are well chaired, reports to the
conference were seen to be of a good standard, and those parents spoken to
by the inspectors confirmed that social workers went through the report with
them prior to the meeting and responded well to their questions. Core groups
are well attended by families and professionals, and the progress children and
families are making is closely monitored.
Service duty system to ensure that children receive a service commensurate
with their needs from qualified social workers who are knowledgeable in this
specialised field. Good multi-agency representation has resulted in
comprehensive, well-understood plans for children with disabilities.
when safe to do so, stepped down to children in need services. As a result,
families are offered services that meet their assessed level of need. The SWIFT
parenting practitioner service has demonstrated a positive impact for children
and young people living in households where parents have mental health or
substance misuse or where domestic abuse is a prevalent factor.
potential for different social workers undertaking each stage, towards a single
family assessment, single worker approach, to support a more comprehensive
overview of childrens and families needs. All assessments seen by inspectors
across childrens services are of a very good standard. A clear and thorough
analysis of risk and protective factors informs the planning and decisions being
taken to protect children. However, the time taken to complete family
assessments at the level of children in need remains too variable across the
county. Effective performance data supports managers to identify where delays
may be affecting children and families and to support a timelier conclusion to
the assessment. Inspectors saw assessments where the help and protection
provided was particularly sensitive to the issues of disability and sexual
orientation.
including on occasions by the Chief Executive, to ensure that practice is robust
and lesson learnt from all quality assurance processes are improving practice.
As a result of this work, the level of management oversight in case files has
improved with clear case direction being given to social workers.
historical information informs and contributes to the conclusions being reached


about childrens safety and well-being. Where children and families have access
to their chronology it has had a significant impact on helping them to
understand their situation. As an example, one young women having seen her
chronology spoke to the inspector about the cycle of neglect she had
experienced as a young child. Further examples show chronologies being used
effectively in planning meetings to enable parents to understand how historical
events inform current decisions being made to protect children. The use of
chronologies as part of the assessment process is highly effective practice, and
well regarded by children and families.
express their wishes and feelings. A number of imaginative ways are being
used to capture younger childrens views, including the use of Bear Cards and
childrens drawings to identify their wishes and feelings. The benefits of
developing meaningful relationships with children and families were illustrated
in a number of cases. Children and young people were equally positive about
services provided by other professionals such as CAMHS, and examples show
remarkable commitments to maintaining a regular visiting arrangement which
was highly valued by one particular young person seen by an inspector.
quality assessments and the effective use of chronologies result in social
workers knowing their children and families well. Social workers are confident
and skilled in protecting children. Children and young people told inspectors
that they both feel safe and are safe, and that they enjoy good relationships
with their social workers.
working hours. Effective liaison is undertaken with the police to ensure that
families considered to be at risk receive a timely service. Good liaison with
daytime services ensures that outstanding concerns are responded to promptly.
recognised by the local authority and partner agencies. Awareness-raising
activities, including work with local language schools, have resulted in an
increased number of notifications of children who are living in such
arrangements. These children have positive relationships with their social
workers, who ensure that their needs are properly understood and met.
Interpreters are used when necessary, and support children with issues such as
their immigration status and parental relationships.
and vulnerable to child sexual exploitation are robust and include a range of
services commissioned through the voluntary sector, including Wise (What is
Sexual Exploitation),a service to support 13-25 year olds who are experiencing
or at risk of experiencing sexual exploitation and Barnardos. The local authority
commissions a service from Catch 22, which provides a helpline service for
young people thinking about running away or currently missing. The service


provides independent return interviews which look at the reasons why they
chose to run away. They evaluate their findings from the return interviews and
report on any patterns and trends emerging that may be affecting children.
These services are well integrated with other services, such as Substance Abuse
Service Specific To Youth (SASSY), the sexual health nurse and under-19
substance misuse services. The impact of this work is the reported increase by
young people in accessing the specialist support services provided by WISE.
Sexual Exploitation, Trafficking and Missing is aware that this is a relatively new
area of work for all social workers and professionals across the partnership.
The voluntary sector who provides specific services to work exclusively with
young people affected by sexual exploitation are key members of the subgroup, and they bring an expertise to it through their work with young people
at risk of sexual exploitation. Through regular training and workshops the
ESSCB continues to raise the awareness of professionals to the possible signs of
child sexual exploitation. The local authority acknowledges that there is still
more work to do across key agencies to collate and improve data collection to
gain a more accurate understanding of the scale of the problem and how to
address it. The ESSCB is proactive in trying to raise awareness across the
partnership and it has started to produce a newsletter twice yearly which
includes information for professionals about child sexual exploitation, runaways
and domestic abuse.
missing education. A database of all those not on a school roll is maintained
and systems for reporting are well-established and used by schools. The local
authority is proactive in raising awareness of the issue and encouraging
reporting, for example, with childrens centres and general practitioners as well
as schools. When a child is reported as missing education, procedures,
including the cross-checking of data bases, are swiftly and effectively
implemented. Performance is effectively monitored by the ESSCB.
all children who are too ill to attend school, either through the three teaching
centres across the county or in hospitals. The quality of the teaching centres is
monitored by the local authority. Tracking of pupils leaving these centres shows
that none are in the NEET category and there is a 30% re-integration rate.
Pupils continue to be monitored by FLESS following re-integration.
one is known to childrens social care and a child protection plan is in place.
Effective tracking systems ensure that when families refuse visits from the
Elective Home Education team, referrals are checked with childrens social care
and the children index database to see if they are known to any services. The
high number of families (97%) which are accepting of a visit indicate that good
relationships have been established with parents. Safeguarding is built into
visits and inspectors saw a good example of effective joint work between the


elective home education team and childrens services to protect a young person
living in unsuitable accommodation. No looked after children are currently
home-educated. Allegations of abuse, mistreatment or poor practice by
professionals and carers are addressed promptly. Professionals understand the
role of the LADO. Recommendations from a recent serious case review have
been implemented, and are subject to rigorous review and scrutiny. There has
been a marked increase in referrals from across the partnership but notably
from schools. Children and young people are therefore safer as a result of an
improved understanding, and application, of policies on potential abuse from
those entrusted to care for them.
through a national provider commissioned by the local authority. A number of
children have sought support through this and found the service to be effective.
A specialist advocacy service is in place for disabled children.
The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence are good.
light of their assessed risk and needs. There is a clear process for children to
come into care. On occasions where there may be professional disagreements
about children coming into care, social workers and Child Protection Advisors
can use the dispute resolution process to escalate any concerns to senior
managers. This is an effective process that supports robust debate.

Effective care planning arrangements mean that the issuing of proceedings is
properly focused on those children who are unlikely to be able to remain living
with their families. When the local authority is considering the use of care
proceedings, specialist family services and assessments, for example from
SWIFT, are being used much earlier in the process to inform the decisions
being made to safeguard children. As a result, this is now beginning to support
a timelier conclusion to care proceedings. Recent evidence shows that some
care proceedings are now completed in less than 20 weeks. This is significant
progress when set against an average of 39 weeks for the completion of most
care proceedings in the county. There remains some historical long-standing
work with a few children and young people and their families which needs to be
brought to a timelier conclusion by the courts. The local authority works well
within the family justice partnership. This good liaison has contributed to the
significant reduction in the time taken to complete complex cases in public law
proceedings. East Sussex has the lowest completion time for care proceedings
within the local Designated Family Judge area.

people who know them. Special Guardianships and Residence Orders are
increasingly used, and used effectively, to secure permanent arrangements for
children.


families, providing the opportunity to build meaningful relationships with them.
As a consequence of good social work intervention, children develop strong
attachments to significant people in their lives and they have a good
understanding of what is happening to them.
that the majority of looked after children are placed with East Sussex foster
carers. The Skills to Foster pre-assessment preparation course is run at regular
intervals during the year to ensure that participants are clear about the
standards and skills required of them to be foster carers. The Children in Care
Council help and facilitate these groups and assist in recruitment campaigns.
Foster carers commented very favourably about the quality of the training and
the help it had given them to understand some of the challenges children face
when separated from their family, and what it feels like to live with a new
family.
statutory timescales. The Independent Reviewing Officers provide consistency
and a continuity of oversight of the progress children make. Children know their
reviewing officers well. The service provides effective challenge to some care
planning arrangements, for example, through challenging the quality of
provision in an agency childrens home or through delaying a young persons
move to a new home until their exams had finished.
fostering and adoption teams. This results in a coherent and robust response to
family finding for children. Social workers report feeling supported by their
managers, who are highly visible and readily available. Social workers are clear
about the high standards of professional practice required by senior managers
and are committed to, and working hard to achieve, good outcomes for all
looked after children. Seeing children and families regularly and writing good
quality assessments that focus on achieving the best possible outcomes are
good examples of how they use their skills to help children. The local authority
is highly committed to, and provides, a good range of training opportunities for
all staff, ensuring that they are well trained in this specialist area of work.
East Sussex is outstanding. There is a sense of urgency across childrens
services in ensuring that care planning arrangements achieve the right
permanence option at an early stage for children and young people.
Accelerating discharges from care through the conclusion of care proceedings
and the use of Adoption Orders, Special Guardianship Orders (SGO) and
Residence Orders (RO) confirms a determination to succeed in achieving longterm stability for all looked after children. Social workers and the independent
reviewing service are active in moving forward decisions where permanence is
considered to secure stability for children. Progress is tracked further at twiceyearly workshops to provide an additional level of scrutiny to ensure that


timescales for securing permanent arrangements for children are progressing
swiftly. As a result of this increased focus and drive, achieving permanence for
all children looked after is outstanding and the potential for drift and delay
significantly reduced.
improvement over the last year. All are now completed on time. The progress
made has been achieved by recognising an issue of capacity within the looked
after childrens health team and addressing this shortfall. Childrens health is
now better understood and monitored. There is a robust system for following
up the health needs of children from other local authorities placed in East
Sussex.
consultation service to social workers and carers. Foster carers spoke of the
meaningful relationships social workers have with children and of high levels of
support from the CAMHS service. Effective support and management strategies
help to reduce reckless, impulsive and aggressive behaviours exhibited by some
young people. As a result, carers believe that this is helping to achieve better
placement stability and to secure strong attachments with the children they
care for.
receive the same level of services as those children who live within the county.
Social workers visit them regularly and their looked after reviews are held
within statutory timescales. In one particular case, a young person visited by an
inspector said she had the same Independent Reviewing Officer over a number
of years and as a consequence she was confident in the decisions being made
about her. Childrens health care is monitored by the looked after health care
team and their educational progress is monitored effectively through the East
Sussex virtual school support. CAMHS have mobilised services in a neighbouring
county to offer additional support to one young person's host local authority.
assessments in place that effectively consider and address the risks. Effective
packages of support help children and families and as a result the number of
children coming back into care is very low.
people across all ages. It is involved in a number of national initiatives, such as
the Childrens Ministers advisory group, where they are able to represent the
views of looked after children. They are engaged locally in the training of foster
carers and interviews for social care staff, including senior appointments. The
contribution they make at training events is highly valued by foster carers. The
Children in Care council has re-written the Pledge in a clear and accessible
format which is appropriate for both young and older children. It is easy to read
and sets out very clearly how the local authority will meet its corporate
parenting responsibilities for looked after children. This is distributed to all


looked after children and promoted by the Children in Care council members at
events such as PGL trips and adventure holidays. This increases the awareness
of looked after children about their rights to services such as access to
advocacy. Children are able to talk about gaining more confidence from being a
member of the care council. For example, one young person explained how a
sense of belonging had boosted his confidence and self-esteem so that he was
able to deal with and overcome bullying that he had experienced in school as a
result of being in care.
young people with a disability to influence the services that they use. They are
passionate about the work they do and can clearly see that they are listened to
and that their inspections make a difference to the lives of other young people.
For example, visiting an outdoor activity centre to see how accessible activities
are for children with a disability, and whether there are books available in
braille at local libraries for children with a visual impairment.
high proportion of young people made the expected progress in both English
and maths in comparison to the most recently reported national figure. Key
Stage 4 results are improving, with 25% of looked after children achieving five
good GCSEs including English and maths. The gap with their peers has
narrowed. Over 80% of young people end Key Stage 4 with an accreditation of
some form and the large majority achieve at least one GCSE. Reading and
maths results are good at Key Stage 2 but less so in writing, and this is an
identified priority for this year. Overall, 81% of the cohort made the expected
progress in reading and 69% the expected progress in writing. In maths, 75%
of the cohort made the expected progress compared to 66% of the national
looked after cohort last year. A high proportion of each cohort has identified
special educational needs.
employment or training. The young people who spoke to inspectors were
overwhelmingly positive about the support from the virtual school, especially
regarding support with university places. Childrens services recognise that
there is more to do to re-engage young people and as of 31st March 2013 40%
of care leavers were NEET (82/206).
well argued, with careful consideration given to each individual childs needs
and the strengths of individual schools. Seven out of 381 pupils are not
receiving 25 hours of education each week. The virtual school knows these
individual pupils well and persistent efforts are made to break down the barriers
to their education. Staff demonstrate a good knowledge of their pupils needs
and carefully track their progress. School moves are minimised as decisions to
change childrens home placements must be agreed by the Virtual School Head
Teacher.


adds value to the service, as does the fact that it holds and manages the pupil
premium centrally for all looked after children. Strengths include being able to
target children whose progress is faltering quickly and effectively, for example,
by providing one-to-one tuition. Young people told inspectors that they valued
this greatly.
and out-of-authority provision to ensure that children are receiving their
educational entitlement and to monitor the progress they make, wherever they
are living. The service has been extended to provide support to adopted
children and young people and their families. Performance is reported to a
board of governors and the corporate parenting panel to ensure that effective
management oversight of pupils progress is maintained.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is outstanding.
visible and stable. There is effective management oversight of the service and
an excellent understanding of adoption and its complexities. As a result, the
performance on the DFE adoption score card is on an upward trajectory.
Improving performance by reducing the timescales in matching children to
families has been a key focus for the service in 201213. This has resulted in a
far better performance than most other local authorities in achieving shorter
timescales for children coming into care and moving into an adoptive family.
Across East Sussex a significantly higher number of adoptive families are
waiting less than three months from their date of approval and the date when
are they are matched to children. As a result, children are moving into adoptive
families quicker.
adoption as evident in their fostering to adopt initiative, the no detriment
policy and DVD recruitment days. Staff are well qualified and demonstrate
strong and driving passion for achieving excellent outcomes for children and
their adoptive family. They receive regular good quality reflective supervision
which gives them time to consider the decisions they are taking to find suitable
families for children. Well organised and specialist training further strengthens
their professional expertise and practice in adoption.
Transformation project has enabled the service to recruit and appoint three
additional qualified social workers. As a consequence, this is leading to
sustained improvement in all areas of adoption practice within East Sussex.
These include more focused recruitment activity to increase the number of
adoptive placements, an increase in family finding for children and a significant
reduction in the use of expensive and geographically distant interagency
placements.


placements in East Sussex. The number of children placed for adoption has
remained high and represents a rise of 29% from the previous year, including
higher numbers of older children and of sibling groups. Good use of the
Governments Adoption Reform Grant has enabled an increased recruitment of
adopters. Alongside the local authoritys own investment to increase the
workforce capacity in the adoption service this will provide a continued,
sustained response to family finding for children.
finding is being undertaken in all cases, including those children who may be
considered harder to place because of their special needs and/or large sibling
groups. The service does have a small number of children who are awaiting
placements for over one year. There are sound reasons for this in each child's
case, with clear evidence of on-going family finding activities underpinning the
services view that all children should have the opportunity to grow up in a
permanent family.
live together CAMHS undertake a full assessment of need and contribute to the
decisions being made. Sensitive assessments explore the impact of such
decisions and record clearly how professionals reach their conclusions. Where
children cannot be matched locally they are placed on the national adoption
register to ensure that as wide a search as possible is made to secure a
permanent family. Membership of the South East consortium offers a wider
placement choice and compliments in-house family finding activities. Learning
outcomes from the recent national Activity Days are being considered to
further enhance possible opportunities for matching children to families.
children waiting. In addition, DVD events are part of the new approach to
match children to families. They provide an opportunity for approved adopters
and childrens social workers to meet and discuss children waiting for
permanent families, particular those children with more complex needs and
larger family groups. Sharing information, including photos, DVDs, art and
written work by children and anecdotal evidence helps adopters to influence
and play a significant part in their own matching arrangements.
advertising space on local radio stations and in local newspapers. Using other
media forums to capture prospective adopters interest are through the
multimedia Fillaspace.com  promoting all aspects of care including
permanent fostering and adoption. The local authority has seen an increased
level of interest as a result. A dedicated telephone number for enquires from
prospective adopters, a specific email address and an on-line enquiry form
ensure that anyone making an initial enquiry to be considered as an adoptive
family receives a prompt and personal response.


assessment and approval process. Most prospective adopters in East Sussex are
approved between six and nine months from registration of interest to approval
at the adoption panel. Panel dates are now secured early in the assessment
process to ensure a more timely completion for the approval of prospective
adopters. Adopters told inspectors that they considered the assessment
process to be timely, fair and thought provoking. They spoke highly of the
training programme in place to support them.
Childrens placement reports are detailed and comprehensive. The views of
birth parents regarding the plans for adoption are sensitively reported on.
Effective quality assurance processes ensure that all reports presented to the
panel are of a high quality.
adopters and the matching of children to families. Panel minutes are of a very
high quality, with a detailed recording of discussions that take place. They
accurately reflect where challenges have been made by panel members.
completed in a timely way and are imaginative and interactive. Life story books
seen by inspectors were of a good quality. In one example, an inspector saw an
excellent illustration of life story activity between a social worker and young
child.
children who have left care either through an SGO or adoption order. Support is
properly focussed on meeting a childs particular educational needs where
adoption in a new family may be affecting their ability to achieve in class. An
adoptive parent and a foster carer are parent governors on the Virtual Schools
governing body which strengthens the role of the school in supporting and
understanding the impact children experience living in a new family. Through
the Adoption Support grant the Virtual School has appointed a former
headteacher as an adoption support coordinator. Their role is specifically to
help adopted children, families and teachers understand about attachment
issues and how these can affect childrens behaviour and capacity to learn in
the classroom. The Virtual School is currently working with local schools to
ensure that the Pupil Premium paid to schools in April 2014 for children who
have left care through either an SGO or an adoption order is used effectively.
adoptive families is exceptionally strong. The service demonstrates an
impressive commitment to adoption support, one that is well tailored and
individualised at all stages of the adoption journey. A commissioned CAMHS
service that sits within the adoption team provides effective support to children
and families, for example through Theraplay, which helps families to stay
together during the early days of placement and assists in the prevention of


family breakdown. These effective approaches to adoption, which are now
embedded in practice, provide children and adoptive families with a good level
of security and support at a time when relationships are new and vulnerable.
Families regard adoption support to be of a high quality and, as a consequence,
disruptions following placement have been consistently low.
following robust post-adoption assessments. CAMHS provide consultation
surgeries for professionals and adopters involved in some very complex family
issues. The childrens guide to post-adoption support services includes ways
that children can make a complaint and informs them of their right to the
support of an advocate. Time limited groups for young adopted people have
been run to provide additional support when they are dealing with some
challenging concerns post placement. Another strength of the adoption support
team is that they have facilitated a number of support groups and workshops
for adopters and children, including Parenting Teenagers. This particular group
led on to the development of the Adoptive Families Group with a focus on
raising awareness at a national level about post-adoption support. East Sussex
continues to work closely with the group to further develop their own postadoption support offer. Workshops relating to specific issues such as social
networking have been run to provide additional advice and guidance on how
children can stay safe. As a result of excellent post-adoption support the service
placement stability is good, with no placement disruptions in the last twelve
months. A service contract with Adoption UK enables adopters to secure
additional support if required though an independent provider.
The graded judgement for the experiences and progress of Care Leavers
requires improvement
are clear from their assessment of the service that improvements are required
in order to support and improve outcomes for all care leavers. The service is
supporting some young people who lead challenging lifestyles which affect their
ability to sustain stable accommodation, employment and education
opportunities. A recent improvement plan for the care leaving service has
enabled some significant developments in the service, such as increasing the
workforce capacity to support these young people. A reduction in the number
of personal advisors and an increase in the use of qualified social workers and
senior practitioners are strengthening the capability of the service to meet the
needs of care leavers. The care leaving service is now based on one site to
enable greater management oversight of the service and easier access for
young care leavers to seek advice and support.
now allocated to a suitably qualified worker. There has been a significant
improvement in pathway planning. However, the format and content of plans
are not yet of sufficient detail and quality to ensure that they remain
meaningful to young people. Training for social workers and personal advisors


on pathway planning is not fully embedded in practice, which impacts on their
ability to produce suitable plans.
develop a good relationship and a degree of consistency with their social
workers and personal advisors. A small number in higher education are
supported until their 25th birthday. Care leavers confirmed to inspectors that
the support given by their worker was helpful.
continue to live with their foster carers post-18. This figure is notably higher
than both statistical neighbours and the England average and confirms the
determination by childrens services to secure better arrangements for young
vulnerable care leavers.
options for care leavers. For example, a joint project with the YMCA has
secured an additional 10 new placements in 2013/2014 for care leavers with
more complex needs. Bed & breakfast accommodation, although only used for
a small number of young people and as a last resort, is still considered a
possible option which leaves them potentially vulnerable to risk. Where young
homeless aged 16+ are assessed as being vulnerable, supported lodgings are
available and used effectively.
independent living skills is variable. Although it is recognised that some care
leavers do receive independence training through their accommodation
providers the care leaving service has not yet provided sufficient programmes
on budgeting and other essential life skills.
defined pathway to access substance misuse services and a sexual health
nurse. A new dedicated mental health nurse for post-18s is in the process of
being recruited to build on an existing high quality CAMHS service.
the virtual school, particularly about the help they receive with university
places. Childrens services know that there is more to do to encourage young
people to gain access to higher education.
the current group. The Care 2 Work programme and a contract with the
Medway Youth Trust has commenced, although both are still in their infancy
and their impact is not yet demonstrable. A multi-agency board tracks and
monitors the education and training of all care leavers to ensure that they are
taking full advantage of the opportunities available to them. The local authority
provides apprenticeships and work experience for care leavers and is looking,


through the Work Rite project, to expand these opportunities further to ensure
that care leavers are prioritised.
care leavers with more complex needs, who are harder to reach. The new panel
arrangement to review this cohort is a positive step, but is yet to have an
impact.
entitlements as care leavers and the process to make a complaint.
Leadership, management and governance are good
ensure that good quality services to children and young people are prioritised.
The Thrive Transformation plan is driving the local authoritys improvement for
children and families. Its impact is beginning to show improved outcomes for
children and families, with early help services being provided to more children
in 2013 than in previous years. The success of the strategy is underpinned by
good partnership arrangements, a high quality workforce strategy and a robust
system of external review and evaluation. The Troubled Families Initiative has
now been effectively assimilated into the THRIVE strategy to ensure the
integration of this service and its future sustainability.
overarching plan to improve outcomes for all children and young people across
East Sussex. It is coordinated through the East Sussex Children and Young
Peoples Trust (CYPT). Recently revised, it sets out clearly the partnerships
aspirations for all children and young people across the county and establishes
twelve priorities, including looked after children. Children and young people
have made a significant contribution and their comments have been effectively
incorporated into the plan.
from performance information. They receive regular briefings so that they can
discharge their statutory roles and act as champions for childrens services
within the authority. They are knowledgeable about recent findings from
serious case reviews and, through the scrutiny committee and the corporate
parenting board, they monitor effectively the progress being made against the
actions set.
challenge and public accountability for the quality of childrens services in the
authority. Therefore the quality of the work of childrens services is properly
understood so that decision-making at a senior level is transparent and based
on a thorough knowledge of the service and its needs.


implementation of the Thrive agenda. He has secured the continued
commitment of the local authority and partner agencies for financial investment
in services and a belief and enthusiasm for the project from the childrens social
care workforce and the partnership.
interim DCS has used his role successfully to promote the learning from recent
SCRs to all partners, to ensure that the messages are understood and directly
influence improving practice. The development in front line practice, for
example, the improved quality of family assessments, the use of chronologies in
direct work with children and families, and the impact of the early help agenda,
are significant achievements. The recent overview report of the Care Leaving
Service to the senior management team identified a number of shortcomings in
this service area. An effective response, including financial investment, is now
showing that some significant steps have been made, including increased
capacity in the workforce to support some very vulnerable young people.
service, and regular management reports to the board enable members to have
an effective oversight of services to looked after children and young people. As
a consequence they are acutely aware of the challenges all looked after
children and care leavers face if they are to achieve their full potential. They
work well with senior managers and social workers to ensure all East Sussex
children and families receive the right level of support to help them, including
those who live out of the county in placements some distance from home. As a
large county they know they are the host authority to a significant number of
children from other local authorities who live in the area. Through partner
agencies such as the police and area health they know the demand this places
on local services, including when children go missing. Achievements by East
Sussex children and young people and foster carers are celebrated and
reported on to full council.
statutory powers in April 2013, bringing together key partners across Health
and Social Care. The HWB strategy 20122016 focusses on a small number of
key priorities, with several intrinsically linked to the Thrive agenda. Based on
the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment it provides a clear focus for the Board
across a range of health and care issues. Progress of the strategy is monitored
at the quarterly HWB meetings. Generally, planning for services is robust and is
based on an examination of all available information, consultation with partners
and service users and a review of evidence-base research and practice.
However, within planning processes it is not always clear that the diverse needs
of the community and the workforce are considered sufficiently. For example, in
the analysis of the work force, ethnicity is not considered nor how this impacts
on children and families where 8.7 % of all children living in the county are
from an ethnic minority group.


arrangements in place. This has resulted in some good outcomes for children
and young people, for example, the re-commissioning of the Childrens
Integrated Therapy Service has ensured a more targeted and timely service to
families. There are some effective services to meet the diverse needs of
children and young people living in rural areas, such as mobile youth services.
However, the diverse needs of children are not always given sufficient
consideration in planning. For example, the Sufficiency Statement does not
consider whether the profile of the resources available to accommodate looked
after children effectively meets their diverse needs.
ensure that a consistently high quality of service is provided to meet the needs
of children, young people and their families. Performance information
effectively focuses on the priorities of the local authority and data are used well
at all levels of the organisation to monitor and report on this. However, the
performance of the independent reviewing service (IRO) has not been properly
scrutinised. Due to capacity issues an annual report on the performance of the
IRO service has not been prepared in line with national guidance. As a result,
senior managers, elected members and partners are unable to properly
consider how this service effectively challenges childrens care planning
arrangements.
routine case file audits and thematic deep dives to accelerate and drive up
practice improvement. As a result of this work, the level of management
oversight in case files has been improved and is now more robust. The role of
the Principal Social Worker has been well planned to support the organisations
commitment to learning. Regular workshops and direct one-to-one support with
social workers and front line managers supports their development.
to develop services and shape practice to ensure that they focus on best
outcomes for children, young people and their families. The data held by the
authority have been used effectively to consider which children may be
potentially at risk of child sexual exploitation through plotting the findings from
research against data held about individual children. As a consequence, this has
helped to improve local knowledge, operational practice and to inform the
monthly missing childrens meetings. As a result, information sharing across the
partnership is robust.
enjoying good relationships with their social worker. Good working relationships
with local education providers and an effective system of induction and support
mean that new staff have a good understanding of the arrangements for
services to vulnerable and looked after children. A strong workforce
development strategy is in place which ensures that staff from all agencies are
suitably equipped to undertake their roles.


that workers at all levels can undertake their roles effectively. The importance
of the multi-agency Family Keyworkers programme within Early Help settings
has been underpinned by offering accredited training and structured, on-going
support across the partnership to a wide range of professionals. These include
staff from other statutory agencies where children are not the primary focus of
their role, for example the probation service.
active member of the Family Justice Board. Effective work with partners to
address some long-standing issues has resulted in the development of a joint
pre-proceedings protocol. As a result, East Sussex has the lowest completion
time within the Designated Family Judge area and children within the family
justice system are able to achieve a permanent status in a timely manner.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the local safeguarding
children board
The effectiveness of the LSCB is good
Areas for improvement
the Board is able to provide effective challenge across all agencies where
shortfalls in provision and practice occur.
frontline practice.

Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
established and mature safeguarding Board. The Board has an independent
chair who has been in post for over 3 years and is a member of the South-East
network of independent chairs, and is influential in driving improvement in
practice across the partnership. A full-time business manager supports the work
of the Board.
are committed to the protection of children and families. Appropriate
governance relationships are in place with clear lines of communication
between the Independent Chair, Director of Childrens Services and the Chief
Executive of the council. A protocol has been developed between the Health
and Well-Being Board and the ESSCB. Although this has been only recently
agreed, early discussions between the chairs of each body have established
clarity of relationship between the Boards.
played a significant role in developing this agenda and the interface between
early help and statutory childrens social care.
priorities. The plan gives a strategic focus across the partnership on
safeguarding children and families and improving practice. Reducing the
number of children and young people requiring statutory interventions, by
ensuring that they receive appropriate early help at a time when they most
need it remains critical to the overall focus of the Board and the partnership.
serious case reviews commissioned recently. ESCC has allocated additional
exceptional funding to support this work and other agencies unable to increase
their financial contribution to the Boards budget, have increased their support


in kind, for example, providing experienced managers to support the work of
the sub-groups. The commitment to work collectively as a group when there
are challenges demonstrates the effectiveness of the partnership in protecting
children.
requirements. The report sets out the progress made against the business plan
and describes the challenges that remain. It considers the impact of the Boards
work in relation to challenging and influencing the quality of practice and the
protection of children in the preceding year.
comprised of appropriate professionals and has an independent chair. Regular
reports are made to the executive committee of the ESSCB as well as
contributions to the annual Child Death Overview Panel report which is
presented to the Board. Reports identify issues of concern, themes or trends
that require action. The ESSCB receives performance monitoring reports about
early help and social care. These reports support further investigation and
challenge, such as a recent report to the Board about the increase in the
number of children on a second child protection plan. However, although the
ESSCB data report has been extended to some additional areas of performance,
it requires further development. As a result, the Board is not able to identify
fully, and challenge shortfalls in, provision or practice in relation to all agencies.
The ESSCB is aware of this issue and is addressing it.
activities including Section 11 audits, case reviews and action plans arising from
Serious Case Reviews. The Section 11 audit for 2014 has been widened to
include scrutiny of the measures that agencies have in place to recognise,
report on and, where relevant, work with young people who may be at risk of
child sexual exploitation. New arrangements for peer scrutiny and quality
control of the Section 11 audit are planned to be introduced this year.
regular programme of multi-agency case file audits. Such audits are undertaken
regularly, with areas for development and good practice identified. Agencies
report to the Board on the changes made as a result. An example is of bank
staff being employed by NHS Sussex to file a backlog of child protection
minutes on childrens health notes. Shortfalls in the completion of social work
chronologies, identified in audits in the summer of 2013, have been addressed,
with inspectors seeing good examples of chronologies and their use in
assessment. The ESSCB conducts a range of reviews into cases that do not
meet the threshold for a serious case review. A range of methods are used to
review such cases to ensure the appropriate lessons are learned. Learning
arising from serious case reviews, case reviews and audit are embedded into
the ESSCB training and disseminated through bi-monthly lunchtime sessions.
Partners are required to report the actions taken or processes put in place that
address the issues arising.


incidents that have met the threshold for a serious case review. The ESSCB has
addressed these with rigour and the Board has quality-assured the reports
arising from the reviews. Although the number of SCRs has increased, no
common cause was identified for the incidents leading to the reviews. Action
plans arising from serious case reviews are scrutinised and monitored and
partner agencies are called to account in relation to their implementation. This
process has included representatives from organisations attending Board
meetings and the Board exerting influence on the development and
implementation of these plans.
Extensive awareness training has been provided to all professionals, including
those who do not work directly with children, for example, environmental
health officers who may be in a position to identify situations of concern about
children through their work. Further work is being planned to raise awareness
with people working in the night-time economy including taxi drivers, staff in
hotels and take-away food establishments.
who have been exposed to domestic abuse. The Board funded a domestic
abuse project officer responsible for raising awareness of domestic abuse
among professionals and the public. The officer worked with colleagues to
develop the Building Safer Relationships programme. It is a community-based
perpetrator project, as well as providing support for children and mothers who
have suffered abuse. To ensure the continuity of this post, funding has now
moved from the ESSCB to East Sussex childrens services, with the role being
brought into mainstream services.
developing communications between the ESSCB and the community, agencies
and young people. Working directly with young people, they have revised and
refreshed the ESSCB website which has experienced a three-fold increase in the
number of hits.
is responsive to emerging local and national issues. Some work has been
undertaken to identify the impact of the training on practice, although the
Board recognises that there is further work to be done to ensure that training
continues to meet the needs of practitioners.


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work based
learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and
other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


