East Riding of Yorkshire
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 21 November to 15 December 2016
Report published: 13 February 2017

Childrens services in East Riding of Yorkshire are good

Good

permanence

Good


Good


Outstanding


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Vulnerable children in East Riding receive good-quality, well-coordinated support that
safeguards them well and improves their lives. This is as a result of strong leadership
by the local authoritys chief executive, council members, the director of childrens
services (DCS) and the head of safeguarding, who have prioritised the improvement
of services in the council and across partner agencies. High-quality social work is
evidenced in most cases and from the positive feedback received from children and
their families.
There has been excellent work first to introduce and now to embed a well-respected
social work model of practice across all services. This has provided a clear framework
for the consideration of risks that children may face and the identification of any
protective actions that need to be taken. Social workers visit children and their
families regularly, listen to them and ensure that their voices are integral to work
undertaken.
The local authoritys early help work is of a high standard. Support services are
provided and coordinated well across the geographically large county that includes
rural, urban and coastal areas. Wherever families and children live, availability and
access to early help support is consistently good. Step-up and step-down
arrangements between early help services and statutory services are highly effective,
and this has resulted in a significant reduction in the numbers of children and
families needing to be dealt with through formal social work support. A multi-agency
early help and safeguarding hub (EHaSH) screens and coordinates support services
well.
In the vast majority of cases, high-quality assessments and direct social work
support are demonstrably improving childrens and families lives. Multi-agency
coordination and actions are a strength, although the quality of written plans is not
consistently of a high quality.
Urgent child protection issues are identified, and appropriate actions are taken
promptly to ensure that children are safe. In the main, strategy meetings are
attended solely by social workers and the police, although discussions do occur with
other agencies. In the cases looked at by inspectors, there was no impact on the
childrens outcomes due to this gap. Child protection conferences and subsequent
multi-agency meetings are timely, identifying work required to reduce risks and
support families effectively. Multi-agency work to address child sexual exploitation,
children who go missing, radicalisation and child safety are all of a high standard.
Support to children who are privately fostered is good. When there are concerns
about professionals who may have harmed children, appropriate actions are taken by
agencies. However, these are not always concluded in a timely manner.
In the vast majority of cases, when children need to be looked after this is identified,
and prompt, appropriate action is taken. Support for children looked after and their
families is of a high quality. The local authority has a good reputation with the
Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and the local


judiciary for the quality of its court work. Permanency work, including support to
return home, adoption and special guardianship, is well considered and tracked by
looked after reviews and management panels. Placements for the majority of
children are of good quality and meet childrens needs. The local authority is aware
that more needs to be done to increase the volume and range of local
accommodation, and, despite much work to accomplish this, it is yet to deliver
desired progress. Overall, regardless of where they live, children are supported very
well in their education, have their health needs met and are involved in leisure
activities and hobbies. The majority of personal education plans are of a good
standard. Too many children have placement moves that might be avoided if mental
health services to support the management of childrens behaviour that is related to
their early life experiences were more readily available.
Corporate parenting support is excellent, and the achievements of children looked
after are celebrated well. The Children in Care Council (CiCC) is a real strength and
ensures that the voices of children looked after are heard and taken account of
across the council. Advocacy support is accessible and well used. However, there are
insufficient independent visitors for those identified as needing this support.
The quality of adoption support provided by a specialist team is good. Children who
may be in need of adoption are identified at an early stage in the planning process,
and decisions to pursue plans for permanence through adoption are timely. Family
finding is purposeful, and effective regional and national links ensure that a wide
pool of adopters can be carefully considered for all children. The majority of children
are well matched with suitable adopters. Most adoption work is completed to the
childrens timescales, and there are no children waiting to be matched with
prospective adoptive families.
The service for care leavers is outstanding. The Pathway team makes tenacious
efforts to keep in touch with all care leavers. Further, care leavers receive excellent
support and speak very highly about the contribution that the team has made to
improving their lives. They benefit from high standards of accommodation and a very
good quality of individualised support in education and work.
East Riding council members and the chief executive have prioritised services for
children across the council. The director has used that support effectively to create a
learning environment where good social work can thrive. New management panels,
combined with an integrated quality assurance and audit framework, have ensured
that work to safeguard families and support children looked after is good.
Recruitment and retention have been prioritised, resulting in most social work teams
being fully staffed. This means that children and their families are being supported
by social workers whom they know well and who have a good understanding of their
individual circumstances. The quality of recording supervision by managers is too
variable. In the main, this is due to the current electronic case recording system,
which is currently being recommissioned.


Contents
Executive summary
The local authority


Information about the local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and
achieving permanence


Leadership, management and governance


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about the local authority area
Previous Ofsted inspections


The local authority operates two childrens homes. Both were judged to be
good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspections.



The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was
in November 2011. The local authority was judged to be adequate.



The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in November 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.

Local leadership



The DCS has been in post since December 2013.
The chair of the LSCB has been in post since December 2007.

Children living in this area


Approximately 63,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in East Riding. This is 19% of the total population in the area.



Approximately 12% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.



The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:


in primary schools is 11.6% (the national average is 14.5%)



in secondary schools is 10% (the national average is 13.2%).



Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 3.3% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.



The largest minority ethnic group of children and young people in the area is
White Eastern European children.



The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an
additional language:


in primary schools is 3.8% (the national average is 20.1%)



in secondary schools is 2.2% (the national average is 15.7%).


Child protection in this area


At 31 October 2016, 1,194 children were identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service.



At 31 October 2016, 203 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a decrease from 216 at 31 March 2016.



Since the last inspection in 2011, seven serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted and four serious case reviews have been completed or are
ongoing at the time of the inspection.

Children looked after in this area


At 31 October 2016, 280 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 44.6 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 260 (42 per
Of this number:









authority area



authority area









two children looked after and four care leavers are unaccompanied
asylum-seeking children.

In the last 12 months:


there have been nine adoptions



seven children became subject of special guardianship orders



returned to be looked after



living





two children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses in multiple occupation

The casework model used in this area is Signs of Safety.


Recommendations

Ensure that when childrens plans are recorded all of them are clear about
actions to be taken, who has responsibility for them and the timescales they
must be completed in, and that they are regularly updated.


Strengthen child protection strategy discussions and meetings by ensuring that
they are more consistently informed by the involvement of all relevant
professionals.


Improve the timeliness with which the designated officer service resolves
allegations while ensuring that this work continues to be of a high quality.


Ensure that high-quality emotional and mental health support is available to
meet the needs of the children looked after population.


Ensure that personal education plans are of a consistently good quality.


Increase the capacity in the independent visitors service and ensure that
children benefit from such support in a timely manner.


Ensure that supervision for all social workers is reflective, challenging and well
recorded.


Ensure that the recommissioned childrens services electronic database
supports social workers to record their work and enables management
oversight.


Summary for children and young people


Services for children and young people in East Riding are good.



When children need help to feel safe and protected, social workers, police and
teachers work well together to provide support quickly to families. This means
that children and their families receive help without having to wait too long or
before problems become too large. Social workers know the children whom
they work with very well and want the best for them.



Sometimes the written plans for children are not as clear as they could be.
Children and their families should always know when things should be done,
who should do it and what should happen next if there is a problem.



If children cannot remain at home with their families, social workers make sure
that they live in stable, caring foster families. The council is working hard to
find more foster carers who live locally for children of all ages. When it is safe
for children to return home, they are helped to do so with lots of support to
make it work.



When children need to remain looked after, their plans are reviewed regularly
by an independent reviewing officer (IRO), who visits them between review
meetings. Children are helped to say what they think in these reviews, either in
person or online. Some children express their views by joining the CiCC, which
works hard to give children looked after a voice by speaking to councillors and
senior managers about how things could improve.



Children can stay with foster carers when they reach the age of 18 if this is
what they want. They receive help with education and all of them have a
personal education plan. For a small group of children, these could be improved
to ensure that all children receive the right support in school and college. Good
support is available to stay healthy.



Children who need permanent new families, including through adoption, are
well supported. They are helped to feel safe and secure by having good lifestory books and lots of support. Children are usually adopted with their
brothers and sisters.



Social workers and personal advisers for care leavers develop very good
relationships with young people. They work hard to make sure that they feel
safe and happy with their accommodation and have a pathway plan that is right
for them. They are helped very well to find apprenticeships, university places or
employment. There is a lot of effort made to keep in touch with them and to
provide a range of activities.


The experiences and progress of
Good
children who need help and protection
Summary
Children who need help and protection are supported by good services that
improve their welfare and help to keep them safe. Social workers see children
regularly and know them well. This means that children are able to build trusting
relationships with them. The adoption of a consistent social work model of practice
helps workers to focus on childrens lived experiences and on what needs to
change to improve their outcomes. Social workers are tenacious and creative in
engaging with and understanding the wishes and feelings of children, and make
good use of a range of direct work tools.
Early help services make a positive difference for children. Services are flexible,
offering evening, weekend and intensive support. The quality of this work has
enabled many more children to be supported through the early help service and
has resulted in a significant reduction in referrals being made to social work
services. Early help assessments are focused on childrens needs, and good
communication ensures smooth transitions when children do need to receive
statutory services. When concerns about children are referred to the multi-agency
early help and safeguarding hub, decision-making about next steps is swift and
appropriate. Decision-making in child protection strategy discussions is timely and
well matched to risk, but partners other than the police do not routinely attend.
Although they share information, health and other partner agencies could more
helpfully contribute to decision-making and action planning by attending in person.
Assessments have a strong child focus, clearly identify what needs to change and
are updated to reflect childrens changing circumstances. Direct work is also of a
very high standard and benefits childrens lives. Written plans, however, are not
consistently clear. Historically, for a very few children suffering from chronic
neglect, the cumulative impact of this has not been recognised sufficiently quickly
and this has delayed service provision for some. The recent introduction of new
multi-agency approaches to address long-standing neglect is starting to show a
positive impact by improving the timeliness of recognition and appropriate action
being taken.
Child protection conferences and core groups are well attended, focusing well on
the management of risk and enhancing protective factors in families. Services for
children at risk from child sexual exploitation or going missing are strong. The local
authority and police work well together to share intelligence and to track and
reduce risk to children. The designated officer service has strong links to schools
and the co-location of this service with the EHaSH has enhanced identification and
feedback to agencies that require guidance. Multi-agency actions are undertaken
when required, although too many cases are not concluded promptly.


Inspection findings

Children who need help and protection in the East Riding receive services that
reduce risk effectively and improve their welfare.

by the local authoritys early years, childrens centres and youth and family
support services. This provision, which includes both universal and targeted
services, supports children and families across a wide range of needs and
vulnerabilities. Early help assessments are well focused on childrens needs and
are completed promptly.
and at weekends, which are best for families. For many children, the support
they receive addresses their needs very well and prevents problems from
escalating to a level at which they would need statutory services. The local
authority continues to broaden the range of early help services available. For
example, the prevention and education team has developed an innovative
Pathways group work programme, aimed at addressing emerging emotional
support needs in schools linked to low self-esteem and self-harm. This service
is beginning to have a positive impact, addressing childrens needs at their
earliest point before they escalate and need more formal interventions.
that their needs are met, or when progress resulting from the intervention of
statutory services means that children can step down to early help services,
these transitions are well managed because of the close working arrangements
and good communication between services. As a result, children and their
families experience a relatively seamless handover between key workers and
the continuation of a package of support matched to their needs.
about childrens welfare, these are progressed promptly. Well-managed
allocation processes, within both early help services and the local authoritys
locality teams, mean that children do not have to wait to receive services or
further assessment. When urgent or emergency situations arise out of normal
office hours, these are dealt with effectively by a team of experienced childrens
social workers. Handover arrangements with daytime services are robust, and
effective transfer of information helps to keep children safe. Appropriate, wellconsidered decisions are made in response to presenting risks and needs at the
point of referral. This holds true across a spectrum of need from signposting to
a universal support service to a child protection investigation.


risk. The presence of a detective sergeant in the EHaSH means that joint
working and decision-making between police and the local authority are well
aligned. However, health and other agencies do not routinely attend, although
they share information via telephone calls. In all of the cases sampled by
inspectors, there was good coordination and no negative impact from this
deficit. (Recommendation)
services to assess childrens needs, and this ensures consistently high-quality
support for the most vulnerable children and their families. The vast majority of
assessments are good. The voices of children are clearly articulated, and the
analysis gives a clear sense of what needs to change to reduce risk and meet
childrens needs. Assessments are updated regularly, to reflect changing
circumstances and needs, and, as a result, social workers are clear about what
needs to happen to improve childrens welfare and to reduce risk. Children who
have disabilities receive high-quality assessments of their needs, whether these
relate to their disability or to safeguarding, and they are supported with
packages of care that are well tailored to their individual needs.
neglect was chronic, experienced delays in having their needs comprehensively
identified and met. Prior to the inspection, senior managers had identified,
through practice audits, that where the toxic trio of domestic abuse, parental
mental ill health and parental substance misuse was found, a small number of
children had waited too long for decisive action to be taken. The recently
launched neglect and domestic abuse strategies are beginning to demonstrate
desired improvements to both practice and childrens outcomes. The graded
care profile, an approach designed to support the identification of chronic
neglect, is also being piloted in part of the county, but it is too early to
demonstrate measurable impact.
conferences are strong. These fora provide an effective framework for
supporting and protecting children living in higher-risk domestic abuse
situations. Children benefit from this and receive good support and services to
reduce their exposure to risk and to help them to deal with their experiences.
Good-quality multi-agency coordination, combined with focused, direct work,
ensures that these issues are robustly addressed.


attended. They make decisions and develop plans that are evidence based and
match childrens needs. Children are involved well in conferences and many
attend or share their views with the support of the participation and rights
service. The established social work model is also used to good effect to
engage parents and to help them to understand what needs to change. When
child protection actions do not effect sufficient change, the local authority
makes good use of letters before action under the Public Law Outline to
prevent drift.
welfare. However, not all of the resultant written plans are sufficiently specific
to drive and measure progress. Any adverse impact of this is limited due to the
good understanding and relationships that social workers have with the children
and families they work with. High-quality direct work ensures that childrens
needs are met and that their plans are implemented within agreed timescales.
Workers spend too much time inputting to the cumbersome local authority
electronic case recording system, although this is currently being
recommissioned to better support contemporary social work practice.
(Recommendation)
designated officer. The co-location of this service with the EHaSH allows for
swift identification and feedback to schools or other agencies that may require
guidance in discharging their safeguarding responsibilities effectively. The
designated officer coordinates effective multi-agency actions, ensuring that
children are safe. However, the service takes too long to conclude some
complex cases. (Recommendation)
partnership working is making a positive difference in ensuring that they are
safe. Social workers confidently complete risk assessments that accurately
identify levels of risk that individual young people face. Monthly multi-agency
child sexual exploitation meetings work effectively to share intelligence, plan
and oversee activity. A well-established child sexual exploitation team provides
good advice and support to professionals and undertakes effective direct work
with children, their families and social workers. One team member is located in
EHaSH, providing valued expertise at this crucial first point of contact. The
approach of the local authority and its partners to awareness raising and
prevention is strong. The Not in our community programme is a wellconsidered initiative that uses both social media and face-to-face work in
engaging both schools and significant numbers of children and young people in
raising awareness of child sexual exploitation and where to seek help. Good
joint working by the police and the local authority is supporting regular use of
both civil and criminal sanctions to prevent and disrupt the activity of
perpetrators.


missing and found notifications, ensuring that risks of sexual exploitation and
information about hot spots are not missed. All children who go missing are
offered a return home interview (RHI).
missing from education or missing out on full-time education are used
effectively. Headteachers are fully aware of the processes for reporting children
missing from education and say that the local authority responds swiftly when
they report a missing child. The local authority is in touch with all of the 212
children who are currently electively home educated. Monitoring of how well
children progress in their learning and whether they are safe is effective and is
supported by home visits to children and their parents.
compliant with the requirements of statutory guidance and well focused on
childrens needs. Updated training has recently been undertaken by local
authority staff.
pathways in place for children who may be at risk of radicalisation. A
programme of workshops to raise awareness of the Prevent duty training has
been successfully delivered. The local Channel panel and process, which are
jointly administered with Hull City council, have been appropriately applied in
the cases of the very small number of children when there are low-level
concerns. There are up-to-date policies, procedures, guidance and training in
place in relation to female genital mutilation and honour-based violence,
although there are no current or recent cases of children for whom these issues
have been a concern.
The numbers of young people who presented as homeless is low, at five in the
last six months. For these young people, the decisions to offer accommodation
under section 20 were appropriate, and the support provided, whatever their
legal status, was comprehensive, with good consideration of their broader
emotional, practical and educational needs. This work is underpinned by a clear
protocol that is consistent with statutory guidance.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Children looked after receive a good service, which supports improved outcomes.
No children who were looked after unnecessarily or who returned home
inappropriately were seen in the inspection. Management oversight is good, with
direction and rationale for decisions evident in case recording. Thresholds for
children entering care are appropriate and, in the vast majority of cases, timely.
Children and young people have meaningful relationships with skilled social
workers and IROs who know them well, and this enables them to receive the
support that they need. Childrens and young peoples views are consistently
sought, and the voice of the child is evident and taken into account in care
planning. Placement matching is timely. The majority of children and young people
live in homes that meet their needs and they feel listened to and supported by
their social workers and foster carers. Foster carers have access to good support
and training. Children and young people are supported well to attain educationally
and make good progress at all stages. However, not all personal education plans
comprehensively identify individual childrens needs. The majority of childrens
health needs are assessed and met in a timely manner, although specialist
emotional and mental health support is not always easily available. Good advocacy
support is available, enabling children to be involved in decisions about their lives.
However, not all children who are eligible have access to an independent visitor.
Adoption performance is good, with adoption being considered for all children at
an early stage. Parallel planning is effective, all permanence options are pursued
and unnecessary delays are avoided. Good regional arrangements and the timely
use of national systems ensure that there is a wide range of available adopters for
children. Children are carefully matched with adopters and successfully remain
with their adoptive families through responsive post-adoption support services.
Currently, no children are waiting for a match to prospective adopters.
Provision for care leavers is outstanding. The pathway team has excellent skills
and is highly adept at helping care leavers in a variety of situations. Care leavers
have a strong respect for the services that they receive and have a say in what
they need and how the service can improve. Almost all care leavers are in suitable
accommodation. They receive clear and effective advice and guidance from the
pathway team on a range of educational options, through the many links that the
local authority has, and a high proportion find employment or progress to further
or higher education or an apprenticeship.


Inspection findings
interests. Thresholds for children entering care are appropriate and generally
timely, with excellent senior management oversight and direction. A preproceedings panel considers high-quality assessments and detailed chronologies
to consider the impact of historical issues and to ensure that risks to children
are well understood. Pre-birth assessments are of an excellent quality and
inform the early identification of the need for permanence planning. When
children are on the edge of care, there is a range of effective support services
to enable them to live safely in their families. Alternative support to extended
family is also well considered. Viability assessments are timely and thorough,
and there is a clear analysis of potential risks and strengths and the capacity to
meet needs and protect children and young people.
work with families to avoid the need for care proceedings. Pre-proceedings
letters appropriately identify concerns, clearly explaining the changes required
and the course of action that will be taken to safeguard and protect children,
should the required changes not be made. Legal planning meetings are used
well to ensure that decisions to take proceedings are carefully considered. In
addition, robust tracking of cases means that children do not experience
unnecessary delays. The district court judge and Cafcass report good working
relationships with the local authority.
whom they know well. All of the workers and managers who met inspectors
spoke enthusiastically about the children in their care. They gave detailed
accounts of the childrens histories, current circumstances, assessed needs and
how they were involved in supporting and improving their lives. Children are
seen alone and often by their social workers, and their views and experiences
are well recorded, informing assessments and plans. Children are helped to
make sense of their life histories by excellent, sensitive and child-centred direct
work.
benefit from a specialist disability team, which has a wide range of knowledge
and experience. Sampled cases demonstrated that the teams expertise leads to
assessments of a high quality, and this in turn results in robust planning for
childrens care. Transition plans demonstrate strong working relationships with
adult services. A joint commissioning panel considers tripartite funding of
complex cases when needs are identified that can only be met outside of the
countys resources. A particular strength of the panel system is its ability to
construct and provide bespoke packages of care provision that wrap around
the individual needs of the child.


comprehensive services and advice. They have timely health assessments, and
prompt access to primary health services. Educational attainment is monitored
very well by the headteacher of the virtual school. IROs and participation and
rights officers undertake regular visits to children to seek their views and
support them in representing their needs and wishes. Children are supported to
engage and contribute in their reviews directly or by using an internet-based
tool. In 201516, 98% of children aged four years and over communicated
their views either before or after their reviews, which represents excellent
practice. Their views are used well to inform individual care planning. Reviews
are timely, and children and young people are supported to maintain positive
contact and links with their families and friends. As a result, children develop
good relationships with IROs, whom they know well.
there are capacity issues in the independent visitors service. At the time of
inspection, eight children were waiting for a match with an independent visitor,
with one young person having waited for five months. (Recommendation)
managed by social workers and managers. Children and young people are
consistently offered return-home interviews. When child sexual exploitation
concerns are identified, risk assessments are undertaken and appropriate safety
planning and direct work with young people support them to minimise risktaking behaviours.
leaver services through the national dispersal scheme. Their health, education,
faith and leisure activities are appropriately considered in visits and reviews.
The lead professionals working with these young people have a good
understanding of them and of the action that is needed to progress their care
plans and to support them.
secondary schools are good. Headteachers are positive about how the local
authority distributes pupil premium to support children looked after, to help
them with their learning and about how it monitors the impact of it. Children
spoken to by inspectors had a good understanding of their pupil premium and
spoke of getting laptops and one-to-one tuition to support their learning.


The virtual headteacher has a firm grasp of the quality of the education that
each child receives across and outside the local authority, and works tirelessly
to further improve the support available. There is a good focus on transitional
arrangements, from pre-school, through the key stages of a childs education,
to their progression to employment or higher education. The virtual
headteacher risk rates the performance of each child to ensure that none falls
behind with their studies or falls short with their attendance at school.
Attendance for children looked after has been consistent at around 95% for the
last two years.
after. There have been no children looked after who have been permanently
excluded from any school, inside or outside the local authority boundary, for
several years. Good partnership working, for managing those children who find
mainstream education too challenging or who get into difficulties in their
schools, ensures that alternative education arrangements are effective. The
virtual headteacher scrutinises carefully the progress that children make in this
provision.
purposeful. The better plans are insightful in the use of all salient information,
and this provides comprehensive, tangible personal and academic targets. The
summary of a childs background information gives a clear picture of their
circumstances, their strengths and the key issues that they face. In the weaker
plans, targets were imprecise or too few in number or there was missing or
scant information in some sections. (Recommendation)


for reading, writing and mathematics, compared with other similar authorities
or nationally. In 201415, the period covered by the most recently published
data, 93% of children looked after attained the expected standard for
mathematics against an average for similar local authorities of 61.5% and 64%
for England as a whole. In reading, 80% of children reached the expected
standard compared to 69.8% in similar authorities and 71% for England as a
whole and, for writing, 73% reached the expected standard compared with
looked after who do well in all three subject areas was 67% compared with
make the expected progress between key stages 1 and 2, according to
published data and data held by the local authority. The most recent published
data for 201415 shows that 79% made the expected progress in mathematics
and writing and 84% in reading. The proportion of children looked after who
made at least the expected progress, in 201415, in developing their English
and mathematics skills from key stages 2 to 4, and the proportion gaining five
good GCSEs, including English and mathematics, was much higher than the low
averages for similar local authorities and nationally. The attainment data for key
stages 2 and 4 nationally changed in 2016. The virtual school has included the
new way of measuring the progress and attainment of children looked after in
its virtual school report. The numbers of children eligible for inclusion in the
statistics are very small this year. However, attainment at key stage 2 and key
stage 4 for children looked after remains consistent with that in previous years.
leisure activities. This support includes children and their foster carers having
free access to leisure provision through the Max card. In addition, activities
such as jazz dance, ballet and football classes were funded and valued.
team. 95% of initial health assessments are completed within statutory
timescales, and the effective monthly tracking of annual health assessments
ensures that needs are identified promptly. There is also a focus on promoting
healthy lifestyles among children, including diet, physical activity and the risks
of substance misuse.
access to child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS). As a result,
there are a small number of cases in which childrens and young peoples
challenging, risk-taking behaviours have resulted in recurring placement
breakdowns. Inspectors heard several times that CAMHS are not available until
children are stable and settled in their placement. This is an unacceptable
criterion for restricting help for some of the most vulnerable children looked
after. The local authority identified these concerns prior to the inspection and is
currently reviewing children looked after CAMHS provision with health partners.
(Recommendation)


for permanence are fully considered and decisions are set out for permanence
to meet their needs in a timescale that a child can understand and cope with.
Their journeys to permanence are monitored effectively through robust tracking
systems. The majority of brothers and sisters of children looked after live
together and, when this is not the plan, the decisions to separate them are
informed by good assessments and a clear rationale. The permanence panel is
rigorous and ensures that information is tested to make well-informed
decisions, including those in respect of special guardianship orders and longterm fostering. The local authority had been slow to promote special
guardianship orders, but the number is increasing each year and a good
support package is now offered.
appropriate management decision-making, careful planning and good support
packages inform and underpin this. Robust arrangements are put in place to
ensure that children continue to be safeguarded and protected.
placements within East Riding, but has not yet managed to do this. It is difficult
to see what else the authority might do to achieve its aim. A new initiative to
recruit foster carers from across East Riding council employees has recently
been launched, but it is too early to demonstrate impact.
placements, which meet their needs well. Children are placed appropriately in
foster or residential care to meet their needs and, when placed away from their
family locality, this is due in the main to the benefits of a specialist placement
being able to best support their additional needs.
relationships with their workers and wider partners. They report that the
training offer is good and reflects the needs of children and the challenges of
the role. There is an excellent rate of foster carers gaining relevant
qualifications. Annual reviews of foster carers, which include consultations with
children and relevant professionals, such as teachers, are of good quality.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

Decisions to pursue plans for permanence are timely and well considered in all
children looked after reviews. The adoption team also tracks children through
high-quality parallel planning until permanence arrangements are satisfactorily
concluded.
strengthen arrangements for identifying and supporting parents at an early
stage. When significant concerns indicate that it is not safe for them to remain
at home, babies are cared for by experienced foster carers who support their
return to their families effectively, or skilfully and promptly support the move to
their new families. Fostering to adopt is a recent initiative, and, to date, four
babies have benefited from being placed with foster carers who were then able
to become their adopters. This has ensured that there are good early
attachments for some very vulnerable children.
entering care, moving in with their adoptive families and being adopted has
improved considerably. Year-on-year data show a reduction from 613 days in
authority shows that this has improved further to 554 days, ensuring that the
needs of these vulnerable children are met well.
arrangements as part of the Being family campaign in the region. This
promotes the pooling of resources across the region for raising the profile of
adoption, recruitment and adopter training. This continues to generate interest
and a steady number of adopters. Eight adopters were approved last year, and
this has risen to 11, so far, in 2016. The local authority is working with other
authorities to establish a regional adoption agency and this is on target for April
waiting for adoptive placements. This is excellent performance and is a result of
the work done to recruit a wide pool of adopters who are then carefully
considered for all children. Currently, four adopters are waiting for a placement,
and their profiles have been promptly shared both regionally and nationally.


Detailed meetings between all parties are held prior to placements, to fully
discuss childrens immediate and long-term needs, and this minimises risks of
disruption to placements. On the rare occasions when plans fail and there are
lessons to learn, the adoption service identifies whether there is any thematic
learning that needs to be disseminated across the workforce, for example,
following a match which did not progress after the child was introduced to their
potential family.
children are identified for adoption. In the 12 months to the period of the
inspection, there was one child for whom the decision to adopt had been
reversed. This is an improving picture, compared to 15 children who had
adoption plans reversed over the previous three years.
last two years, 21 brothers and sisters were placed together and a further two
children were successfully placed with a brother or sister who was already
adopted. When an assessment and plan determine that it is not in childrens
interests to live together, their adoption plans outline how they can maintain
their relationships positively.
books add effectively to the very good quality of support provided by foster
carers who prepare children to move to their adoptive placements.
adoption service, the visits from workers and the training received. The
majority of prospective adopter assessments are timely, of good quality and
give thorough consideration to what prospective adopters can offer a child,
alongside a clear analysis of their strengths and circumstances, which supports
the eventual recommendation.
adopters. In particular, it carefully considers what services are available to
support children once they are placed, if they are being matched to families
living outside of East Riding. The agency decision-maker makes timely
decisions, with the rationale well recorded and considered. Medical adviser
input is integral, thorough and clear on any potential issues for unborn babies,
to inform matching. These solid foundations positively support lasting adoptive
arrangements for children. This is demonstrated in there having been no recent
placement disruptions.


currently being assessed. Specifically trained and experienced workers within
the service deliver good-quality support and assessments. For families seeking
adoption support, the pathway is through the central contact team rather than
through the specialist service. Although there is some confusion in the wider
workforce about what post-adoption support services are available, children
receive good and individually targeted services. The use of the adoption
support fund has been utilised effectively and supported 19 families to access a
range of tailored interventions. Older adopted children enjoy a range of
organised activities and group events, which support them in forming
relationships and in building resilience and self-esteem. This is extending to a
group for younger children in early 2017. Adoptive families are invited to attend
organised events throughout the year, enabling them to share experiences and
access informal support from the adoption team. Overall, adopters are well
informed of their entitlements and have ready access to information to keep
them up to date.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is outstanding

have the best possible advice, support and help, to enable them to become
individuals who can contribute positively to their communities. The team has a
strong professional empathy with the young people whom they support and
uses excellent skills to make the right decisions for them. This ensures that
young people know and trust the staff to do all they can to make sure that they
move forward in their lives, or help them when they make mistakes.
leavers are in suitable accommodation. The local authority has sustained the
quality of this service over time. It has ample accommodation available, and
staff provide it swiftly, whether allocating it for the first time or finding
alternative safe accommodation, when a young persons tenancy breaks down.
Care leavers who spoke to inspectors reported that they feel very safe and are
extremely happy with their accommodation. They said that staff support them
exceptionally well to help them to learn how to treat their accommodation and
live independently in it.
higher than that for similar authorities and nationally. Almost all (95%) of the
care leavers in the local authority were in such accommodation in 201415, and
managers have ensured that a similarly high proportion of care leavers are in
suitable accommodation in 201516.
good specialist advice and guidance about potential options for them to
progress into further or higher education, training or employment. The
authority is highly aware of the local economy and potential training
opportunities, and has good partnerships with its local colleges.
education or employment is higher than that of similar authorities and
nationally. In 201415, 68% of care leavers went on to further or higher
education or employment, and 11% of these went on to higher education. In
studying in higher education and 11% are apprentices. In some cases, the
pathway team has supported young people who have left school, having failed
to achieve their qualifications, to a situation in which they are thriving in their
learning in a university or on an apprenticeship. A low proportion of care
leavers (31%), compared to similar local authorities or nationally, were not
engaged in education, employment or training in 201516.


and staff meet the variety of essential needs of each individual care leaver.
Care leavers have had a strong voice in the shape and format of pathway plans.
Staff review their plans regularly, and visits to support care leavers are
frequent. Care leavers plans are accurate, up to date and show clearly how
staff help to meet their needs. Issues considered include records of young
peoples health assessments and of any learning they have undertaken. Plans
usefully indicate whether these experiences present challenges for young
people or whether they are viewed positively.
them well and keep a close eye on them. The team adeptly assesses risks to
young people, listens carefully to care leavers life situations and helps them to
understand when they have concerns and when to consider a different and
safer life option. They monitor closely any young person at risk and, when the
risk increases, regularly update pathway plans and increase visits, alongside
thorough discussions at the excellent and innovative care leavers risk panel.
to stay with their carers when this is in their best interests. Some 75% of young
people remain with their foster carers until they are 18 and 15% stay with their
carers when they become young adults.
told inspectors that they understood what the local authority should provide for
them and their entitlements. They received financial support to help them in
their lives. They fully understood what the local authority pledged to give them,
and added that it followed through with these promises. Care leavers who met
with inspectors summarised the care leaving service with extremely positive
comments, such as: I would not be where I am now,  more like a friend
past and present, and Occasionally I feel lost, but now I feel like living again.
positive ethos among care leavers who use the service. For example, care
leavers enjoy team-building events such as go ape to help them to get to
know each other. Staff and carers assess the development of care leavers skills
to live independently, such as their ability to live within a budget and to cook
and eat healthily. The pathway team supplies care leavers with mobile phones,
which provide additional ways to help them to keep in contact.


history documents after the age of 18, which build on the accurate health
records in pathway plans and ensure that young people fully understand their
health histories, such as births, immunisations, any health checks, illnesses or
injuries, or their mental health needs. The team also ensures that the young
persons general practitioner has a copy of the health history so that they have
a full understanding and are ready to help the young person when needed.
They help young people to understand about, or get support with, their sexual
health and support them effectively if they become pregnant.
understand the different types of issues that young people face locally and
nationally. For example, they have received training in child sexual exploitation,
the dangers of radicalisation and extremism, female genital mutilation and selfharm and have gained a deeper understanding of how to spot the signs when a
young person may be fabricating an illness. This adds value to their skills to
help care leavers.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Leadership, management and governance of services in East Riding are good.
Senior leaders and elected members have worked well to deliver services that
improve the lives of vulnerable children and young people. The DCS leads a strong
and stable management team, which has overseen the design and delivery of a
robust range of childrens services. The role of the principal social worker supports
high standards of social work practice. As a result, there has been evident
improvement in all services since the last Ofsted inspection in 2011, which means
that the most vulnerable children receive good support and benefit from improved
outcomes.
Elected members play a prominent role in sustained service improvement through
effective delivery of their governance responsibilities. These include a
knowledgeable lead member for childrens services, a highly effective scrutiny
committee and a dynamic corporate parenting panel. Elected members significant
relationships with children, such as through the excellent CiCC, ensure that the
voice of the child is central to everything that they do. The chief executive,
through a corporate safeguarding assurance panel, has ensured that the relentless
drive for service improvement has been well resourced and owned by the whole
council. In an environment of limited resources, the council has invested prudently
in its childrens services, and an important factor in the success of the council's
approach has been its robust workforce strategy. An offer to newly appointed staff
of rigorous but achievable practice standards within a manageable workload
means that the council has attracted and retained a talented workforce, whose
staff are dedicated to pursuing their careers within the local authority. The
embedding of a robust model of social work support across childrens services has
provided an excellent tool to enable good work to thrive.
Managers fully understand and routinely use performance information in managing
services. They are well connected with the frontline, through such formal
processes as supervision sessions, resource panels, or informally through regular
contact with social workers. However, decisions resulting from these conversations
are not always well recorded, and this does not aid review of any actions arising.
Day-to-day social work management could be further improved by ensuring that all
written plans are of high quality. The childrens services electronic database takes
too much time for social workers to complete. The electronic database is currently
being recommissioned to facilitate better management oversight.


Inspection findings
integrated learning systems, the use of a respected social work model and the
support to staff at all levels greatly contribute to the positive outcomes
achieved by many vulnerable children in East Riding.
protection to require improvement and those for children looked after to be
good. The local authoritys capacity to improve was judged to be good. To
progress the post-inspection development plan, the chief executive formed the
safeguarding assurance panel as a corporate board to improve services. The
panel has met regularly since that time, and has resulted in support across the
council to raise the quality of services for vulnerable children.
previous director, has been sustained. Since his appointment, in 2013, the
current director of childrens services has championed childrens issues
exceptionally well within inter-agency partnerships. For example, his role in the
childrens trust arrangements provides effective governance to a range of multiagency agendas. He and his senior management team also provide motivational
leadership to staff, to whom they are visible and engaged. He has ensured that
managers are well connected with frontline services through formal processes,
such as panel systems, and through participation in casework quality
assurance.
worker (PSW) adds significant value to an excellent culture of learning in
children services. The PSW role is at the centre of learning drawn from a variety
of quality assurance processes, such as case audit and evaluation of training
courses. Additionally, the role maintains a high level of awareness of the views
of children, young people and their parents from a wide variety of sources,
such as the outcome of complaints investigations. An example of the good work
of the learning organisation is the regular threshold meetings. These
retrospectively sample cases that have come through EHaSH, review
management decision-making and ask key questions about childrens services
actions. Valuable learning from this process is captured and used constructively
for the purposes of both service and workforce development and in individual
supervision sessions.
corporate parenting panel and the scrutiny committee, for example, in the
scrutiny committees sharp focus on improving practice to address child sexual
exploitation and those who go missing. Elected members relationships with the
CiCC is a particular strength. They listen carefully to the voices and experiences
of children and ensure that they are incorporated into all of their activities.


impact on improving and developing services are well evidenced through a
range of work undertaken. The CiCC contributed to the development of the
Pledge, revamping of the personal education plans form and designing of the
life-story folder. Members of the group deliver training to foster carers, take
part in recruitment of staff and have produced information for designated
teachers. Children spoken to by inspectors talked very positively about visits by
and with senior managers and councillors. Corporate parents recognise and
celebrate the achievements of children well, and this includes holding monthly
celebration events when the children are awarded vouchers and certificates.
recruitment of a stable and skilled workforce. Good support of newly qualified
members of staff, together with manageable workloads and a comprehensive
staff development programme, has resulted in the local authority attracting and
retaining a well-motivated and skilled group of staff. Managers have regular
informal contact with their staff and know their caseloads well. One-to-one
supervision by managers with staff is mostly regular and, although at its best it
can be reflective, it is not always so. Supervision work is not well recorded and
particularly the scrutiny of decision-making and whether actions have been
taken. The recording of some childrens plans is not yet of good quality, but this
is mitigated by the good-quality work and understanding of practitioners and
frontline managers. The current childrens services electronic database does not
aid management oversight, and this is currently in the process of being
recommissioned. (Recommendation)
and, additionally, the service has developed its own cohort of frontline
managers. The workforce strategys successful implementation results in a
virtuous circle of dedicated and stable staff being recruited effectively,
developed and retained. As a result, most social work teams are fully staffed,
and the use of agency workers is minimal, leading to secure relationships for
children and young people with social workers who know them well.
are strong. A dedicated team deals well with all commissioning activity and has
developed intelligence and expertise in meeting diverse needs. All care
packages for children who have a disability are commissioned individually.
Evidence was seen of strong, wrap-around packages of care creatively built,
using existing resources. Specialist resources for children looked after are
accessed through a robust joint commissioning panel and procured through
regional participation in the White rose purchasing partnership. Quality is
monitored through visits by the dedicated team and monitored by the panel.
The assurance process also includes intelligence drawn from social workers,
IROs, parents and young people themselves. A quality monitoring framework is
currently being introduced to standardise this process, but it is too early to
judge its impact.


whole life course, including issues that impact on the lives of children and
young people. Some features of the joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA)
are strong. For instance, the parenting needs assessment is comprehensive,
and information on childrens emotional well-being is detailed and is informing
the recent review of CAMHS provision in East Riding.
for instance as part of a sophisticated case allocation process by team
managers, which ensures that workloads for social workers are manageable. A
dashboard of performance metrics is discussed at a cycle of quarterly
management meetings and is well understood by managers who use it
extensively to understand and monitor the services that they manage. The
performance and quality board takes up any individual performance matters.
When information is required that is not on the dashboard, bespoke
performance reports can be pulled together to inform service development.
Senior managers are highly aware of, and routinely use, comparative
performance information, such as performance against statistical neighbours
and national averages.
complaints. Most compliments were about the quality of service and staff
attitudes, while the majority of complaints were about decision-making. In the
main, complaints are dealt with well. A new alternative resolution process has
been introduced recently and, as a result, there was a reduction of 28% in the
number of formal complaints in the last year. Learning is identified and
disseminated when identified. For instance, a young person expressed concern
about access to their saving account when they had moved from a foster
placement, and this resulted in clearer guidance being issued to carers.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
Effective governance and mature partnership work by East Riding Safeguarding
Children Board (ERSCB) is increasingly ensuring that services deliver good
outcomes for children.
Clear priorities that reflect the needs of children in East Riding inform the Boards
business plan, actions from which are making good progress in coordinating the
work of agencies to safeguard children. The work of the Board would be further
strengthened if it directly engaged and took account of the voices of children in its
work.
A highly effective audit programme, involving partners, ensures that the LSCB has
a strong overview of frontline practice. Partners are held to account effectively and
board challenges are making a difference through service improvements. Highquality strategy documents and guidance, including a recently revised threshold
document, support early help and improving practice in areas of neglect and
domestic abuse. The Board was instrumental in the work to develop multi-agency
front-door arrangements (EHaSH). Multi-agency oversight supports consistency of
thresholds effectively.
The LSCB has made some considerable progress towards a multi-agency data set
to oversee performance. An excellent learning and improvement framework
enables the Board to monitor and review training to ensure that childrens
safeguarding needs are met and emerging issues are well supported. A highquality newsletter ensures that developments are shared.
The Boards oversight and coordination of children missing and at risk of child
sexual exploitation are well developed and highly effective. Partners support the
operational structures in place, and there is good oversight of themes and issues.
Effective challenge events support safeguarding compliance for partners, although
this is less effective with schools. Although the virtual headteacher and the schools
safeguarding officer provide robust reassurance, the Boards direct engagement
with schools needs to improve.
The learning from some serious incidents has not been sufficiently timely, and the
Board has not ensured that all key messages from reviews are shared promptly or
disseminated widely.


Recommendations
voices and experiences directly inform its work.
education settings and timely ways of assuring itself of their safeguarding
compliance.
management reviews and child deaths is disseminated widely and promptly to
drive improvements for children.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
responsibilities. The involvement of two lay members and a representative from
East Riding Voluntary Action Services ensure that the Board has a community
focus that provides visibility and is connected to local issues. The experienced
independent chair is a member of the Childrens Trust so there is good overlap
between the LSCB and the Trust, and mature partnerships allow challenge to
improve outcomes for the children of East Riding. Partner commitment to the
Board is evident, and all agencies have maintained sufficient funding levels for
the ERSCB to carry out its work.
Board and its sub-groups in the last 18 months, as a result of the appointment
to a new Board manager post. Clear priorities are now evident, which reflect
the needs of vulnerable children supported by childrens services. The LSCBs
detailed business plan keeps the Board updated and evidences good progress
with actions. The sub-groups are clear about their responsibilities, and the
management, evaluation and effectiveness group, chaired by the independent
chair, oversees progress well.
the Health and Wellbeing Board with the chair of the LSCB ensure good scrutiny
and governance of childrens safeguarding. The work by the children and
families overview and scrutiny panel and its review of the LSCBs annual report
provide further assurance.


families through the LSCB have influenced the commissioning and planning of
services to support parenting skills. Extensive and high-quality early help
services are evident and improving outcomes. Considerable work has resulted
in recent neglect and domestic abuse strategies, and there are measureable
plans in place to evaluate progress. The work of the Board would be further
strengthened if it directly engaged children and their voice was more clearly
evident throughout the work streams. (Recommendation)
presented to the Board to allow scrutiny and oversight. There is considerable
multi-agency audit activity to review frontline practice. Any reduction in
attendance at sub-groups is challenged effectively to improve multi-agency
involvement in all of the Boards work.
also a good challenge log, which captures the Boards shared and individual
challenges to partners. This demonstrates well how the Board has supported
service development. For instance, improvements to frontline practice include
better timeliness of information sharing for child protection conferences and
better responses to children who go missing.
frontline practice. Board members take part in audits, including thematic multiagency audits, as well as the more recent walk the floor initiatives, introduced
in September 2016. Four members of the Board visited the police and domestic
violence abuse partnership to gain assurance about support for children. This
opportunity meant that members were up to date on current challenges to
inform the discussions at the Board.
practitioners and managers, and reflect on practice together, as a multi-agency
group. This is good practice. Key learning feeds back into the priorities for the
Board as well as the training programme. The LSCB is appropriately focused on
ensuring that childrens outcomes improve, and re-audit is included in the
planning cycle to show the impact on practice.
procedures influencing the quality and consistency of practice. For example,
pre-birth guidance was created after an audit in January 2015, and self-harm
and parenting needs assessments are currently being progressed as a result of
learning lessons reviews. Piloting of the National Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) graded care profiles is being led by the Board to
influence stronger practice in cases in which neglect is a feature.


and effective with strong partner engagement. A comprehensive multi-agency
strategy includes a wide range of actions to identify and disrupt child sexual
exploitation. There are clear service pathways with effective links to other
related vulnerabilities, such as children missing, gang affiliation and neglect.
Partners are appropriately engaged, including schools, police and licenced
providers. Progress is reviewed effectively by the Board, and there is a range of
resources to support schools and victims directly.
missing and makes good use of escalation processes when issues arise. Return
home interviews for children are collated by the Board manager who reviews
themes and trends with a monthly report to the service leader. For those
children whose return interview suggests that they have complex issues, the
operational group is used to provide support. There is an appropriate response
for children looked after who are placed in East Riding and remain the
responsibility of other local authorities. Information about children missing
education is also cross-referenced for completeness.
safeguarding compliance. The dialogue at the challenge panels provides good
opportunities for the Board to engage in emerging concerns, such as the
Prevent duty. Action plans are updated by members, ensuring that the Board
has a detailed overview of partners progress against its key priorities.
arrangements, although oversight by the virtual headteachers team and the
schools safeguarding officers excellent links with schools provide assurance. An
education reference group that is under development to provide more formal
links with schools has not been given the priority needed, and an acceleration
of pace is required. (Recommendation)
Immediate actions are taken by agencies, but the wider learning is stalled by
the delays in completing reviews. More needs to be done to ensure that
practitioners understand the Boards priorities and that learning from serious
incidents is shared. For example, a serious case review published in November
had important lessons about the vulnerability of non-mobile babies, which the
majority of staff met with during this inspection could not recount.
(Recommendation)
sharing results in appropriate crossover with the serious case review panel.
There is greater confidence for practitioners who support bereaved parents as a
result of the multi-agency training provided by the rapid response team.


monitor and review training and provide an arena for the escalation of
challenge. For example, a shortage of partner participation in training was
successfully addressed by the Board. Excellent newsletters capture practice
issues and new developments, and these are shared widely.
resources well to ensure that practitioners have the training and support
needed. A new guidance document has been produced to support practice in
tackling female genital mutilation. Recent work on hidden harm resulted in
multi-agency workshops reaching 400 participants and contributed to more
effective working relationships across services. The annual report for the LSCB
for 201516 was published in November 2016.
responsive to emerging issues and valued by staff. In total, 26 courses were
provided in the last financial year, with over 2,100 participants. A further 4,346
e-learning activities were also accessed. The scheduling of training activities is
flexible. For example, learning bites provide opportunities for twilight sessions
to support access to training by the early years sector.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted and two additional inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Neil Penswick
Deputy lead inspector: Ian Young
Team inspectors: Dominic Stevens, Shabana Abasi, Fiona Parker, Steve Stanley,
Caroline Walsh, Lorna Schlechte, Tara Geere
Senior data analyst: Tania Corbin, Patrick Thomson
Quality assurance manager: Lynn Radley


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance, Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


