London Borough of Enfield
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 20 January 2015 to 11 February 2015
Report published: 27 March 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services are good
The local authority leads effective services that meet the requirements for good.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Requires improvement

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Areas for improvement


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about the local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Areas for improvement


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Enfield are good because:
Leadership, management and governance
 Enfields senior managers and leaders have a strong track record of making
significant improvements to the lives of vulnerable children and young people.
This is in the context of a rapidly changing environment characterised by high
levels of child poverty, a transitory population due to relatively low housing costs,
gang violence and increased prevalence of female genital mutilation.
 Strong partner agency support and political commitment are making a positive
difference to childrens outcomes.
 The workforce strategy is highly effective, ensuring well-trained and motivated
staff teams. A determination to achieve manageable caseloads means that social
workers have time to get to know children and protect them more effectively.
 Partnership arrangements to safeguard children and young people from child
sexual exploitation ensure that individual children and young people who are
considered at high risk of sexual exploitation are effectively safeguarded.
 Corporate parenting is well embedded across the local authority. Members of the
award-winning children in care council (known as KRATOS, meaning power) told
inspectors that staff listen to them and take action, which is making a positive
difference to the lives of children in care.

Social work practice
 Most children and families receive the right support at the right time. However,
during the inspection, the local authority was asked to consider a small number of
childrens cases as inspectors found that their needs were not being met
effectively.
 Child protection arrangements are effective. Families and children are clear about
the concerns for their family and know what needs to change.
 Looked after children and care leavers receive good care and are supported by
staff who are determined that they achieve good outcomes.
 The local authority and partners have well-developed knowledge and
understanding of the diverse needs of local groups and communities.
 Adoption performance is good. High priority is given to children achieving timely
permanence through adoption, and timeliness is improving.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action

Leadership, management and governance

Ensure that the profile and data of children at risk of sexual and gang
exploitation, and/or missing from home, care or education are cross-referenced
on a regular basis, analysed by senior managers and the learning disseminated
to social workers and partner agencies.

Areas for improvement
Leadership, management and governance

Prioritise the planned integration of the Single Point of Entry (SPOE) with the
Referral and Assessment Team, so that referral pathways for children in need
and those in need of protection are rationalised and better understood
alongside the planned review of early help.


Improve the electronic social care record system so that it delivers accurate and
timely data and performance information and combine this with auditing activity
outcomes to enable senior and frontline managers to improve the quality of
service.


Ensure that the annual reports of the Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO)
and the independent reviewing officer (IRO) meet the requirements of the
relevant statutory guidance, provide a critical analysis of their respective
services and identify specific areas for improvement.


Improve local placement choice so that more young people can be looked after
close to their homes, unless this is not in their best interest.

Quality of social work practice

Ensure that return interviews for looked after children are carried out in
accordance with the policy and procedures, and that findings from all return
interviews are analysed and aggregated and also shared with social workers to
assist with risk assessment and care planning.


Improve management oversight of children in need cases and those at potential
risk of sexual exploitation, so that they consistently receive the appropriate
level of protection and support.


Ensure that initial strategy discussions include relevant professionals to inform
decision making during child protection investigations.



Improve the quality of care and pathway plans so that they are consistently of
a good standard and meaningful for children, young people and their families.
Improve the quality of chronologies and ensure they are used to inform
assessments and decision making.

that records are of a consistently good standard.
statutory timescales, and that the assessments of carers are of high quality.

The local authoritys strengths
partnership arrangements. Senior managers are very experienced; they provide
clear strategic direction and are highly visible. Safeguarding is a key priority for
the local authority and is underpinned by effective governance and strong
partnerships.
risk management panel, chaired by the Director of Schools and Childrens
Services (the DCS), providing effective management oversight and ownership in
high risk safeguarding matters.
services. Although savings are required by the local authority, increased
resources have been secured for schools and childrens services. Additional
funding has been agreed to establish a dedicated child sexual exploitation
team. In response to national concerns about sexual exploitation, a member-led
task group has been established to improve scrutiny.
radicalisation. There are effective partnership arrangements to raise awareness
across schools, colleges, governing bodies and faith groups. Effective joint work
takes place between the Community Safety Partnership, the Metropolitan Police
Prevent team and the local police. Monthly meetings focusing on individual
young people have identified 12 people at risk of radicalisation in the last 18
months, four of them less than 18 years old. The local authority has appointed
a faith officer, who successfully engages with local community leaders.
its partners to plan a holistic, multi-disciplinary preventative service called the
Family and Accommodation Support Hub  FASH. The intention is that social
workers will carry out intensive work with families using the team around the
child/family approach, and act as lead professionals. Funding has been agreed
for this new service and has a focus on diverting young people and their
families away from negative choices.


casework and planning. Managers and staff are passionate about improving
outcomes for children and young people. Continued investment in high quality
training and support to staff has resulted in excellent workforce retention that
has been sustained over many years. Low staff turnover, combined with
manageable caseloads, means that social workers have time to get to know
their children well, and delays are minimised.
website, which contains a range of age-specific direct work tools and video
vignettes of professionals using the tools with children. Inspectors saw
evidence of improved analysis as a direct result of the use of online
information.
regional work programmes that are making a positive difference. For example,
the North London Adoption and Fostering Consortium is successfully increasing
the number of carers for children with complex needs. Innovation is evident in
effective partnership work to tackle gang involvement, de-radicalisation and the
accelerated response to child sexual exploitation child and female genital
mutilation.
universal and specialist services, which means that disabled children and their
families receive integrated support at the point of need.
demonstrated by a highly effective and award-winning children in care council,
known as KRATOS, and childrens views are clearly recorded in social work
visits, assessments and surveys.

Progress since the last inspection
after children services was in May 2010, when the local authority was judged to
be good for overall effectiveness. All recommendations have been addressed,
although the quality of chronologies remains variable.
his staff and partners to ensure that children and young people continue to be
provided with good services in a climate of rapid change, despite additional
demand on resources. The success of the SPOE in bringing partner agencies
together at the front door is ensuring that most children requiring help to
prevent concerns escalating are identified and provided with services that meet
their needs. The number of re-referrals to social care has reduced over the past
two years. Improving assessments, earlier and better intervention and good
knowledge of pathways, both within the authority and with other agencies, help
to ensure that outcomes for most children are improving.


initiatives. For example, the Tri-Borough Care Proceedings Project with Barnet
and Haringey, led by Enfield, is successfully reducing the duration of care
proceedings.
stable staff group who are supported and trained to improve outcomes for
children and young people. This means that children benefit from having the
same worker over a considerable period of time. Managers are permanent and
provide good oversight of case progress. Staff morale is high and staff told
inspectors that they are proud to work in Enfield.
dramatically since 2013; examples include the Youth Parliament, the Young
Inspectors programme and Young Carers. KRATOS has engaged with 102
looked after children and care leavers in the past 12 months and has led the
development of the safeguarding champions programme on behalf of the
Enfield Safeguarding Children Board.
Families, Strengthening Communities parenting course between April and
December 2014. Parents reported that the course had increased their
confidence in their ability to manage their anger, and that they were more likely
to ask their children for their opinions about a range of topics, including gangs.
delivering good services to some key groups of vulnerable children. It has been
increasingly proactive in developing awareness of, and services for, children
and young people in gangs and those children at risk of child sexual
exploitation and female genital mutilation.
their effectiveness in protecting children and young people at risk from sexual
exploitation in October 2014. An action plan and task and finish group are
driving the improvements. This work is aligned to the Trafficked, Sexually
Exploited and Missing (TSEM) work stream and its impact is monitored by the
safeguarding sub-group.
exploitation in primary and secondary schools include, Making Safer Choices
which is delivered by the police, safer school officers, social care and youth
engagement officers. Designated teachers have a specific training module
which focuses on children at risk of sexual exploitation and missing.


improvements being made by all agencies to divert young people away from
gang related activity and to support parents and siblings of gang members.
Gang workshops are delivered to targeted schools by the police and social care.
behaviour, includes workshops for girls involved in gangs. This training has
been rolled out to all Enfield secondary schools.


Summary for children and young people
 Senior managers have a strong and well established track record of making
improvements in services for children and young people. They are aware of the
strengths and the areas for development in these services, which provide good
support for children and young people at times of their lives when they
experience trauma and great change.
 Most children and young people get the right sort of help from the right people
when they need it. In most cases their circumstances improve as a result of the
support they get from social workers and other professionals. Those most at risk
are protected by different agencies working well together. However, some
information on children who go missing from home, care or education is not
shared between agencies. This limits the effectiveness of the work to help these
children and young people to keep safe.
 Children and young people have a strong voice in developing services. KRATOS,
the children in care council, is very successful in involving looked after children
and care leavers in a wide range of activities. Managers take the views of
children and young people seriously and act on them to improve services.
 Social workers really care about the children and young people they work with.
Young people told inspectors that they have good relationships with social
workers, who visit them regularly and listen to their views and concerns.
 The adoption team works well to find permanent families for those children who
cannot stay at home. They act in the best interests of children and ensure that
they move to families who can meet their needs well.
 Social workers and personal advisers provide good support to young people who
are leaving care. They contact them regularly and help them prepare to live
independently and to move successfully into education, employment and
training.
 Social workers and other professionals keep in close contact with looked after
children and young people and know them well. Wherever they live, children and
young people receive good support and as a result their health, education and
welfare needs are met.


Information about the local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 80,400 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Enfield. This is 26% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 37% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 22% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 22% (the national average is 16%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 77% of all
school children living in the area, compared with 28% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Turkish, Black African, Caribbean, White Eastern European, Greek Cypriot,
Nigerian and Bangladeshi.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 48% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 43% (the national average is 14%).
 The borough has the seventh highest number of households in temporary
accommodation in England (December 2013), unemployment levels consistently
above both London and national averages, and the 17th highest notifiable crime
rate in London (201213).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 2,012 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 31 January 2015, 234 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 182 at 31 January 2014.
 At 3 February 2015, 14 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is the same number as at February 2014.
 Since the last inspection, six serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and two serious case reviews were in progress at the time of the
inspection.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Children looked after in this area
 At 31 January 2015, 340 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 41.8 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 291 (36.2 per
estimate of 81,400 is used for 2015 and 80,400 for 2014.) Of this number:
authority area
authority area
 five live with parents or another person with parental responsibility, of
whom 60% live out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 19 adoptions
 five children became the subjects of special guardianship orders
returned to be looked after
independent living
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates no childrens homes.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Schools and Childrens Services has been in post since January
 The Chair of the Enfield Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since
September 2010.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement
The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Judgement grade
Requires improvement

Summary
Enfields Single Point of Entry (SPOE) co-locates professionals from across the multiagency partnership to manage referrals and identify services for children who would
benefit from early help. Early help and social work assessments are robust and help
is provided quickly through the Team Around the Family (TAF) arrangements.
Management oversight and quality assurance of the SPOE require improvement to
ensure that thresholds are applied consistently.
Children and young people referred to childrens social care receive a good service.
This includes timely response to referrals, holistic assessments which take childrens
views into account, and effective multi-agency child protection investigations for
those identified as potentially being at risk of significant harm. Planning to improve
outcomes and reduce risk for children receiving a social work service is robust, and
regular reviews ensure that progress is measured and risks are reduced for the
majority of children. For some children, including those privately fostered, monitoring
of their progress requires improvement to ensure that intervention is escalated to the
correct level if their needs and risks increase.
Social workers and managers demonstrate good analysis and sensitivity to ethnicity
and racial, language and cultural needs. Interpreters are used when required, and
translation of key documentation for families within legal processes is undertaken.
Children with disabilities and their brothers and sisters receive good specialist
services, co-ordinated through the Children with Disabilities Team.
Children at risk of sexual and gang exploitation are identified early, and those most
at risk receive a good multi-agency service that seeks to reduce their vulnerability.
Those at lower levels of risk require improved co-ordinated services to prevent
escalation and ensure that risk is managed at the appropriate level.
Most children who have been missing from home are provided with the opportunity
to discuss their reasons for going missing on their return, with an independent
person. The information from these missing episodes is not routinely shared with
their social worker, so co-ordination of intervention and support to them is not fully
informed by their experiences. Information about children missing from home and
education, and those at risk of sexual and gang exploitation is collated but not
systematically cross-referenced within social care, so emerging issues for individual
children and wider issues and trends within the local authority area are not fully
identified and analysed.


enables good information sharing between agencies and robust decision making
for children when needs and concerns are first identified; this leads to support
for children and families at the earliest opportunity. The use of the early help
form for referral into the SPOE has been successfully implemented across the
partnership, with the majority of referrals being detailed and clear.
different cohorts of children and young people. For example for adolescents,
under-fives or children living in households with domestic abuse, parental
mental ill-health and/or substance misuse. This ensures that a wide group of
relevant professionals are successfully engaged in sharing information and
reaching timely decisions for children. However, inspectors saw a small number
of cases where thresholds were not effectively applied and needed to be
escalated for social care intervention. While performance information is utilised
by managers to monitor quality, planned improvements to the electronic
recording system are intended to improve efficacy.
is well established within the local authoritys guidance and protocols. Timely
referrals into the Referral and Assessment Team and swift triage by a team
manager ensure a prompt response for children. A very small number of
contacts are subject to duty visits, to establish whether an assessment is
required. The local authority accepted inspectors views that this led to
unnecessary duplication in the assessment process and has ceased this
practice.
held appropriately with early help professionals. In most cases there is evidence
of childrens outcomes improving. When early help is not making a positive
difference to children, processes to escalate the level of intervention are
followed in almost all cases, including step-up to childrens social care and
escalation to legal action.
authority acknowledges that within this service some plans for these families
are more focused on the parents than on outcomes for children. The PSU
currently operates a waiting list; while step-downs and self-referrals are
prioritised, the waiting list is not kept under regular review. The local authority
is currently recruiting a social work-qualified deputy manager to increase
capacity and ensure sufficient and robust management oversight of this work.
evaluate outcomes for children receiving early help services, although this tool
is not yet fully embedded. Their audit of early help services, conducted during
the third quarter of 20142015, to which 37% of lead agencies responded,
highlighted a need to ensure that TAF meetings were being held on all cases.


network meetings to review children in need, and child protection conferences
 are a particular strength in the borough. Meetings are well attended by all
relevant professionals and, when unable to attend, professionals submit a
report to the meeting. Children are also supported to attend and participate
within their meetings. Meetings observed during this inspection were chaired
well and ensured that all attendees contributed relevant information and views.
police. Almost all initial strategy discussions do not include other professionals
and, while this did not adversely affect the outcomes on cases sampled, this
practice does not comply with Working Together 2013 nor fully consider
background information held by partners. Subsequent strategy meetings do
include information from other agencies.
significant harm, including harm from neglect, section 47 child protection
enquiries are undertaken in a timely way. Good joint working with the police
was seen by inspectors and, in cases sampled, police accompanied social
workers on the majority of child protection enquiries. The decisions to progress
to section 47 enquiries are proportionate and children are not subjected to
formal child protection investigations unnecessarily. However, in a small
number of cases, there are delays in escalating concerns to formal child
protection processes which impede the implementation of multi-agency plans to
reduce risk. During this inspection, six cases were formally referred to the local
authority; five of these were as a result of delay in progressing from children in
need to child protection processes.
comprehensive and included information from relevant professionals and key
factors affecting childrens lives. The consideration of history and use of
effective analysis, including specific tools used by social workers in assessing
neglect, lead to appropriate outcomes and decisions for children and their
families. The voice of the child and their experiences within their family are fully
considered within assessments, and this is used to inform outcomes and
recommendations.
reviewed regularly and contain a range of appropriate, outcome-focused actions
for children, parents and professionals to achieve, although timescales are not
consistently included. At the time of inspection, there were 230 children subject
to child protection plans: 103 under the category of emotional abuse, 102 for
neglect, 13 for physical abuse and four under the category of sexual abuse,
with eight children under multiple categories. Families spoken with during the
inspection understood the concerns and plans for their family, and knew what
needed to change to reduce risk. The rate of children on child protection plans
is 34.5 per 10,000, which is lower than the England average of 47.4 per


for children. In 201314, only 4% of children had become subject to a child
protection plan for a second or subsequent time within the previous two years.
Where a decision is reached to either step-up or step-down a case between
early help and childrens social care, this is effectively undertaken through a
meeting between professionals and the family; this ensures that plans and
contingencies are clear.
workers, and changes in worker are kept to a minimum. Staff spoken to all
know their children well, regular visits are undertaken and workers ensure that
childrens views, wishes and feelings inform decision making and planning.
website, which contains a range of age-specific direct work tools and video
vignettes of professionals using the tools with children. Children spoken with
during this inspection said they have good relationships with their current social
workers.
in households where parental mental ill-health, substance misuse, alcohol
misuse, domestic abuse or a combination of these factors were present. The
partnership provides a comprehensive range of services to support families
experiencing these issues and these services effectively engage with parents
and children to ensure that risks are minimised.
effective service that promotes the mental and emotional health needs of
children. A monthly forum ensures that children with higher level mental health
needs are prioritised. There is also a specialist arm of CAMHS  SAFE, which
undertakes work with adolescents. The local authority has been successful in
protecting the resource for SAFE.
in identifying issues of child sexual exploitation. Those children considered to be
at the highest levels of risk are protected through the effective multi-agency
sexual exploitation (MASE) arrangements. These arrangements are well
embedded and are a key strength for the local authority. At the time of the
inspection, 29 young people were deemed to be actively at risk. Action is taken
to disrupt known perpetrators. This includes the use of abduction notices, and
there is also good cross-borough information sharing, and sharing of disruption
activities by the police. Analysis from the local authoritys own evaluation found
that practice is more variable where the evidence of sexual exploitation is less
obvious. As a result, a specific identification and assessment tool was
introduced in December 2014, but it is too soon to evaluate its impact.


support young people who are associating with gangs, for example, through
the use of Gang Courts (specific courts for considering gang-related activity) to
secure collective responsibility within gangs for criminal acts. Gang workshops
being run for parents of young people involved in gangs are highly valued.
Parents told inspectors that Its great to know that others are going through
the same and you are not alone. The Gangs and Providers Meeting ensures
that there is effective multi-agency mapping of hot-spots, and partners hold
each other to account for the safety of young people, including those living
away from their home local authority. Work at these meetings is also crossreferenced with the multi-agency sexual exploitation (MASE) group, ensuring
effective communication and a joint approach to child sexual exploitation and
gangs.
interviews with children who go missing from home. This service undertakes
ongoing work with children who frequently go missing and/or who are at risk of
child sexual exploitation. The service does not routinely share records of their
interventions with allocated social workers. This means that for some children,
their social workers are not able to respond promptly to missing episodes.
Information is not well collated or aggregated to inform the identification of
trends.
(CME), as well as those whose parents choose to educate them at home. At the
time of the inspection there were 147 children missing education and 148 being
educated at home. The Education Welfare Service has a daily presence in the
SPOE. All vulnerable children of school age, referred through the SPOE, are
automatically cross-referenced by the education welfare officer to the CME list.
Thorough checks are carried out, for example of council tax and benefit records
and GP registrations, to establish the whereabouts of children.
of cases were closed by the CME forum after checks had been exhausted, a
further fifth of children moved to or were referred to other boroughs and a
small number moved abroad. In the cases sampled, oversight, tracking and
monitoring were mostly good. Data on children missing from home and
education and those at risk of sexual and gang exploitation is collated but not
systematically cross-referenced within social care.


welfare service to support children at risk of exclusion. The fast track to
attendance programme helps improve childrens attendance at school. When
children miss education, appropriate checks are undertaken to ascertain their
whereabouts. All children who do not attend a mainstream school attend
registered alternative provision and receive 25 hours or more education per
week; most attend regularly. Last year, only three CME forum meetings took
place, with a gap of seven months between the first and second meeting. Not
all agencies were present and the police representative failed to attend any
meeting. Reporting to the Enfield Safeguarding Children Board is in place, but it
does not provide robust challenge to the effectiveness of the work.
home, and the vast majority engage well with the local authority. All families
receive an initial visit and are visited annually by the elective home education
officer. Reports on the progress of children and the suitability of their education
are good.
range of issues including health, offending and substance misuse. The Family
Accommodation and Support Team (FAST) is increasingly effective in identifying
young people's welfare needs, and this is reflected in the increase in the
number of referrals to social care, from six in 2013 to 21 between June and
December 2014. The FAST team has responded well to the increasing number
of homeless 16- and 17-year-olds (160 in 20132014), and provides effective
mediation to support these young people to return home. This means that
fewer young people (40 in 20122013, dropping to 20 in 20132014) have
needed supported accommodation. Accommodation for young people in an
emergency is available through Nightstop. Bed and breakfast accommodation is
only used as a last resort (once in the last 12 months) and in such
circumstances 'floating support' is put in place.
children living in households where there is domestic abuse. It is well
established and attended by partner agencies. From July 2013 to July 2014 the
MARAC received an average of 38 referrals per conference; conferences are
held on a three-weekly basis. The number of referrals fluctuates month by
month. There has been an increase in referrals as a result of the police revising
their processes to ensure the referral to the MARAC of repeat victims (three
police calls or more in a 12-month period). This positive change enables the
MARAC to identify and support more repeat victims.


children and young people out of normal office hours. If a missing young
person returns out of hours then EDT is informed and this is noted on the
electronic recording system and copied to the relevant team manager. Legal
advice is available to the team and there are clear criteria for authorisations, for
example regarding independent fostering association placements for children
needing accommodation. EDT staff have access to social work records but not
those in the early help service, which means that they may not always have the
full information that they need when making decisions out of hours.
advocacy services. Since September 2014 a total of 43 children have received
independent advocacy: 24 children subject to a child protection plan, 16 looked
after children or care leavers, and three unaccompanied minors.
child, the Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO) ensures that allegations
are investigated thoroughly. Risk is understood and appropriate action is taken.
While the annual report lacks analysis of service effectiveness, there is evidence
of the service being responsive. Targeted training has resulted in an increase in
the number of referrals, for example in relation to in-house foster carers.
with 22 new fostering arrangements beginning in the reporting period 1 April
assessed and receive visits from their social workers. However, a significant
number of visits are completed out of timescales. Assessments of carers, and
exploration of how they manage without parental responsibility, are less well
developed and the local authority accepts that this is an area for improvement.
sensitivity to ethnicity, racial, language and cultural needs. Interpreters are
consistently used when required and translation of key documentation for
families within legal processes is undertaken. Children with disabilities and their
brothers and sisters receive effective specialist services, coordinated through
the Joint Service for Disabled Children. The local authoritys offer for families
with disabled children is well developed and ensures that a wide range of
services is available to them.


Key judgement
The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Judgement grade
Good

Summary
Children in care achieve good outcomes from their starting points. Children are only
looked after when it is in their best interests. The progress of children throughout
their time in care is tracked by the placements panel, providing a good strategic
overview that prevents delay and ensures that children who cannot return to their
families find suitable permanent homes. High priority is given to children achieving
timely permanence through adoption.
The quality of practice with children looked after is good. Social workers know their
children well and this is reflected in their assessments. The quality of assessments
and reports for court in care proceedings is good and the Parental Capacity
Assessments (PCAs) are particularly thorough.
The looked after children health team ensures that childrens health needs are
promptly assessed and met, including for children who live at distance from the
borough and cannot access local services. Child and adolescent mental health
services (CAMHS) are highly responsive, and can commence treatment within five
days of the referral if needed. The vast majority of children looked after attend good
or outstanding schools. Educational outcomes are good, with most children making
good progress. The virtual school monitors the progress and achievement of young
people well.
The independent reviewing officers (IROs) bring rigour and challenge to care
planning. Recommendations arising from the regular reviews provide a good
overview of progress made and action needed, which ensures that drift is avoided in
most cases. A very high proportion of children take part in their reviews.
When children go missing from care a need to know alert is sent to senior managers
and tracked by the Head of Service. Children and young people are spoken to on
their return to identify any concerns. The performance team compile a monthly
report on missing episodes that is shared with senior officers and council members,
but formal independent return interviews are not consistently offered, therefore
trends are not fully analysed.
Care leavers have a strong voice in Enfield, being the driving force behind the vibrant
Children in Care Council (KRATOS), and effectively influencing service development.
The proportion of care leavers in education, employment or training has been
consistently high and almost all (94%) are in suitable accommodation. The majority
of pathway plans seen require improvement.


best interests. All requests for admissions to care are considered by the weekly
placements panel and the few emergency admissions are approved by a senior
officer. The placements panel continues to track the progress of looked after
children throughout their time in care, providing effective case tracking and
monitoring, and preventing drift in finding permanent homes for children and
young people. The panel is chaired by the Assistant Director for childrens
services and comprises the relevant senior managers, resulting in timely
decisions made at the appropriate level.
Public Law Outline (PLO) and oversees the progress of this activity, ensuring
that PLO cases are kept on track. PLO meetings observed by inspectors were
well run. Parents understood what they needed to do and agreed that the
proposed written agreement was reasonable and achievable. Good practical
support is offered by the Fresh Steps service to help parents to achieve
improvements. Family Group Conferences, involving the wider family group, are
used to help explore options for support in a timely way.
parent regulations or by court direction. However, in a small number of cases
seen during the inspection, children placed in an emergency were too quickly
returned home to parents without a robust assessment or clear plan of support.
This left children without their needs being met and at potential risk. The local
authority is taking part in a pilot project with the NSPCC of a model designed to
improve risk assessment, promote transparent decision-making and consider all
aspects of support for those returning home.
good understanding of the reasons for delay, some of which are unavoidable.
The latest data (April to September 2014) show the duration of care
applications by the local authority is 37 weeks, which is above the 26-week
target and seven weeks longer than the national average. The local authority is
improving year on year, and has significantly improved from 60 weeks in 2011
West London Family Court.
One local authority solicitor said: [The looked after children team] has really
excellent report writers  its a joy sometimes. They remind you what good
professionals are. Manageable caseloads of 10 to 15 children in the looked
after children team enable social workers to see children regularly, get to know
them well and understand their wishes, feelings and needs. This enables them
to report confidently on childrens views within their assessments.


young people, with good performance on the completion of annual health
assessments, dental checks and immunisations. Robust systems ensure that
children placed at distance from Enfield receive regular health assessments. For
children looked after with emotional health needs, CAMHS assess and can
commence treatment within five days of the referral.
well in mathematics, reading and writing. For seven to 11-year-olds at Key
Stage 2, achievement for this small cohort varied between subjects, but most
achieved well in reading and writing. At Key Stage 4, achievement of five good
GCSEs with English and maths has been consistently good over time, and better
than looked after children elsewhere. In 201314 performance dipped, but still
remains above the national average for looked after children. Over a three-year
period, 26% of looked after children gained five good GCSEs including English
and mathematics and 42% gained five good GCSEs.
progress expected of all children. In 201314 most looked after children made
the progress expected of them between Key Stages 2 and 4 in English. Their
progress compares well to that of looked after children nationally and is
comparable to that of all children. They attend well and develop their personal
interests and social skills, and benefit from additional support.
Target setting is always specific enough to reflect the individual needs of pupils,
and the views of children and young people are often well represented in plans.
In most cases sampled, pupils were achieving either improved or good
outcomes. Attendance, for example, was almost universally good.
the educational and personal targets of children as identified in the PEP. Staff
monitor the use of the pupil premium effectively and withhold funding where
there is not a clear link between a childs learning and development and the
purpose of the funding. Good examples were seen where funding was used
well to develop childrens personal interests, social skills and academic abilities.
well. Staff know the children and young peoples circumstances and understand
their needs. There is an increased and improved focus on 16 to 18-year-olds,
with careful tracking and monitoring arrangements of their progress. Most
young people continue in education and training beyond 16. The virtual school
knows the whereabouts of all young people, including the small number in
registered alternative provision. The virtual school takes effective action to
support children back into school when they miss education. Most return to
education within 10 days, and 70% within 20 days.


previous years performance to 86% in 201314. The virtual school is swiftly
alerted where there are attendance concerns. Careful monitoring of all young
people is in place and the virtual school operates an 'attendance risk register'
for all pupils up to 18 years old where there are concerns. Fixed term
exclusions of looked after children are reducing steadily, and there have been
no permanent exclusions of looked after children since 2008.
those who started secondary school at the start of the 201415 academic year
started at a good school. A close eye is kept on the progress of all children,
whatever school they attend.
educational progress and record this at reviews. They challenge social workers
and managers when care planning is not effective and seek additional support
from the virtual school when needed.
report bullying or other forms of discrimination to their social workers and
carers; this issue is routinely explored in the annual health assessment. Enfield
has introduced Viewpoint, an online survey tool, and is beginning to capture
the views of looked after children and other groups about bullying in this way.
services to help them reduce risks. Effective action is taken to identify and
tackle risks associated with offending. Senior managers have a good overview
of all those in care who are known to the youth offending service, and have
ensured that suitable support and diversionary activities are in place for each
individual young person. During 20132014 only five young people who had
been in care for a year or more were convicted or subject to a final warning or
reprimand during the year.
exploitation are protected through the robust arrangements within the MASE
and gangs meetings. This includes children who go missing from care and are
considered at risk of sexual exploitation. In one case, a sexually exploited
young person with numerous missing episodes was purposefully placed outside
London. When interviewed by an inspector, they reported that their life was
turned around and they felt safe.
managers. Missing episodes are then tracked by the Head of Service. At the
time of inspection, one 17-year-old young person was missing. Enquiries were
made which established the reason for going missing.


shared with senior officers and council members. While the local authority has
not ensured that formal return interviews are routinely offered to children who
go missing from care, inspectors sampled six cases of children who had
frequent missing episodes. All of the children had had regular visits from their
social workers, who recorded the reasons for their absence. For those children
at high risk, a strategy meeting was convened. The authority accepts that, in
addition to acquiring information on a case-by-case basis, the collation and
analysis of information from missing episodes would enable them to gain a
broader overview of trends in the area.
are already exhibiting the most disruptive behaviour. Of particular concern is
the area of sexual vulnerability in relation to girls in the older age group. Of the
moves, 29 were female and 16 were male. These young people came from
chaotic backgrounds, were beyond parental control and all had behavioural
problems. As a result, published data for 201314 showed a decline on
placement stability compared with other local authorities nationally. As at 31
March 2014, all the Enfield children in residential care were over 11 years old.
introducing a new CAMHS In Step programme and improved training for inhouse foster carers to help them manage complex and challenging placements
more effectively. Analysis of unplanned placement changes has enabled better
targeted support to those who are more at risk of placement breakdown. There
has been a substantial increase in support available to 16- and 17-year-olds in
semi-independent living provision. Local data for the year to date shows that
action has been effective, resulting in a considerable improvement in placement
stability.
outside the borough. This is in line with the average for all London boroughs.
The authority cites increasing numbers with complex needs, the need for
residential school placements, remands to care, and the need to move children
to break links with gang activity and protect them against child sexual
exploitation, as reasons for making placements away from Enfield.
Nevertheless, senior managers recognise that there is a need for more local
placements, particularly for teenagers and sibling groups. The placements
panel, which is attended by representatives from health and education, ensures
that any child in care moving to live outside the borough boundary will have
arrangements made for immediate access to health and education services.


friends and short break foster carers. In 201314 the service approved 14 new
foster carer households and de-registered 15, resulting in a net loss of one
household. This pattern has been maintained in the year to date: 13 new
households being approved and 16 being de-registered. Exit interviews with
foster carers are not routinely included in de-registration reports, although DfE
categories are being applied and recorded, allowing for some analysis as to why
carers cease to foster for Enfield.
all limited to babies or younger children, meaning a lack of local availability or
choice for children and young people over the age of 11. The service has been
targeting recruitment, and 16 assessments are in progress and listed for the
fostering panel over the next three months, 11 of which are for teenagers.
although some carers report several changes of workers during a recent
restructuring. Despite this, training, reviewing and development programmes
have been maintained, with the fostering panel impressive in its oversight and
execution. Recently recruited carers report excellent experiences, from initial
contact through to presentation at panel, and ongoing support.
and references are in place and arrangements for delegated authority are clear.
Records demonstrate regular and meaningful supervisory visits. Children and
young people are invited to express their views in preparation for foster carer
reviews, and report being well supported in their foster homes. Reviews have
all been completed within the last 12 months.
held before the second looked after reviews. In all cases seen, permanency
planning was timely and effective. Good practical and financial support is
available to families when a special guardianship order is made.
from the regular reviews provide a good overview of progress made and action
needed, which ensures that drift is avoided in most cases. A review for a looked
after young person observed during the inspection was skilfully chaired by the
IRO, who made sure that the young person was fully involved throughout. All
relevant areas were considered, including health, educational progress, contact
and Staying Put arrangements. However, the quality of the written care plans is
not consistently good. Some plans have insufficient information, are not up to
date or do not contain specific, measurable and time-bound actions.


and young people in their review is very high. IROs sometimes use a series of
meetings to form a review, so the young person can participate without feeling
uncomfortable about having to share their private feelings in a wider meeting of
involved professionals. IROs prioritise their monitoring of cases in accordance
with the needs of the child.
on the progress of children looked after and offers no recommendations for
improvement that the authority could make as corporate parents. It offers no
information on the impact that the IRO service has made, and it does not meet
the requirements set out in the IRO Handbook.
date, and provide a valuable overview of the history, current issues and plans.
Case recording in the looked after children team is good and was up-to-date in
the vast majority of cases seen, although the quality of chronologies was
variable.
both strategically and in individual care planning, have increased dramatically
since 2013, when the youth service was commissioned to: increase
engagement, ensure that children and young people have a voice and make
sure that this drives improvement in practice and outcomes. KRATOS has
engaged with 102 looked after children and care leavers in the past 12 months.
Approximately 25% of these were White British, with the others from a wide
variety of ethnic backgrounds. KRATOS has led the development of the
safeguarding champions programme on behalf of the Enfield Safeguarding
Children Board.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

their family would be unsafe or would not meet their needs. Permanency
Planning meetings are consistently convened prior to the second Looked After
Childrens Review, and are attended by a representative from the adoption
team, so that delay in family finding is reduced.


information is updated, and cases are tracked. Meetings are chaired by a
manager, take place frequently and are clearly recorded. Difficult decisions
about separating brothers and sisters are only made after appropriate
consultation and assessments have been undertaken, and when in the best
interests of the children. The adoption cases seen by inspectors had benefited
from having consistent and experienced workers.
and to give prospective adopters information about the child, are of a variable
quality. A small number seen by inspectors lacked analysis and were not up to
date, although this did not lead to unnecessary delays for these children. Good
quality life story work is being undertaken pre-adoption within the Looked After
Children teams and by the adoption workers following the making of the order.
needs, is undertaken with persistence and creativity. In addition to possible inhouse carers, the local authority will explore consortium options through the
monthly Family Finding Working Group. It also uses the Adoption Register and
Adoption Link, sends out profiles, creates DVDs, and attends exchange and
activity events.
recent Family Finding Briefing (January 2015) produced for senior managers
confirms that adopters were being considered for most of the children whose
plans for adoption had been agreed by the Agency Decision Maker. In one case
a match had not been identified, though every effort had been, and was
continuing to be, made to find a placement.
is an area of strength for the local authority, overall timescales for achieving
adoption were significantly higher than the England average. The average time
between receiving court authority to place a child and deciding on a match for
impressively 51 days less than the England average. However, the average time
between children entering care and moving in with their adoptive family was
days longer than the England average. Significantly, only 43% of the children
waited less than 18 months from entering care to moving in with an adoptive
family compared to 51% nationally. Importantly, the local authority is reporting
an improvement in the overall time taken from entry to care to a child being
placed, which, for the first 13 adoptions in the current year, is averaging 546
days.


finding capacity, improve oversight of cases that are in proceedings and to
develop thinking in relation to concurrency. Effective collaboration established
through the North London Adoption Consortium is leading to improved
recruitment and assessment of prospective adopters, ongoing training and an
increase in adoption support.
the team provide strong leadership and individual workers have been
encouraged to develop areas of expertise such as life story work, concurrency
and fostering to adopt. There are good working relationships between the
Adoption Team and the Looked After Children Team workers, which directly
contribute to the timeliness and the quality of the work carried out.
in order to generate a sufficient number and range of carers so that their
strong matching performance is maintained. Improved marketing strategies are
in place, aimed at recruiting more carers from Black and minority ethnic
heritage. It is too early to assess the success of this piece of work. On the 30
January 2015 there were 24 children with plans for adoption agreed by the
Agency Decision Maker and there were 20 adopters waiting to be matched to
children.
reporting a smaller percentage of children adopted than average for statistical
neighbours and England. In 201314 the authority reported that 11% of the
children who ceased to be looked after were adopted  a figure below both that
of its statistical neighbours (14%) and the average for England (17%).
experiences. They told inspectors that the assessment process is extremely
informative, proceeding at a pace that is helpful and appropriate. The adopters
spoken to felt that their individual workers were open and approachable, and
they viewed the support offered as genuine.
agency decision maker. There is good challenge by the adoption panel, which is
appropriately constituted. A Panel Business Meeting takes place every six
months, the minutes of which show that the panel takes account of
departmental priorities.


child and their adoptive parent. There is a good range of effective pre- and
post-adoption support provided by the in-house workers, the North London
Adoption Consortium and through commissioned services. The two workers in
the adoption support team have between 35 and 40 open cases at any one
time and do not operate a waiting system. The local authority reports low levels
of adoptive placements which breakdown and adopters spoke highly of the
support being provided. Letter box and face to face contact is comprehensively
overseen within the adoption team and this service is provided to all children
living away from their parents.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good
leavers, sometimes using creative means such as a trusted professional.
Consequently they are able to provide ongoing help and support. Currently
there are only four young people (1.5%) not in touch with workers.
Support is being provided to engage them in education, employment and
training. Most young people are being assisted by their personal adviser, foster
carer or key worker to develop independent living skills such as cooking and
budgeting, which are aimed at assisting them to make the transition to
adulthood. Young people informed inspectors that they felt safe in their
accommodation and that being in care had provided them with opportunities to
develop their lives. There is good engagement with young people to support
future arrangements, including housing and jobs, and work in these areas is
contributing to improved outcomes for young people. While care leavers are
being well-supported and pathway planning reviews take place regularly, some
recording is not up-to-date and some plans are not sufficiently detailed.
training (EET) opportunities. The average proportion of care leavers in EET was
include 20 and 21 year olds, and has dropped to 59%; comparisons with other
local authorities are currently not available.
managers for looked after children. In addition, termly reports by the head of
the virtual school and the head of behaviour support are presented to the DCS
and his departmental management team for scrutiny and challenge. This
ensures that the educational attainment and engagement of the local
authoritys care leavers receive the highest priority and that all possible
opportunities to improve outcomes are identified and utilised.


Programme deliver good outcomes for young people. For example, from the
last Care2Work programme, almost all candidates progressed well and achieved
positive next steps, including gaining an apprenticeship place within the local
authority or employment elsewhere. There are currently eight care leavers
undertaking apprenticeships; one young person told inspectors that it had
turned their life around. Access to higher education is promoted and 20 care
leavers are attending university. Young people spoken with confirmed that they
had been supported by the local authority with their education.
The level of information depends on the length of time the young person has
been in care. It is not always possible to retrieve a full health history on
unaccompanied asylum seeking children as their early lives were spent
overseas. Young people have been involved in developing a health passport,
and these have been issued to all children in care.
majority were in suitable accommodation as at 30 September 2014. There is a
range of accommodation options available to young people, and good
partnership working is taking place with commissioners and community safety
to ensure that young people are not placed in areas where they will be unsafe.
young people currently in Staying Put arrangements. The local authority is
looking to increase this number and has recently signed off a newly developed
Staying Put policy and pathway, both of which have had input from young
people. Seventy-eight young people are in semi-independent accommodation,
comprising both small units with key worker support and individual
arrangements for young people with higher levels of need.
protocols in place with the Housing Department which prioritise the needs of
care leavers; 58 young people have their own flats. Workers recommend them
to a panel when they can demonstrate key independence skills. There has been
a significant increase in these arrangements over the last year (34), after the
application forms for the panel were changed to better represent the
independence skills of the young people.
though this type of accommodation was used in an emergency once in the last
year. There are currently no young people in multi-occupancy accommodation,
and none are deemed to be homeless.


care leaver service continues to be provided throughout the period of
incarceration, and supports their discharge. In one case a placement was kept
open for a young person throughout the time that they were in prison, on the
basis that it had been providing for their complex needs previously.
attempts had been made by their workers to raise awareness. Care leavers are
familiar with the Pledge, but not with the details contained within it. Passports
and other significant documents are not being provided on a systematic basis,
but all the young people spoken with had the documents they required at the
current time.
interviews of prospective employees, deliver training to staff and Members, and
design booklets/materials for children in care. They have a strong voice in
Enfield, being the driving force behind the vibrant Children in Care Council,
KRATOS. One young person told inspectors that her request to retain the same
social worker was agreed when she left care, and she has kept the same
worker for six years.
cases they were able to describe tangible ways their workers had assisted them
in their lives, typically in relation to education and accommodation. Similarly,
there was enthusiasm amongst staff to do the best for their young people.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and governance Good
Summary
Leaders and managers are highly ambitious and have a clear and enduring
determination to provide high quality services for children and young people in
Enfield. They have a good understanding of the main challenges for children and
their families and of the strengths and areas for development in the services they
provide. The Director of Schools and Childrens Services and his senior team provide
strong and stable leadership. Partnership work is well embedded and demonstrable
in casework and planning. The local authority has a track record of delivering good
services to key groups of vulnerable children. It has been increasingly proactive in
developing awareness of, and improving services for, children and young people in
gangs and those children at risk of sexual exploitation and female genital mutilation.
Enfield is an innovative local authority, developing and promoting effective
approaches to practice in collaboration with its partners, for example through its
successful gangs strategy and its external tri-borough review of the effectiveness of
arrangements to protect sexually exploited children. The authority continually
demonstrates its commitment to children, young people and families through its
investment in staff to ensure that caseloads are manageable. A highly effective
workforce strategy is in place, ensuring the stable staff group are supported and
trained to improve outcomes for children and young people. Staff morale is high and
staff are proud to work in the borough.
Systems to monitor performance are in place, and provide a range of performance
data to front line and senior managers. Analysis of the quality of practice carried out
through audits is used to drive improvement. However, this is not routinely brought
together with performance data to create a more rounded analysis of the
effectiveness of services to inform improvement.
The Overview and Scrutiny Committee has recently reviewed its priorities on key
areas of performance. Inspection findings and national events have led to immediate
steps being taken to ensure that the quality of the work of childrens services is
properly understood. There is a dedicated, member-led task force set up to monitor
all strands of child protection in the borough.
Corporate parenting responsibilities are well-understood across the service. Regular
management reports to the Corporate Parenting Board enable members to have an
effective oversight of services to looked after children and young people and care
leavers. Services to looked after children are of good quality. The local authority
work hard with care leavers to ensure good outcomes. Further improvements are
needed to increase the number of suitable foster placements for older children.


board chairs work together to achieve improvements across childrens services.
Local authority senior managers, leaders and elected members discharge their
individual and collective statutory responsibilities effectively. There are wellestablished lines of communication, which include regular meetings between
key personnel. Senior managers are visible to staff, respected and take an
active role in quality assurance and practice issues when required. Senior
managers have good awareness of the strengths and areas for development of
childrens services within the borough.
and have been effective in driving sustained improvement in childrens services.
Thresholds, agreed with partners, have been established to ensure that services
can respond to the needs of the sustained influx of families to the borough.
Early intervention is well-embedded, with the effective use of TAFs making a
positive difference to children at the earliest opportunity. Innovation is evident
in work with gangs, de-radicalisation and the accelerated response to child
sexual exploitation and female genital mutilation, and a wide range of early
help services has been developed.
pressures, increased financial commitment has been secured for schools and
childrens services. This is to be used to address demand, including placement
choice for looked after children. The Overview and Scrutiny Committee has
recently reviewed its priorities on key areas of performance. Inspection findings
and recent national events have resulted in immediate steps being taken to
increase the breadth and depth of the scrutiny function. Core safeguarding
activity now features routinely in the forward plan.
established links between the Health and Wellbeing Board, the Childrens Trust
and the Enfield Safeguarding Children Board (ESCB). Both the DCS and the
Independent Chair of the ESCB attend all three of these meetings, ensuring
that work streams are aligned though not duplicated. The childrens plan is at
the end of its cycle; the plan is currently under revision and new priorities are
being identified, based on the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment. These include
vulnerable children in care, those who are at risk of sexual exploitation,
involved in gangs, and who are neglected.


Educational Needs and Disability (SEND) Local Offer which is articulated clearly
in a booklet produced in partnership between the local authority, the NHS and
parents and young people. This promotes service users and associated
professionals awareness of resources and entitlements for families of children
with special educational needs and/or a disability. Partner agencies work well
together and achieve improved outcomes for children and young people, as
demonstrated by the highly effective work of the Joint Service for Disabled
Children.
range of strategic and working groups that enable them to contribute richly to
the development of childrens services. The sector provides an extensive
tapestry of services that support children and families.
for, children and young people at risk of child sexual exploitation. The local
authority and its partners commissioned an external evaluation with two other
London Boroughs of the quality and effectiveness of their services in identifying
and protecting children missing and those at risk of sexual exploitation, and
preventing such incidents. A robust task and finish group to take forward the
recommendations provides details of leadership oversight of frontline practice,
and actions to improve communication, standards and a consistent response to
sexually exploited and missing children.
the inspection, and attended by senior managers from children social care,
provided evidence of effective multi-agency engagement, and inspectors also
read the previous six months meeting minutes. There is a robust tracking
system, with details on all young people known to be at risk. This ensures that
an effective audit trail is in place, records are updated and matters brought
forward. Cases are escalated if risk increases, and stepped down following
intervention to reduce risk. There is evidence of cross-borough communication
and mapping of hotspots and perpetrator activity. For example, three young
women at risk of sexual exploitation (two in care to neighbouring local
authorities) were effectively linked, with joint work in place between the police,
local authorities, parents and carers to protect the girls. These arrangements
are well embedded and demonstrate effective joint working for young people at
risk of sexual exploitation and gang related activity.
TAFs. Further work is required to ensure compliance with policies and
procedures on missing looked after children. Inspectors found that these were
not uniformly followed to include return interviews. Once aware of this, the
local authority took immediate action to reinforce policy and procedures in this
area. The deficit in this process was mitigated by purposeful casework practice,
and inspectors saw no cases of missing looked after children where young
people were at risk of immediate harm.


cycle to provide information to senior leaders. A health check on the current
ICS system was recently undertaken that has resulted in a corporate action
plan of improvement and investment, with activity scheduled for completion by
July 2017. Key data, agreed by senior managers and strategic boards, is
routinely collated and reported to departmental management groups, the ESCB
and the Lead Member. Some analysis of data, including trends and issues
arising, is provided to senior managers, though this lacks robust analytical
commentary.
managers. Managers at all levels routinely undertake audits of work for which
they are directly responsible. Most social workers receive effective and timely
supervision, although records do not always demonstrate that sufficient time is
given for reflection. Decisions within casework are recorded on the childs
record, ensuring that childrens progress is effectively monitored. Social workers
told inspectors that they feel supported by permanent managers who know
their cases well. Audit findings are not yet being used effectively to drive
improvements in practice, but thematic audits occur regularly and these are
considered routinely by the ESCB.
organisational learning. This learning is powerfully enriched by the impressive
and valued engagement with children, young people and their families.
Examples include the Youth Parliament, the Young Inspectors programme and
Young Carers. Six parental engagement panels are used effectively across the
borough to inform service planning and promote engagement with hard to
reach communities. There is good recognition of equality and diversity issues
within the borough, and the workforce broadly reflects the diversity of service
users.
for young people and families. Strategic commissioning is informed by a welldeveloped Joint Strategic Needs Assessment, which includes key information on
safeguarding issues and vulnerability. There is a focus on strategic planning for
childrens services, and the authority has established aligned budgets with the
Clinical Commissioning Group, for example to provide multi-systemic therapy
and a bespoke adolescent service through CAMHS. Contract arrangements
demonstrate a link between commissioned and statutory services, for example
by including an expectation regarding FGM reporting within contract
specifications. Commissioned services are required to report quarterly on
progress and more frequently if there are concerns or if targets are not met.
The local authority has developed links with consortia, and leads the North
London Childrens Efficiency Programme which is also involved in an ambitious
project to build a residential facility for those hard to place, in order to increase
sufficiency of local placements.


strong commitment to the needs of looked after children, led with vigour by the
Lead Member with other elected members and senior leaders. The established
Children in Care Council (KRATOS), is well supported and visibly active. Young
people in care and care leavers are well represented on the corporate parenting
panel. The panel has been influential in challenging performance, leading to
improved outcomes, for example, improving looked after children
documentation and the Viewpoint consultation tool. There is a meaningful
pledge for young people in care as well as for care leavers, and the authority is
in touch with almost all of its care leavers. Educational achievement for looked
after children is overseen effectively by the virtual school, and attainment is
consistently above that of statistical and national averages.
caseloads are manageable and all work is allocated. This work has been
successful in ensuring that the average caseload in most teams is about 15
cases. This supports the delivery of good social work practice, characterised by
sound assessments, appropriate analysis and child-centred work that is both
planned and purposeful. There remains some variability in practice, and it is not
yet uniformly good. A small minority of cases seen were poor, with the common
factor being too great a delay in escalating cases to child protection from child
in need cases.
developing and retaining strong frontline services. For this reason, the
workforce is skilled and well supported at all levels. Social workers and
managers, through a Grow your own scheme, have an established career
structure and increasing opportunities for group and reflective supervision.
Learning and training opportunities are identified through annual appraisals,
and are very well met through comprehensive and flexible training that is
assessed to measure impact over time. Social workers report that they feel well
supported by managers who are knowledgeable and accessible. These factors
contribute to a workforce that is highly motivated, evidencing high morale. The
local authority reports that vacancy levels at the time of the inspection were
local authoritys figure for turnover of staff was also markedly lower than the
national average of 15% in 2013.
social workers assessed and supported year in employment (ASYE). This
includes a range of mandatory training, and opportunities to gain advanced
qualifications. Arrangements for additional support include mentoring and
reflection time. Newly qualified staff interviewed during this inspection
confirmed that they had reduced and manageable caseloads and reported
feeling very well supported in their work. The proportion of newly qualified
social workers across all teams is 16%.


notifications were received by Ofsted between 31 March 2013 and 1 April 2014;
one has resulted in a serious case review (SCR) being commissioned by the
ESCB.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
good.

Summary of findings
The LSCB is good because:
Partnership arrangements
 Strong and effective partnerships mean that partners are holding each other to
account for the delivery of good multi-agency services to children and families in
need of help and protection.
 Thresholds are understood, embedded and applied well by partner agencies.
They are supported by an escalation policy that is well understood.
 The Board is pro-active in seeking to work with neighbouring safeguarding
boards to protect vulnerable children and young people most effectively. The two
most recent serious case reviews (SCRs) have been undertaken in partnership
with neighbouring LSCBs.
 The multi-agency training plan is comprehensive and well evaluated. Training is
responsive to emerging need, including learning from SCRs.

Scrutiny and challenge
 Annual Section 11 audits are conducted well. They feature peer review and
challenge to identify gaps in agency safeguarding practice, policies or
procedures. Gaps are addressed effectively.

Policies and procedures
 ESCB policies and procedures are routinely updated and responsive to local and
national developments. A recent focus on child sexual exploitation and female
genital mutilation has accelerated and improved practice in these domains.

Childrens views
 The ESCB ensures that the views of children and young people play a pivotal role
in the work of the Board and have influence over service developments.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
There are no priority actions.

Areas for improvement
effectiveness of early help services.
oversight of the Boards priorities.
from contributing agencies and the quality assurance sub-group, so that the
Board will be better able to identify themes and trends and take necessary
actions as required.
powers under the Licensing Act 2003 so that taxi companies and taxi drivers
are subject to appropriate scrutiny.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
that the Board complies with its statutory and regulatory responsibilities. The
Board is well attended by partner agencies, including representatives from the
third sector. The Board has two lay members who demonstrate both
commitment and independent challenge to the Board on behalf of children and
young people. Board members are of sufficient seniority to be able to commit
resources to support the work of the Board. All sub-group chairs are members
of the main board. The Board is well managed financially and contributions are
proportionate.
effective links with the Health and Wellbeing Board and Enfield Adults
Safeguarding Board, and with neighbouring Local Safeguarding Children
Boards. As such, concerns are shared on issues such as child sexual exploitation
and gang activity that cross local authority boundaries.
Executive, the Director of Schools and Childrens Services, other senior
managers and the Board Chair. This ensures that safeguarding activity remains
core business and is effectively managed. The Chief Executive undertakes a
formal appraisal of the Board Chair each year.


example, a Board-level concern was raised about the lack of FGM referrals from
health; health partners were asked to consider the matter, and the subsequent
action plan has led to a direct increase in FGM referrals. Board members are
actively involved in visiting partner agencies and meeting frontline workers to
assure themselves that safeguarding practice is well understood and part of
their everyday thinking.
Board and its partner agencies have a strong grip on these issues and make a
clear link between child sexual exploitation, children missing from home and
care, and gang activity. The Trafficking, Sexual Exploitation and Missing (TSEM)
subgroup of the Board was set up in February 2012. It is a multi-agency group
which coordinates and oversees Enfields operational and strategic response to
child sexual exploitation including the implementation and monitoring of the
child sexual exploitation strategy, the action plan and MASE. Meetings provide a
forum for agencies to evaluate progress, share operational issues and highlight
any specific areas of risk.
additional oversight and scrutiny, the Board convenes a Section 11 challenge
panel. The panel is chaired by the ESCB Chair and is attended by other Board
members, including the Designated Nurse for Safeguarding, Enfields Head of
Safeguarding and a lay member. An action plan is drawn up for the agency
identifying where improvement and/or clarification are required. This process
has been used effectively to improve safeguarding practice by Board member
agencies.
from contributing partner agencies and the quality assurance sub-group. This
undermines the Boards capacity to identify if there are any emerging themes or
trends in the data.
assurance sub-group. This has resulted in improvements to practice, such as
ensuring that the probation service was firmly linked to the SPOE. Similarly,
when it became apparent that health visitors employed by the Mental Health
Trust could not access information about parents with mental health difficulties,
an information protocol was established. This now enables more effective
discussions about thresholds for services and sign posting to the most
appropriate service for children in need.
a colour coded system to easily demonstrate impact on practice. For example,
an audit of child sexual exploitation referrals identified that thresholds for
accessing a statutory service were high. Practice has now developed to ensure
that all referrals where risk of child sexual exploitation is identified are allocated
to a lead professional or a social worker.


has plans to undertake a deep dive audit of TAF processes to reassure itself of
partner understanding and compliance of work in this area.
It effectively identifies improvement priorities, such as work on female genital
mutilation and child sexual exploitation, children and young peoples further
participation, and joint working with other boroughs.
the voluntary sector. Serious case reviews, both local and national, influence
learning, as well as being driven by key local issues such as FGM. Training is
well attended by partners and the Board monitors attendance. Evaluation
returns indicate training is highly valued. Social workers who spoke with
inspectors during the inspection reinforced this. Training is evaluated over time,
and this is a strength in ensuring that it has impact and is cost effective. Two
learning events are scheduled for the near future, a conference on female
genital mutilation in March 2015 and learning from local SCRs in April 2015.
legislation. Currently the Board operates on an 18-month cycle of reviewing
and, if necessary, updating procedures which, once ratified, are disseminated to
partner agencies. The policies are then published on the Board website, which
has recently been revamped.
board and sub-group activity. It provides information on audit activity and
makes reference to engagement with young people and how it has responded
to Enfield young peoples concerns.
Safeguarding Champions), who make an active contribution to board activity
and ensure that the voice of young people is heard in the Board. They bring
challenge to the Board and have been commissioned to complete a piece of
work, including a DVD and posters, on the dangers of young people becoming
involved in drug dealing.
young people. They have also been trained to take part in interviewing staff,
and were involved of the interview process that appointed the current ESCB
Business Manager.


It is well attended by appropriate professionals. Reports to the main Board
have led to local health campaigns, for example, a safe infant sleeping
campaign on the risks of parents sleeping with an infant. The CDOP chair also
attends the SCR sub-group to ensure that cases and concerns are not discussed
in isolation. The lessons from the serious incident notifications have been
disseminated. When the two current SCRs are published, learning events will be
arranged for all staff groups.
reviewed local authority licensing activity. However, it cannot currently assure
itself that taxi companies and taxi drivers have meaningful and effective
scrutiny. The Board is aware of this and is taking steps to monitor this activity.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted,
and two additional inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Brenda McLaughlin
Deputy lead inspector: Sean Tarpey
Team inspectors: Jansy Kelly, Rob Hackeson, Jon Bowman, Martin Parry, Chris Luke
and Dominic Porter-Moore.
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


