Essex County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and protection, children
looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children board 1
Inspection date: 14 January 2014  5 February 2014
The overall judgement is good
The local authority leads effective services that meet the requirements for good.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

Good


Good


Good


Good


Good

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) requires
improvement
The LSCB is not yet demonstrating the characteristics of good.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents

Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: the effectiveness local safeguarding children board


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority is good because

When children, young people and families need help the right services are
provided as soon as they need them. The thresholds document Effective
Support for Children and Families in Essex sets out the services that are
available, including the Early Help Hub and Family Solutions. Children who
need to be protected immediately are safe because social workers and the
police work together quickly and well.


Social workers are very good at getting to know children and families and
work closely with them when they are making assessments. This means that
social workers can quickly identify and provide immediate positive help and
support for children and families.


Social workers record the work they are doing with children and families
really well. This ensures that others know what is happening if the social
worker is not available.


Where children and young people have difficulty saying what they want, for
example because they are disabled, social workers are skilled at finding out
through other ways of communicating with them.


Social workers and their managers are making sure that the right children
are being looked after, and that they have safe and secure places to live. If
there is a possibility of children staying or returning home, they make sure
that families get support to do this.


Social workers are getting much better at assessing and planning for what
looked after children need, particularly if the case goes to court. This means
that decisions are made without delay; children and young people have plans
for permanent homes and are kept safe.


The local authority is good at making sure that looked after children do well
at school and they are now much better at completing Personal Education
Plans to support this. They are particularly good at making sure looked after
children are not absent from school.


Most looked after children have the chance to stay where they are currently
placed because the authority has an effective system in place for planning
permanency. For example, the fostering service is good at making sure there
are enough foster families available for looked after children, so that they
can live with a family that matches their needs. Low numbers of children
move because their carers cannot continue to look after them.



Looked after children get a consistent, high quality service. Their reviewing
officers are good at making sure that social workers are delivering what they
planned to do. If looked after children live out of the county, social workers
visit them regularly to make sure they get the same service as if they lived in
Essex. The adoption service is good at finding the right families for looked
after children and making sure that adoptive families know what it is that
children need, so that they stay with them and do not have to move. The
local authority is very good at supporting adoptive families to make sure this
happens.

job or a place to study, and somewhere safe to live; it helps them to become
independent adults.
and frontline managers receive regular performance information. This shows
what is working well and what they could do better, so that they know what
action they need to take. When senior managers make changes to improve
services, they make sure they understand the issues and consult with
children, young people and their families and listen to what they want. As a
result, changes are flexible, workable and realistic in meeting childrens
needs.
Children in Care Council has worked with staff to improve the service,
provide helpful leaflets and promote the advocacy service. A good system is
in place to make sure the local authority learns from complaints.
young people and families in Essex. They have very good plans in place that
are working well to make sure that they employ, support and keep good
social workers to ensure that services can be maintained.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Areas for improvement
should make clear in plans how things will get better for children, not just for
their parents.
the threshold is met to contact the social care Initial Response Team (IRT) in
line with Effective Support for Children and Families in Essex.
where there is a plan there is also a clear contingency for what will happen if
the plan does not work.
and supporting children who go missing become stronger. This includes risk
assessments, strategy meetings and return home interviews, taking account
of changes to statutory guidance, published at the time of the inspection.
information and working together to identify and prevent young people being
sexually exploited or trafficked.
endorse social workers decisions to look after children.
problems have good assessments and easy access to good quality mental
health services.
involved when their pathway plans are being written so that their voice is
heard, and that they know how to get someone to advocate for them if
needed.
objectives to timescales.
Agency Risk Assessment Conference (MARAC) cases.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted, one of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) designate and one Associate
Inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Ian Young
Team inspectors: Fiona Millns, Nigel Parkes, Carolyn Spray, Lynn Radley, Mike
Ferguson, Carmen Rodney, Graham Tilby and Deane Jennings.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 296,683 children and young people under the age of 18
years live in Essex. This is 21.1% of the total population.
 Approximately 17.1% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 13.6% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 10.1% (the national average is 15.1%)
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 8.5%
of all children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a
whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the
area are mixed ethnicity and Asian.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 5.7% (the national average is 18.1%).
 in secondary schools is 4.1% (the national average is 13.6%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 January 2014, 6,220 children had been identified through
assessment as being in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a
reduction from 6,739 at 31 March 2013.
 At 31 January 2014, 438 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is a reduction from 547 at 31 March 2013.
 At 31 January 2014, 29 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from 27 at 31 March 2013.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 January 2014, 1,139 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 38.4 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from
 Of this number, 246 (22%) live outside the local authority area

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


authority area
 eight live in residential special schools, of whom 100% live out of the
authority area
area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 99 adoptions
subsequently returned to be looked after
moved on to independent living
now living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. Four were judged to be
good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Essexs safeguarding arrangements /
arrangements for the protection of children was in October 2011. The local
authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of Essexs services for looked after children took
place in August 2010. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of Essexs fostering service took place in May 2013
and judged it to be good, and an inspection of the adoption service in
March 2012 judged it to be good.
 The previous inspection of Essexs private fostering arrangements took
place in February 2013 and they were judged to be good.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since November 2010.
He has a dual role and became the Statutory Director of Adults Social Care
in January 2013.


 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since June 2012. Prior to that he
held the post of interim Chair of the LSCB.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
are good
and Families in Essex. This was in response to a needs assessment in
January 2013 that identified that 47% of children were on a child protection
plan for neglect. This strategy is transforming the way in which children and
families are helped and protected. The partnerships approach is designed to
ensure that children and families get the right help and support at the right
time. This has resulted in positive reductions in the number of children who
have a child protection plan or require specialist services and the number of
children looked after. This is a move away from a reactive approach to
managing short-term crises in childrens lives based on an over-reliance on
the provision of social care.
These have been refocused as part of an integrated approach. This has led
to a much sharper emphasis on the impact of the help childrens centres
provide, with good systems now in place to track childrens progress. The
centres reach extends to minority groups, as well as supporting isolated
children and families living in rural communities. Good partnership work
between a range of agencies is used to signpost women who are subject to
domestic abuse to the Freedom Programme run by childrens centres. This
gives them access to the skills necessary to protect themselves and their
children.
multi-agency help and support. The shared family assessment (SFA), which
has replaced the common assessment framework (CAF), ensures that
parental consent is routinely obtained. This allows information to be shared
between agencies appropriately, in line with requirements of legislation and
guidance.
Help Hub (EHH) provides enhanced signposting to early help services. This is
helping professionals to identify the right mix of community-based support to
children and families. Trained advisors based in the EHH use a
comprehensive directory of local services to provide good quality
information, advice and guidance to professionals. This ensures that children,
young people and families get the right level of help and support in a timely
way. It is too soon to assess the full impact of the EHH but the early signs
are very positive.
professional multi-agency Family Solutions service. Family Solutions plan and


work effectively with families to improve parenting skills. The support offered
includes direct work with children, young people and parents to achieve
change in those areas of their lives that are negatively affecting parents and
their children. The work includes liaising with other key agencies, for
example those dealing with domestic abuse, mental health or substance
misuse, advice on debt (including rent arrears), and then offering practical
help. The service is located where the highest levels of need in the county
have been identified, and it includes an experienced and qualified social
worker in each of the eight teams. Good working arrangements between
Family Solutions and childrens social care ensure that the level and intensity
of help and support provided is responsive to families changing needs and
can be escalated if required. Children and families are very positive about
Family Solutions and about the impact it is having on their lives. One mother
interviewed said Im not a bad mum but I had reached rock bottom; without
Family Solutions my children would probably be in care now.
owned at a strategic level. Referrals made are appropriate. The re-referral
rate for 201213 is 25%, in line with that of statistical neighbours and
England. The new arrangements were only introduced from April 2013. Some
positive impact has been seen but the volume of calls and emails continues
to be high as the service becomes embedded. Between 1 November 2013
and 31 January 2014, monitoring by the local authority shows that staff in
the IRT dealt with 12,351 contacts, including domestic abuse notifications
and information requests. Of those, 3,077 went forward for an assessment
by social workers based in one of the locality-based Assessment and
Intervention Teams (A&ITs). Of the callers, 3,539 were offered advice,
information and guidance; no further action was required with 5,221
contacts. From cases looked at during the inspection, managerial oversight
was appropriate and other support services were provided as necessary.
the team responds promptly to telephone calls and emails. The service is
effective in identifying those children and families who require social care
intervention. Appropriate checks and balances are in place, with good
management oversight ensuring that the screening process is safe. Social
workers based in the IRT provide a valuable consultation service to other
professionals, enabling them to address issues and concerns so that children
and young people receive the right level of support and are kept safe.
are effectively protected. Assessments are undertaken by qualified social
workers and senior practitioners based in one of 14 Assessment and
Intervention Teams (A&ITs) across the county. A well-resourced emergency
duty team (EDT) provides an effective response outside normal office hours
to children and families in need of help or protection. Experienced senior
practitioners based in the EDT have good links with the daytime teams and
this means a high quality social work service is available at any time.


In the vast majority of cases seen by inspectors, strategy discussions and
meetings were appropriately attended by multi-agency partners, particularly
the police. This has led to good analysis of risks and strengths, which is used
well to plan, manage and review child protection enquiries. The meetings
ensure that information is shared quickly and effectively, and appropriate
protective action is taken promptly. No examples were seen by inspectors of
children or families being subjected unnecessarily to child protection
procedures.
and families receive the help and protection they need from social workers
promptly and routinely, without waiting for their assessment to be
completed. Good packages of support are provided while assessments are
ongoing, preventing childrens circumstances worsening while they await the
outcome of an assessment, and their cases escalating unnecessarily. Social
workers ensure that they see the children alone and listen to what they say.
Social workers have manageable caseloads. This mean that they have the
time to use a range of direct work techniques to get to know and understand
children and young people well, build positive relationships with them and
provide well-tailored packages of support.
in the large majority. Risks and protective factors are well understood and
analysed as part of a strength-based approach. Chronologies and case
summaries are generated through the integrated childrens system (ICS). An
improved format for chronologies has been developed and is being
introduced to all teams across the county. In the majority of cases, evidence
was seen by inspectors that these provide a historical record of the case and
are being used effectively to inform social work assessments and
interventions. The summaries provide detailed relevant information and an
historical overview.
children being supported through clear and simple, outcome-focused, highly
specific and measurable child protection plans. This method provides
professionals with a way of engaging parents in a collaborative approach to
protecting their children. It uses plain English to identify and describe risks
and strengths and agree what safe will look like for the child. Child
protection conferences (CPCs) using this approach involve families more
effectively and are much more interactive than conventional CPCs. However,
the new format is not being consistently used across the county.
requiring a child protection plan have one. During the inspection, no children
were seen left at risk of significant harm and no cases were referred to the
local authority. Child protection conferences and core groups are good at
protecting children. The vast majority are timely. They meet regularly and


are effectively chaired, well attended by partners, well recorded and are
good at monitoring and managing risks.
inspectors in supervision notes and on electronic case files, including an
appropriate level of critical challenge. This ensures that the right decisions
are taken at the right time and that plans are reviewed and updated at
regular intervals. Appropriate action is taken to ensure that cases are not
allowed to drift.
case records seen provide a good level of detail about the work undertaken.
This includes considering the childs view and consultation with other
professionals, with a clear explanation of how key decisions were reached.
The vast majority of case records are up-to-date. This ensures that the
information is available for social workers to draw upon and make decisions
in a timely and effective manner when the allocated social worker is not
present.
scrutiny. A commissioned service makes daily calls to schools to identify
children who are absent, including those who have been excluded. This high
level of vigilance is supported by the targeted activities of education welfare
officers. Currently there are 700 children known to the local authority who
are being educated at home. A risk management system is in place to
prioritise education advisor visits to those children, as part of a commitment
to safeguarding them.
of persistent absence reducing from 7.7% for all children in care in 2009
Overall absence of children in care in Essex has reduced from 5.4% to 4.6%
for 2012-13 which is better than the Essex average for all children. In
addition, appropriately arranged changes of school are used well to engage
and keep children looked after in full-time education. Positive referrals
between schools have contributed to reducing exclusions. Consequently,
attendance at 95.4% is better than the national average for children in care
and the local average for all pupils. This is again keeping pace with the
reduction nationally.
been strengthened by the introduction of the multi-agency Missing Children
Partnership. As a result of closer partnership working, police information is
now recorded by IRT on the childrens social care electronic database. Senior
managers receive weekly reports on all missing children, enabling them to
provide a level of scrutiny. No examples were seen by inspectors of young
people who go missing being left at immediate risk. There was also evidence
of services such as Family Solutions and the Divisional Based Intervention


Teams being used successfully to reduce missing episodes for individual
children. However, strategy meetings and return home interviews are not
used routinely by social workers, and there is limited evidence of a proactive
approach to understanding why children go missing.
until December 2013, there were 1,085 episodes of 251 young people going
missing. 58 (23%) were missing from home and 193 (77%) were missing
from care; of these, 81 (32%) were Essex young people placed in Essex, 67
(27%) were Essex children placed outside Essex, and 45 (18%) were young
people placed by other local authorities in Essex. In the case of looked after
children who go missing, newly revised procedures provide clear guidance
about the need for them to be classed as missing and subject to a strategy
discussion if absent from where they live for six or more hours. IROs are
routinely notified when children are missing from care and can bring forward
their review, providing an additional safeguard.
programme, has helped to increase awareness of Child Sexual Exploitation
(CSE) across the partnership. Following the recruitment and training of CSE
champions across all partner organisations, the number of investigations
being carried out by the police has significantly increased, including joint
investigations with childrens social care. Case tracking by inspectors
provided examples where high levels of monitoring provided by the care
leavers team and the police were ensuring individual young peoples safety.
To strengthen joint working arrangements the local authority has recently
appointed a senior practitioner who works jointly with the police for missing
children and a team manager for CSE. This is to improve consistency,
including the use of multi-agency strategy meetings.
professionals. As a result children are safeguarded against the potential
threat posed by adults who are not fit to work with them. The role of the
Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO) in Essex has been re-structured
and strengthened with the appointment of a LADO in each locality.
partners use the Domestic Abuse, Stalking and Honour-Based Violence
(DASH) tool to identify, assess and manage risks. Where children are
involved, notifications are sent to the IRT promptly by the police. IRT
routinely informs schools in cases that are already known to social care to
enable them to monitor and be proactive in keeping children and young
people safe. A Joint Domestic Abuse Triage Team (JDATT) has recently been
created by the police and social care in order to streamline the notification
process and ensure that only appropriate referrals are received.
abuse are effectively protected. Partners are fully engaged with Multi-Agency


Risk Assessment Conferences. Although there is currently a backlog of cases
waiting to be discussed, in the interim, timely, appropriate risk ratings result
in coordinated action, involving both the police and childrens social care to
protect children. Plans are firmly in place to enhance support for victims, by
increasing the number of Independent Domestic Violence Advocates (IDVAs)
from six to 18.
advocacy service commissioned through a voluntary agency. This promotes
the voice of the child, assists in the early resolution of complaints and
supports children and families who are subject to child protection
processes. Child Protection Conference Chairs meet with children and young
people in advance of the child protection conferences and are proactive in
giving them information about the advocacy service.
housing officers ensure that young people aged 16 or 17 who are homeless
or at risk of becoming homeless are safeguarded and supported. HYS assess
the need for accommodation. Some young people are referred to childrens
social care; others are supported to return home. When this is not possible,
they are helped to find suitable alternative accommodation. Since July 2013
the team has supported 74 young people to return home successfully and 56
to find alternative accommodation.
private fostering arrangements. Privately fostered children and their carers
are well supported. Assessments are timely and children are seen and seen
alone at regular intervals, in line with statutory guidance. Private foster
carers say they feel well supported and are able to access training available
to other foster carers.
recognised and is reflected in assessments and plans. Children with
disabilities receive effective support from social workers who have good
insight and who are imaginative and creative in identifying their needs,
wishes and feelings. Close links to the Transitions Pathway Service ensures
that for older children with disabilities, transitions are well planned, personcentred and are effective in maximising and promoting their independence.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence are good
Social workers in the children in care teams have manageable caseloads and
provide families with support through direct work and relationship based
social work. Assessments incorporate effective assessment of risk and
demonstrate a comprehensive understanding of the needs of children.
Records are detailed, include good case summaries, are up-to-date and
clearly reflect the voice of the child. If children return to the care of their
families wide ranging support is put in place to maximise the chance of
successful rehabilitation. Only a very small number of children reunited with
their family re-enter care.
of care are offered by time-limited, solution-focused intervention and multi
systemic therapy teams. Parents and young people spoken to value these
services and the resulting improvements in their lives. These services,
alongside other family support services such as Family Solutions, and the
implementation of robust exit from care plans, have significantly reduced the
number of children looked after while still keeping them safe.
only those children who need to be looked after come into care. Decision
making by the panel is currently recorded against resource allocations, but
could be further strengthened through the recording of the professional
challenge and endorsement of social workers decisions.
work written reports for reviews are comprehensive and up-to-date. Reviews
observed and social workers spoken to by inspectors clearly articulate the
childs care plan and how it is being progressed. However, a small minority of
written care plans seen were not sufficiently SMART, and did not therefore
focus on what was needed to make sure the plan worked.
large majority of cases enter the court arena at the right time for the child.
The average length of proceedings is now standing at 28 weeks, down from
little need to commission expert witnesses as analysis in social workers
assessments for court continues to improve. Timely assessments of family
and friends are undertaken by a specialist team. These improvements have
all significantly reduced delay for looked after children in securing legal
permanence and allowing planning for their long term future.
affecting their lives are very strong. Children and young people looked after
are fully consulted, both by their social worker and their IRO. Their wishes


and feelings are clearly expressed in social work records and the outcome of
reviews. The comprehensive IRO Feedback Report for 2012/13 records that
the majority of children and young people in care said they are happy where
they live and that they would not change anything about it. Furthermore,
the majority report that they enjoy school, have good relationships with
social workers and positive experiences of reviews. This was also evidenced
in the inspection as part of case tracking. Cases reviewed by inspectors
demonstrated a good level of involvement of children and young people and
a good level of understanding by the IRO of their needs. Social workers in
the teams dedicated to working with disabled children use creative and
inventive methods to ensure that views of those who do not use speech as a
means of communication are understood.
service provided by a voluntary sector organisation to help them complain if
they want to. This service has helped achieve early satisfactory resolution of
concerns before they become formal complaints. The Corporate Parenting
Panel meets routinely with members of the Children in Care Council (CiCC)
and an action plan is being implemented to address the issues they have
raised. The CiCC communicates effectively with children through meetings,
their website and a regular newsletter. The views of children are gathered
and reported by a dedicated involvement team. This is clearly informing
service developments, such as the restructuring of the leaving and after care
teams.
managed by a project co-ordinator responsible for the recruitment, training,
supervision and support of 50 volunteers. The Project Coordinator also
manages referrals to the service and the matching process. All volunteers are
requested to provide a minimum of two years commitment and in some
cases the independent visitor remains involved with the young person up to
the age of 21.
taken. This includes foster carers receiving training to ensure they offer
appropriate support. Feedback from children as part of the IRO Feedback
Report indicates that the large majority of looked after children (70%) and
young people (79%) do not feel bullied. This is in line with children who are
not looked after, and no instances of bullying were seen by inspectors
tracking and sampling cases and meeting with young people during the
inspection.

A very large majority of looked after children say in feedback to the authority
that they feel healthy and well. Most children have current health assessments
(87.4%), dental checks (86.8%) and immunisations (83.5%). Dedicated
health coordinators in each local area, who are valued by social workers as a
source of accurate advice, also ensure that children placed out of the
authority area receive appropriate services. Strength and difficulties


questionnaires (SDQs) were routinely completed in cases seen by inspectors,
and these help assess childrens well-being and inform their health plans. A
review of Essex Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS)
acknowledges the need to improve services and has involved wide
consultation with service users. In the interim, improved access to CAMHS
services is being achieved locally through mental health practitioners based
within the children in care and care leavers teams. These are providing
effective support to workers and working directly with children and young
people.
as well as their classmates educationally. Clear strategic priorities for raising
standards and accelerating the progress of children in care have led to the
restructuring of the virtual school and to better use of targeted resources.
Furthermore, equality of access to additional resources ensures that looked
after children meet their targets, with a significant minority exceeding them.
The authoritys clear and deliberate policy ensures that looked after children
mostly attend schools that are judged by Ofsted to be good or outstanding.
base. The achievement service has made strong progress in guiding schools
to focus more sharply on the achievement of these pupils. Under the virtual
head, key appointments of senior staff have helped to establish a clear vision
for improvement, and priorities are being met. As a result, over the last five
years, the rates of progress have risen to the point where, in 2013, Key
Stage 1 and 2 results for Essex were in line with the national averages for
children in care, statistical neighbours and other children in the authority
area. The number of looked after students gaining five A*-C grades at GCSE
was in line with the national average for children in care. This includes the
good achievement of 13 young people who achieved between six and 15
GCSE grades A*-C, including English and mathematics. The attainment gap
is closing in each key stage and the rates of progress over time are broadly
in line with national expectations for looked after children.
significant improvement in their completion rate and quality. In May2009,
the completion rate of the integrated PEP was 65%. The current completion
rate of PEP 1, completed by school, is 81% and PEP 2, completed by social
workers, is 98%, which is good. Schools have embraced the process, which
has increased their accountability. Systematic tracking of looked after
childrens progress against specific and measurable targets quickly identifies
needs and allows for personalised support.
activities, such as personal tuition, employing extra support staff and buying

The pupil premium, is additional government funding provided for students eligible for free school
meals, children looked after by the local authority and students with a parent in the armed services.


learning resources, are well matched to the learning needs of individual
children and young people. Since September 2013, schools have begun to
work in clusters to spread the benefits of good practice widely. It is,
however, too early to evaluate the impact of these strategies on improving
progress.
school. This has led to a decline in persistent absence amongst children
looked after, from 7.7% in 200809, to 5.2% in 201213. Attendance is now
not only above the national average for children in care, but above that for
all pupils in Essex schools. This is a significant achievement by the
authority. Exclusions are rare, and the one permanent exclusion in the last
five years was successfully challenged within the local authoritys procedures
and also raised with the Secretary of State. Effective support, including
managed moves between schools, is used well to engage and keep looked
after children in full time education.
countys provision are strong. Careful commissioning of placements means
that only 22% of Essex looked after children are placed out of county
compared to the national average of 36%. Appropriate systems are in place
to ensure that children placed outside Essex have timely and suitable
arrangements for health and education services. Looked after children living
out of county, and those in alternative provision, are monitored the same as
those living inside the county boundaries. They are supported to receive
their full entitlements and achieve as well as their peers. Cases tracked by
inspectors evidence that children continue to see their social workers
regularly and receive appropriate support. These are kept under review by
the Resource and Care Panels, with a view to bringing them back to Essex or
moving them if appropriate to foster placements, if in their best interest. A
sample of children placed at a distance from the county was visited by
Ofsteds regulatory inspectors during the inspection. They were observed to
be well placed, with sound placement plans to ensure that their complex
needs were met. When interviewed, they said that they were happy with
where they lived and were visited regularly by their social worker and family
to ensure they maintained contact with home.
places for looked after children is underpinned by both good self-knowledge
and the creative use of feedback from children and users. Arrangements for
sourcing, contracting and quality-assuring independent fostering
services, residential and supported accommodation placements are effective.
Sufficiency is monitored and reviewed regularly by senior managers.
The commissioning teams have good knowledge of providers in the market,
include social work and special education expertise, and they collaborate
with neighbouring authorities through a regional consortium. As a result,
they are able to identify quickly placement options which take account of
both the care and education needs of looked after children.


early, and is formalised by the second looked after review at four months. To
avoid unnecessary delay, parallel planning is used routinely, as is a
consideration of family and friends care. A very small number of plans
evidence some drift, but overall management oversight is robust and
effective in reducing delay. Progress in delivering the plan for permanence is
subject to a tracking process, and the plans of children under five are subject
to a review on a quarterly basis. This is more frequent than required. It
ensures timely referral to the Adoption Agency and encourages consideration
of other permanent alternatives to looked after children living in long term
care.
permanent families to live in, outside the care system. The numbers of
children currently placed for adoption and being made subject to special
guardianship orders (SGOs) have consistently increased. The use of SGOs in
Essex is high: in 201213, 12% of the children who ceased to be looked
after became the subject of an SGO, compared to an England average of
England. There are presently over 400 SGOs in place in Essex, and this led,
appropriately, to the establishment of a specialist team for SGO support in
October 2013.
fostering service, ensuring robust and swift recruitment and assessment of
foster carers to provide homes for looked after children. Scrutiny of foster
carer case files demonstrates timely and rigorous assessment processes, with
all checks and references being effectively undertaken and recorded.
access training that they say they value. In 201213, 45 new foster carers
were approved together with 27 family and friends, while only 25 foster
carers were de-registered, creating an expanding pool of in-house options to
improve matching. Over 60 foster homes do not currently have children
placed with them. This is in order to maximise the opportunity for suitable
matching. This is supported by a good training programme, low caseloads
for supervising social workers, a payment for skills scheme and good take up
of certificated training; 933 out of a total of 995 foster carers have a
Childrens Workforce Development Council certificate. In addition, a
dedicated household reviewing team specialises in foster carer reviews and
this is also a strength, enabling focused attention on the needs of foster
carers.
live so that they enjoy improved life chances. Performance data demonstrate
that at March 2013 only 9.2% of looked after children had experienced three
or more placements and 69% had lived in the same placement for two years
or more. Essex compares very favourably nationally against both of these


indicators, as the England average for looked after children experiencing
three or more placements is 11.1% and 67.3% have lived in the same
placement for two years or more.
adoption teams have workers whose primary function is to find families for
children who need a permanent alternative family. The local authority has
good child-centred processes for managing cases where long term fostering
is the best possible permanency option. The authoritys monitoring indicates
that older young people take longer to match and may have a history of
placement moves. Managers of the service have identified the need to recruit
more specialist foster carers for adolescents with complex behaviours, such
as those experiencing sexual exploitation and involved in offending.
manage both direct and indirect contact with their families for children in
adoption, special guardianship and long term fostering cases. Complex
contact arrangements are managed well by social workers, and facilitated or
supervised by support workers, to ensure that they are a quality experience
for looked after children. IROs both monitor and effectively challenge the
impact of contact arrangements on children and the families caring for them.
people who look after them and helping them understand and manage their
previous experiences. Support for them is wide ranging and includes
improved access to specialist therapeutic services offering one-to-one work.
Also, a rolling programme of group work for foster carers is facilitated by
fostering teams and individual life story work is available for children.
Training for foster carers and family and friends carers also helps equip
carers to address better the needs and attachment difficulties of the children
they care for.
appropriate challenge. IROs have manageable caseloads, review plans
regularly and routinely see children between review meetings, ensuring
childrens views and wishes are well represented. The IRO service is working
effectively to avoid drift and progress permanence planning, and where
necessary it reviews care plans at double the statutory frequency. Reviews
ensure that the needs of children arising from identity, gender, race, culture,
sexual orientation and gender identity are identified and addressed. Evidence
was seen of IROs challenging social workers to update plans and
assessments. Review meetings are well recorded and childrens progress and
achievements are set out clearly. Timely and effective arrangements are in
place for responding to the needs of unaccompanied asylum seekers,
provided by the ethnically diverse staffing within children in care teams who
have a good understanding of cultural needs. Unaccompanied asylum
seekers are well matched with suitable families. This includes commissioning
places outside the county, with continued support by specialist services as


required. Young asylum seekers often come into care in their teenage years
and are supported well through transition to leaving care and aftercare.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is good.
when it is identified that this in their best interest. Over the past three years
the local authoritys adoption performance has consistently improved. The
authority is getting closer to meeting the national adoption scorecard
thresholds, and already performs above the national average rate for placing
children over the age of five.
support prompt action in care planning. For example, children under five
benefit from tracking meetings overseen by managers of the independent
reviewing service, and this ensures prompt action to progress plans.
possible means that in over a third of cases adopters are simultaneously
approved and matched to specific children. The effective use of
independently commissioned social workers to assess applicants where they
are drawn to a particular child avoids unnecessary delay.
court proceedings overtaking the volume of adopters who are being assessed
and approved. A commitment to careful matching for children with complex
needs, or where there are brothers and sisters to be adopted together,
means that there are currently 28 children awaiting a match. This includes
disabilities, and three brother and sister groups of three. There are 10
approved adopters without a match.
together even when this may mean waiting longer for a match with the right
adopters. When separation of brothers and sisters is considered, the decision
is underpinned by good quality assessment by the specialist Family Finders
team.
secure the right permanent families for children. Individual childrens profiles
are used at recruitment events, and where prospective adopters are drawn
to a particular child the authority prioritises early assessments and matching.
Assessment, approval and matching of adopters are thorough and linked to a
good and comprehensive programme of preparation and training. Where
children cannot be matched to locally approved adopters, swift use is made
of the Adoption Register and national family finding initiatives.
impressive range of locally developed materials supports rigorous and timely


practice in progressing applicants through to panel approval. A good example
is the prospective adopter workbook. It uses intensive and supported selfevaluation to reduce duplication during stage two of the assessment process.
Fostering for adoption was seen being used to very good effect in one case
looked at. Further recruitment is planned.
skilled independent chair. Good practice is promoted by working closely with
effective panel advisors to ensure high standards of reports. Robust policies
underpin the decision making of the chair in matching and approving
adopters at the same panel. While not appropriate in all cases, the benefits
for children from such early attachments to their adoptive families are
considerable. In the last 12 months there have been three placement
disruptions; none of these involved children whose placements had been
made through adopter-led matches. Agency decision makers work effectively
and are supported by a clear and systematic procedure. Recommendations
are appropriate and made with the benefit of easily accessible medical and
legal advice.
and facilitated reunion of birth relatives and adopted people. Adoption
support is a strength in Essex. A highly skilled, county-wide team offers and
delivers a comprehensive range of effective, good quality research-based
interventions and assessments. In 201213, 107 adoptive families and 194
adult adoptees were receiving support. Social workers are specifically trained
to deliver a range of therapeutic interventions to support adopted young
people with complex and challenging needs. A psychotherapist is attached to
the team and is easily accessible for consultation and on-going treatment.
Good management of both direct and indirect contact is sensitive,
constructive and focused on the contribution of birth parents to their
childrens long term stability.
The graded judgement for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
good
safe in their home environment and community. From the time of their entry
into care, looked after children and young people receive good quality
support from a range of services to ensure that they know how to keep
themselves safe. Care leavers spoken to by inspectors confidently articulated
their views of feeling safe. Planning and support for care leavers considers
aspects of health and any potential risks regarding young peoples safety and
well-being. Services are provided so that care leavers can develop the right
skills to enter adulthood. For example, those in custody have a clear support
plan to help prevent them from re-offending.
generally well considered and addressed precisely. There is good attention to


ensuring that life skills and matters around identity are tackled. As part of
the recent restructuring of the care leavers service the authority has
strengthened the capacity of managers and practitioners to increase their
level of engagement with care leavers. Emerging evidence indicates that this
is improving the time allocated to work directly with care leavers. Scrutiny by
inspectors of unaccompanied asylum seekers pathway plans shows they are
effectively supported and achieve well, regardless of their starting points.
Care leavers were instrumental in shaping the redesigned leaving and after
care services. However, care leavers spoken to say there is still a need to
embed good practice through their involvement in pathway planning and
awareness of the availability of advocacy.
interview or discussion. Various partners work with care leavers over a
specified period of time, collating information about their ambitions, to
develop their plans. Young people know that this process, combined with
more formal meetings, is used to record information about their lives and
help them to achieve independence.
they are leaving care. The allocated social worker now works with care
leavers until they are 18 years old, providing stability and individualised help.
Personal advisors work with care leavers alongside social workers from the
age of 17 years. Consultation as part of the review process is good. Evidence
from case tracking by inspectors indicates that IROs scrutinise the quality of
pathway plans thoroughly, and provide appropriate challenge to social
workers.
different medical fields ensure that support is extended up to the age of 19,
following which health advisers provide the necessary specialist guidance
needed. Care leavers who spoke to inspectors said they have good access,
guidance and support to accessing their health records and personal
histories. These records are, however, not always readily available and
delivered promptly. Mental health practitioners based in the care leavers
teams ensure that young people with a history of poor mental health, but
who do not meet the thresholds for adult services, can receive a
personalised therapeutic and consultative service. The experiences and
health needs of care leavers are dealt with sensitively through organised
training and development of practitioners. An information pack developed by
a local General Practitioner is used to disseminate the benefits of this work
widely across the county.
support of advocates and make a complaint if required. Care leavers value
the advocacy service when it is needed. Unaccompanied asylum seekers and
refugees are provided with good quality care, guidance and advocacy
support with immigration matters.


all ensure that young people have the opportunity to represent their views.
For example, the Involvement Team has sought to identify and resolve any
issues that make care leavers dissatisfied. Good quality support, guidance
and encouragement are enabling an increasing number of care leavers to
enter higher education. Currently, 54 care leavers are studying at university,
including two who are completing a higher degree.
achieve very well. For example, of this group, two thirds are in further or
higher education, including 13% at university compared to 8% of other care
leavers; and 57.2% are in education other than university compared with
and visited regularly. They are enabled to access their full entitlement to
bursaries and have a family home to return to during the holidays. Those on
apprenticeship schemes receive financial assistance with travel. Similarly
young mothers, including those with health problems, are assisted to pursue
their studies; for example, through the Open University or as a student living
on campus. Success is celebrated and young people who have left care often
return as ambassadors to support younger care leavers.
of care leavers not in employment, education or training declined from
is linked to the increasingly good support that is tailored to the needs of care
leavers. For instance, targeted youth workers ensure that care leavers are
aware of and access their entitlements. Employability workers also support
care leavers to stay in employment, while developing employers
understanding and expectations of these young people. Care leavers have
good access to a wide range of work experience and apprenticeship
opportunities. This has been possible primarily because of the good and
creative partnership work between the authority and targeted youth workers
who brokered the employability scheme. Altogether, 34 care leavers are
undertaking an apprenticeship. Weekly alerts across departments about
internships are leading to more care leavers entering employment or
training. A recently introduced tracking system is beginning to identify trends
in the employment or otherwise of care leavers, but it is too soon to assess
the impact of this recent change.
improving. In 201213, Essex reported that 88% were in suitable
accommodation, which is directly comparable with the all England figure.
Arrangements for young people to access a good range of accommodation
are well managed. Care leavers have support from their personal advisers,
targeted youth workers and employability workers to ensure, and support
them in accessing, their entitlements to housing. Social workers advocate
widely for young people who want to Stay Put and 82 care leavers currently
benefit from the Staying Put, policy where they can remain with the families


they grew up with. Managers champion the cause of young care leavers,
including unaccompanied asylum seekers, to secure suitable accommodation
and private tenancies. Increasingly, they are challenging the twelve district
councils with responsibility for housing to ensure that care leavers are
prioritised for a tenancy. It is too early to comment on the impact of this new
level of challenge which started in January 2014.
Leadership, management and governance are good
Inspection judged safeguarding in Essex as inadequate. In October 2011
Ofsted re-inspected safeguarding arrangements and judged them adequate.
The local authority has demonstrated significant progress since that time.
The DCS was appointed in November 2010 and, along with the senior
management team, has been instrumental in driving the significant
improvement in childrens services across the county. A clear and highly
effective strategy and action plan sustains the childrens workforce. In the
past three years there has been a drive on supporting the change and
improvement in the delivery of services and outcomes for children, young
people and families.
effectively with strategic partners in Essex to realign the delivery of services
to improve outcomes for children, young people and families. Strategic
priorities are clearly identified in response to local need, external scrutiny,
inspections and national initiatives. These priorities are communicated by the
childrens partnership through the prevention and early intervention strategy,
the sufficiency and commissioning strategy for children in care, and the
children in care and leaving care partnership strategy. These all link closely
to the priorities of the joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA). A clear
commitment to learning and openness to feedback is demonstrated by the
authoritys participation in the peer review process. The self-assessment and
the scorecard provide a comprehensive and detailed overview of the
commitment to improvement, and a local programme of peer inspection
checks that progress is maintained.
achieved through a culture change, promoted by senior partners, of strategic
progress and direction being directly informed by the views of frontline
practitioners and service users. Developments and improvements in social
work practice are being achieved through investment in strengths-based
working, systemic practice and direct work with children and families. These
changes can be seen to be steadily improving the quality of social work
practice, leading to improved outcomes for children.
and the voluntary sector, defined through needs analyses and service user
feedback, underpin the effective delivery of services. There is strong


partnership working across the local authority, public health and the five
clinical commissioning groups, responsive to locality needs and priorities. The
voluntary sector service providers are an important partner in the delivery of
services and are enabled by the authority to work innovatively with children
and families to improve outcomes. For example, in developing a childrens
centre on a caravan park to provided targeted support to very vulnerable
families. Key strengths of commissioning include the early help and childrens
centre contracts and family solutions. Commissioning is supported by
rigorous quality assurance, contract monitoring arrangements and feedback.
the involvement of children and young people from the CiCC. They have
worked alongside new elected members to provide training about what it
means to be a corporate parent and what signing up to the children in care
Pledge means. To ensure a clear understanding of progress against The
Pledge, the corporate parenting board receives performance information
with a dataset drawn from the overall performance reports and a clear
analysis provided against the commitments in The Pledge. It is
acknowledged by the senior leadership that the corporate parenting board
operates to a business cycle of meetings which are reactive, and could be
further strengthened by the adoption of a strategic business plan.
his responsibilities. Clear accountabilities are in place between the Leader,
who chairs the Health and Wellbeing Board and the independent chair of the
Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB), who is also a member of the
Health and Wellbeing Board. In accordance with their statutory duties, the
Chief Executive of the council and the independent chair of the LSCB meet
regularly to discuss safeguarding matters. However, the LSCB has not been
held sufficiently to account by the local authority in ensuring that the
priorities identified in the business plan are met.
in the agenda for children. A rigorous schedule of meetings and informal
briefings with other senior leaders includes the Leader of the Council, the
independent chair of the LSCB, the Director of Childrens Services and
Executive Director for Family Operations. The cabinet member is briefed in
detail on his portfolio, and takes public accountability for the performance of
a service that receives significant media attention.
quality assurance. Performance is managed well through a programme of
meetings, with an appropriate emphasis on better performance and
outcomes through improved social work practice. A detailed set of reports
demonstrate that performance is in line with or exceeds comparators against
most indicators. Where deficits are identified, managers of the service are
held accountable to improve. Auditing is used effectively to promote
managers understanding of performance issues. Lessons learnt from the


programmes of routine single and multi-agency audits are drawn together
and disseminated through learning bulletins. This helps promote improved
social work practice. Additional 'thematic' reports are completed to provide a
deeper understanding on specific areas of practice.
appropriately undertake observations of social work practice and learning is
shared to improve the performance of the wider team. Staff are well
supported in working with children, young people and families through
regular reflective supervision processes. In the vast majority of cases
supervision is good, and where there have been historical deficiencies, such
as in the care leavers team, an increase in managers and reductions in
caseloads for social workers means that there is an improving trend. In
addition to individual supervision, some managers, having undertaken
training in systemic practice, have introduced monthly reflective group
supervision, which further supports good quality casework.
consultation and feedback from children and young people, are provided
through a voluntary agency. The service is available to support all children
within complaints procedures. It is also available within child protection
processes, for children in care and to children and young people who have
been missing from care.
feedback from children and young people. This identified that there was a
low number of complaints from children in care. IROs ensure that children
and young people know about the advocacy service and how to make
representations, including complaints, to ensure that action can be taken to
address concerns. Complaints are responded to in a timely manner, with
works closely with the customer care team to facilitate early resolution of
issues, where possible prior to a formal complaint. Contact details about the
service have been incorporated into the public information on making a
complaint, as well as on the CiCC website. Learning from complaints is
disseminated through action planning, team meetings and through individual
case work and supervision.
been instrumental in changing and shaping services. For example, children
were involved in developing leaflets explaining child protection processes and
in the commissioning of the advocacy service. The IRO service is now
sharing minutes of meetings with children and young people in a childfriendly format, and a young inspectors programme is currently being
introduced to support the monitoring of contract arrangements.
the virtual school, has strengthened its position to challenge and hold


schools to account for the achievement of children looked after. Clarity of
direction, including the appointment of specialist advisers, and increased
monitoring and accountability means that schools are fully engaged in
improving looked after childrens life chances.
the Family Solutions, Divisional Based Intervention Teams, a new adoption
post and the Children in Need reviewing officers, alongside the reunifying of
CAMHS workers from NHS secondments into social work teams. Good links
with local universities, including involvement on panels for recruitment to
social work courses and provision of student placements, are providing a
good supply of qualified social workers. The average social work caseload is
of agency staff from 37% in October 2010 to 13.8% in December 2013. The
voluntary turnover of staff is slowing, and the vacancy rate in Essex is
reducing, from 26 full time equivalent posts in April 2013 to 21.9 in
December 2013, which is better than other local authorities in the region and
in London.
ensured that appropriate actions have been taken to expedite delay in care
proceedings. Also, that placement orders for those children requiring an
adoptive placement are secured at the earliest opportunity. The quality of
training available for professionals including social workers, teachers and
solicitors has improved.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: the effectiveness local safeguarding children
board
The effectiveness of the LSCB requires improvement
Areas for improvement
their views are represented at board level and that effective communication
is maintained.
assessed need and priorities, and evaluate its influence, including the lessons
learnt from serious case reviews (SCRs).
effectiveness of safeguarding arrangements across Essex.
work of the Essex Missing Children Partnership and the detail of children
going missing, in order to improve strategic planning in compliance with
recently introduced statutory guidance.
in Essex are understood and consistently implemented across the
partnership to promote appropriate referrals and support safeguarding of
children and young people.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
sufficiently independent to challenge partners and hold them to account.
Following a review of the board in 2011, the chair has been successful in
engaging most partners to improve scrutiny of safeguarding arrangements
across partnerships in Essex. A particular strength is the involvement of
district councils and health partners, through the Health Executive Forum.
The LSCB influence and challenge is limited because senior representatives
from schools, fundamental to safeguarding children, do not attend the Board
on a regular basis. The LSCB is actively trying to resolve this situation
through discussion with partners.
member of the Health and Wellbeing Board. This helps to ensure that
safeguarding is prioritised across these key strategic bodies. Recently-formed
links with the local area-based Stay Safe groups are improving
communication between the board and local front-line practitioners,
including schools. The LSCB has helped to drive developments such as the
Joint Domestic Abuse Triage Team. This has helped to develop an awareness


and strategic response across the partnership to domestic abuse. The LSCB
has been instrumental in developing and publishing the comprehensive
threshold document Effective Support for Children and Families in Essex.
The document is widely owned and understood by agencies and is driving
change in practice and improving outcomes for children, young people and
families. The impact of this is not yet fully embedded and reflected in
frontline practice, with continuing high levels of contacts to IRT.
of local arrangements to safeguard children. The report describes the Boards
role and its work, such as the number of audits carried out and awarenessraising about safe sleeping, but the strength of the work across the
partnership and priorities for action are not sufficiently detailed.
are reported on regularly. A data analyst employed by the Board has begun
to interpret this data to provide reports that identify potential areas for
consideration and action. This ensures that the Board is in a better position
to understand front line practice and the experience of children. There is
emerging evidence of well-informed challenge to practice within board
meetings.
of practice, such as the higher than expected number of child protection
plans in one of the local areas. This has led to appropriate discussion and
challenge of the findings by the Board. The Board oversees a series of audits
carried out under Section 11 of the Children Act 1989. The increased number
of these audits completed by partners demonstrates appropriate prioritisation
of safeguarding. An initial report highlighting key strengths from Section 11
audits has recently been produced. An action plan is being developed to
improve practice across the partnerships, building on the findings of this
report.
These include training on safeguarding and on domestic abuse, which are
offered at different levels, as appropriate to the needs of practitioners. There
is insufficient evaluation of the impact of training across the partnership.
from child deaths, draws out themes and proposes appropriate actions to
address identified needs. A recent review of the child death review process
led to the introduction of an additional step with a specific focus on ensuring
that families are supported.
work of the pan-Essex Strategic Child Sexual Exploitation Group. LSCB subgroups are helping to drive the take-up of training and the development of
the role of CSE champions across the partnership. The Board does not have


a detailed overview of work with missing children across the partnership,
particularly the work of the separate Essex Missing Children Partnership. This
will be required to meet the requirements of recently introduced statutory
guidance on children who run away from home and care.
consider if the criteria are met for an SCR. Ofsted has received five
notifications of serious incidents in the past twelve months. Two serious case
reviews are currently being conducted following a thorough scoping exercise.
Even when criteria for a full SCR are not met, a systemic approach is taken
to learn lessons from the death or serious injury of a child. The Board
recognises the challenge of disseminating the lessons learned from SCRs
across the county to frontline multi-agency staff members. Recent, more
formal alignment of the locality-based Stay Safe groups to the LSCB is
enriching communication between the Board, frontline practitioners and
schools. This is developing a stronger focus on quality, standards and
learning from SCRs and good practice.


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners
of all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children
and Family Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014

