Gateshead Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
And
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 27 October 2015 to 19 November 2015
Report published: 11 March 2016

Childrens services in Gateshead are good

Good

permanence

Good


Good


Requires Improvement


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Gateshead are good because leaders, managers and workers
are highly effective. Very good practice was seen in the following areas: intensive
family support in relation to domestic abuse; performance management and quality
assurance arrangements; fostering support; celebrating the achievements of children
looked after and care leavers and promoting childrens rights.
There is strong corporate commitment to safeguarding and improving outcomes for
all children and young people in the borough. Political leaders and elected members
led by the chief executive officer (CEO) are good advocates for vulnerable children
and young people. The Strategic Director of Care, Wellbeing and Learning is a skilled
and confident leader. He is effectively supported by the CEO, members and other
directorates within the council, and a strong, cohesive senior management team. The
council has responded effectively to the areas for development identified following
the inspection of child protection services in 2013 and the inspection of safeguarding
and looked-after children services in 2011. Improvements have been sustained in a
methodical way.
Leaders and managers have a comprehensive understanding of local need. This is
reflected in strategic planning with explicit objectives for improvement and service
development. The council is responsive to the diverse needs of the community and
delivers a wide range of accessible and appropriate services. Good-quality service
provision is secured through effective prioritisation and a shared understanding of
safeguarding across the multi-agency partnership.
The council has undertaken significant work with partners to ensure confidence and
understanding of the threshold for access to childrens social care. Advice,
information and timely signposting ensures children, young people and families
receive the right support at the right time. There is a clear and accessible early help
offer. A particular strength is the alignment of adult and childrens commissioning for
example, services for parents which include domestic violence support and
prevention, adult mental health and substance misuse services. This is leading to
much earlier identification of children in need of help and protection.
There is a highly effective multi-agency approach to safeguarding and managing risk
across the council and wider partnership. A particularly strong area is the response
to children at risk of sexual exploitation and those who go missing from home and
care. Responses to child protection concerns are timely and robust. Social workers
have manageable caseloads and are supported by effective supervision. This allows
practitioners to complete good-quality assessments of risk and need in a thorough
but timely way. Despite this, plans are not consistently outcome-focused and do not
always ensure that interventions are targeted or enable progress to be monitored
and measured.
Corporate parenting arrangements are good. As a result, outcomes for children
looked after are often good and improving, for example decisive action has been
taken to improve the educational attainment of children looked after. Performance is


now above national comparators across all the key stages. Placement stability is very
good and the vast majority of children looked after live with foster carers. The
majority of children benefit from timely plans to secure permanence. Decisions about
permanence are most often made by the childs second review. The profile of the
fostering resource and the projected needs of children and young people is very well
understood. This informs recruitment activity and planning to maintain sufficient
resources.
Children and young people are at the heart of practice in Gateshead. The children in
care council One Voice are highly valued and have a wide range of opportunities to
make a positive contribution across all areas of service delivery. The achievements of
children looked after and care leavers are valued and celebrated.
Adoption performance is good. Children are identified at an early stage when
adoption is being considered as part of their plan for permanence and their parallel
plans are effectively tracked to minimise delays. Recruitment practice is robust and
the majority of assessments are completed within timescales. Good links exist with
regional partners and agencies, which broadens the potential links for children.
Children are well matched with adopters and effective ongoing support promotes
stability, which adoptive families highly value.
Arrangements for keeping in touch with care leavers are effective. Care leavers have
good access to a range of suitable accommodation and they are well supported to
develop independent living skills. However, pathway plans are not used effectively as
tools to promote care leavers health, wellbeing and education. Not enough care
leavers sustain their education, employment or training beyond the age of 19 and
the council needs to be more ambitious and persistent for this vulnerable group.
Performance management and quality assurance arrangements are good with
outstanding features and promote a robust culture of improvement through learning.
Management information is used well to monitor actual performance and impact and
encourage staff at all levels to contribute to improving outcomes for children and
young people. The workforce is stable and staff feel well supported by visible,
approachable and accessible managers. There is good investment in social work staff
and partner agencies, with clear expectations for learning and continuous
professional development to improve and inform social work practice.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates three childrens homes. Two were judged to be
good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the
protection of children was in February 2013. The local authority was judged
to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked
after was in January 2011. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Other information about the local authority
 The strategic director of care, wellbeing and learning has been in post since
October 2014.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since June 2014.
Children living in Gateshead
 Approximately 40,100 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Gateshead. This is 20% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 23.2% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 In primary schools is 17.6% (the national level is 15.6%)
 In secondary schools is 14.1% (the national level is 13.94%)
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 5% of
all children living in the area, compared with 21.5 % in the country as a
whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are the White Other (which includes a significant Jewish community as well
as those from many European countries) and Asian/Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 In primary schools is 5.9% (the national average is 19.4%)
 In secondary schools is 4.1% (the national average is 15%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in Gateshead
 At 31 March 2015 1,590 children were identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction
from 1,602 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 October 2015, 238 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is a reduction from 258 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 October 2015, one child lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from two at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection in 2013, five serious incident notifications have
been submitted to Ofsted and one serious case review has been completed.
Children looked after in Gateshead
 At 31 October 2015, 367 children are being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 92 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 340
(85 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2015.
Of this number:
area
 nine children live in residential special schools
area
 three children live with parents, all of whom live in the authority area
 one young person is an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.
In the last 12 months:
 there have been 25 adoptions
after
moved on to independent living
 Six young people who have ceased to be looked after are now living in
houses of multiple occupancy.


Recommendations

Improve the quality of all childrens plans, including pathway plans to ensure
that targets for improvement are clear and that they focus on risk and the most
important issues for children, young people and care leavers (paragraphs 17,


Ensure that child protection conferences and looked after reviews are used to
drive and progress plans through the use of effective challenge and robust risk
analysis. (paragraphs 17, 36, 81 and 99)


Improve the attendance of education professionals at all children and young
peoples reviews and meetings to ensure a robust focus on their educational
outcomes (paragraph 19).


Ensure that children who are subject to child protection processes have access
to independent advocacy in order to help share their views and to inform
decisions about their lives (paragraph 19).


Support care leavers to understand their health histories more thoroughly and
ensure they have regular and timely access to mental health services
(paragraphs 78, 79 and 95).


Devise a more effective way of communicating legal entitlements to all care
leavers (paragraph 83).


Establish a protocol with all education and training partners to ensure that
arrangements are in place to provide proactive support for care leavers to stay
on their courses and complete their qualifications (paragraphs 81, 82 and 93).


Ensure the adoption panel provides quality assurance feedback to the agency
on the quality of reports being presented to panel and adoption performance.
(paragraphs 64 and 99)


Summary for children and young people
 Senior managers and councillors in Gateshead want to give children the best start
in life. When children and their families need help, good-quality services and
support are available at the right time.
 Social workers and managers are good at listening to children and making sure
their views are acted on. When they do assessments to find out what children
need, they always talk to people who know the family such as teachers, health
professionals and sometimes police officers. This is to make sure they provide the
right help and support to make children safe and to offer help to parents and
carers.
 When social workers make plans to help children and their families, the plans do
not always show what is going to happen and who is going to help.
 Social workers are very good at identifying when children are at risk of sexual
exploitation. If children go missing, they will always be visited by a trustworthy
adult when they return home to see how they can help to keep them safe in
future. Senior managers make sure professionals from all agencies work together
to protect children and young people.
 Children who are looked after go to live with very skilled carers who look after
them well. Wherever possible they will live with their brothers and sisters. If it is
safe to go home social workers make sure this happens at the right time and
provide support for as long as necessary. When children need to be adopted,
social workers find adoptive parents quickly.
 One Voice, which is the Children in Care Council, works hard to influence how
children looked after are supported. Children can contribute to their reviews,
make complaints, suggestions or comments on their achievements using the Mind
of My Own app (MOMO).
 Councillors and senior managers want all children to do well at school. They
provide lots of support to help children make progress in their learning. They
celebrate childrens success and are very proud of all childrens achievements.
 When young people leave care, they get good support to find a safe place to live
and to live independently. Care leavers get good help from their personal advisors
and value these relationships. The council needs to get better at giving care
leavers information about their health and what benefits they are entitled to.
They also need to get better at helping care leavers stay in education,
employment and training after their 19th birthday.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Children who need help and protection are identified early and receive effective and
timely interventions. Multi-agency partnerships are strong with a robust focus on
safeguarding. Thresholds for access to social care are well understood and
embedded. A wide range of very good targeted and coordinated early help is
delivered by childrens centres, commissioned services and in-house provision with
elements of outstanding practice within intensive family support. Good-quality early
help assessments lead to effective family-focused interventions. Regular reviews take
place via team tround the family (TAF) arrangements. Very good performance
management arrangements evidence these services are effective in providing
support for families, reducing the need for social care intervention and sustaining
progress when childrens cases step down from statutory services. This is reducing
re-referrals to childrens social care.
Referrals to childrens social care receive timely responses that are thoroughly
considered, safely managed and lead to swift and decisive actions. In almost all
cases, child protection enquiries are thorough and benefit from effective multiagency strategy meetings. Whilst timely, child protection conferences and core
groups are not always effective in challenging and driving childrens plans. Poor
attendance by educational professionals at some key meetings means that
information sharing is not as robust as it should be.
Assessments are holistic, make good use of historical information and evaluate the
childs experience well. Most assessments balance strengths and risks and lead to
appropriate outcomes for children. Evidence of direct work with children is a
particular strength. Social workers know the children they work with well and, as a
result, provide good support to meet childrens needs and promote their safety.
Where children cannot express their views, social workers use observations to inform
the assessment. Timely identification and provision of services where needed during
assessments ensures children receive help at the point it is first recognised.
Childrens plans however do not focus consistently on outcomes and contingencies,
although case recording clearly evidences the progress children are making.
Multi-agency arrangements to safeguard vulnerable children who go missing from
home, care or education or are at risk of sexual exploitation are robust. Where
required, children receive coordinated help and protection that are underpinned by
effective risk assessments. Regular monitoring of their progress via the Missing,
Sexual Exploitation and Trafficked Group (MSET) provides additional scrutiny and
leads to effective support for children and young people, which then informs
strategic prevention and disruption work.


Inspection findings

Gateshead has appropriately prioritised and invested in early help and
prevention and this is making a positive difference in improving childrens
outcomes. The early help quality assurance system is providing a good
overview of the effectiveness of early intervention within the Family
Intervention Team (FIT), Positive Pathways, childrens centres and Youth
Support Team. Children and their families benefit from a wide range of targeted
and well-coordinated services, both commissioned and in-house, when they
first need help. As a result, some childrens circumstances improve and others
who need more targeted or specialist help are identified quickly.

cooperation has resulted in consistent use of the Common Assessment
Framework (CAF) to identify and respond to need. The vast majority of CAFs
seen were thorough and contained an assessment of risk that included the
impact on the child. Team around the child meetings and reviews are regular.
They are managed effectively by a lead professional and well attended by a
good range of agencies. Family engagement is clear throughout the process. In
the vast majority of cases, the life of a child (and often the parent) has
improved because of the services provided.
right level, coordinating childrens cases as they are stepped up and stepped
down between early help and childrens social care. The Family Intervention
team, childrens centres and the adolescent youth support service offer
targeted interventions to meet identified need. However, too many children
with a disability experience statutory assessments that are not proportionate to
their identified need when a lower level service response is required. The
council needs to make pathways to early help services clearer for families and
children with a disability. Overall, social workers, other professionals and
parents spoken to during the inspection identified significant improvement in
the outcomes for many children because of the good quality services they
receive. Due to the success in phase one of the Families Gateshead (Troubled
Families) programme, the council was an early adopter of phase two of the
programme. There are 672 families currently receiving coordinated support, led
by a wide range of agencies. The service is tracking a further 334 families
where positive outcomes have been achieved to ensure that progress is
maintained.
Experienced social workers and managers provide social work expertise at the
point of contact with childrens social care. Most social workers and managers
have received recent training to raise awareness of child sexual exploitation
female genital mutilation (FGM) and trafficking. No cases of FGM or trafficking
are currently reported in Gateshead. A workshop to raise awareness of
radicalisation has provided information for frontline staff, including the duties
placed on all agencies and the role of frontline workers.


between early help and statutory child protection work operate effectively.
Robust information gathering by duty workers at the contact and referral stage
leads to timely and informed decision making in the vast majority of cases.
Management oversight is robust and additional quality assurance of decisions
by peer managers where cases have closed acts as an additional safeguard.
meet the threshold for childrens social care receive support, where appropriate.
Re-referral rates have reduced from 20.1% in 201415 to 11.6% currently,
indicating that the support provided to families is effective in meeting their
needs. Good communication between the longstanding, dedicated emergency
duty team and day-time services results in robust information sharing and
effective support to children in the evenings and at weekends.
nationally. In 201415, 53.1% of assessments took 41 to 45 days for
completion and only 5.2% were within 10 days. The council has not yet
analysed the underlying reason for this and therefore cannot be certain that all
assessments are completed within the childs timescale. However, this does not
lead to a delay in service. In the vast majority of cases seen by inspectors,
children received services and had an interim plan while the assessment was
ongoing.
strengths and risk analysis. Chronologies are present in almost all cases and
previous history is well considered. In almost all cases, children are seen alone
where appropriate and good attention is paid to obtaining their views and
feelings, including sensitive direct work and observations of younger children.
Assessments involving a child with a disability are holistic and consider every
child within the family. A childs ethnicity and religion are given careful
consideration and there is evidence that the council have improving
relationships with diverse groups including a large Jewish community. However,
there is further work to do to help community leaders understand social care
thresholds and facilitate early engagement if there are concerns.
seen where a child was without a plan, they did not consistently contain
outcome-focused actions and timescales were not routinely included. Childrens
outcomes could be further improved if plans were more robust and specifically
targeted to identified need. Core groups and care teams take place regularly.
However, the lack of focused planning in some cases makes it difficult to
measure progress against the plan. More positively, case recording does show
that risk to children is reducing because of effective safeguarding activity. In
most cases, contingency planning needs to be clearer, although parents spoken
to were clear about what was expected of them and what would happen if
things did not improve.


well above the national average of 1.8% (201415). This proactive approach
ensures that focused multi-agency work starts as soon as professionals identify
concerns. Protective action commences and continues before and immediately
after birth. As a result of this robust planning, 63% of children no longer
required a child protection plan by the time they reached six months old.
(ICPC) and reviews taking place within the prescribed timescales. This is higher
than the national average of 74.7%. Children are supported to attend their
conference where appropriate. However, not all currently have access to
independent advocates. A system has recently been introduced for family
support workers to undertake direct work with children to seek their views
where an ICPC is arranged. This is a new initiative and, while positive, does not
replace robust independent advocacy. Good attendance at conferences by most
agencies results in well-informed, multi-agency decision making. A concerted
effort by the council has seen an improvement in the attendance of GPs at
conferences, which is improving the availability of health information to inform
risk analysis. The involvement of schools, however, is inconsistent with
examples seen of non-attendance and reports not being provided.
well. Case records show that work influences assessments and reflects the
childs day-to-day life experiences. With the exception of one safeguarding
team, caseloads are appropriately weighted to social workers capacity and
experience and management oversight is good. Inspectors did however request
that senior managers review a small number of cases where plans for children
were insufficiently robust. In all cases, inspectors concerns were accepted and
acted on immediately. Visits to children are regular and most children benefit
from having a consistent social worker, which enables children and their
families to develop trusting relationships with them. One parent told inspectors
that their support worker helped to get the knots out of my stomach and make
better life choices for me and my child.
protection plans at a rate of 58 per 10,000 at the end of March 2015. This is
above the national average of 43 per 10,000 and represents a 7% decrease
since the same period in 2014. A significant proportion of children are subject
to protection plans due to neglect (67%). The Local Safeguarding Childrens
Board (LSCB) has undertaken an evaluation to look at reasons for this and
plans to launch new guidance for frontline practitioners. There has been a delay
in this guidance being introduced. However, in all but one case sampled by
inspectors where neglect was the primary reason for a child protection plan, the
childs needs were identified in a timely way and protective and authoritative
actions had been taken where appropriate.
these effectively consider cases of children living in households where domestic


abuse is a significant risk. Information sharing between agencies enhances risk
assessments and translates into individual safety planning for children and their
families. The council has invested in domestic abuse support services including
dedicated domestic abuse workers within the social work teams. Operation
Encompass is a pilot initiative established with the police and two neighbouring
authorities to share information with schools following domestic abuse
incidents. This has led to 276 separate incidents of domestic abuse reported to
schools that otherwise would not have been known. Although it is too early for
an impact evaluation, the feedback from schools is positive as it allows them to
consider additional support needs for pupils.
substance misuse or domestic abuse is well known. Robust assessments are
undertaken by adult services and referrals generated to childrens social care
where appropriate, or families are signposted to early help services. The impact
of adult substance misuse on the child features prominently in the assessments
and plans seen by inspectors. Very good examples were seen of effective work
with parents struggling with such problems, for example intensive family
support and bespoke support packages for children and parents.
sexual exploitation benefit from a coordinated multi-agency response to assess
risk and need. MSET sits monthly and collects information about children who
go missing from home and care and those who experience or who are at risk of
child sexual exploitation and/or child trafficking. Effective intelligence sharing in
relation to potential hotspots, disruption activity and the use of harbouring
notices are leading to a reduced risk for those children. Multi-agency mapping
exercises support the process of building knowledge of local patterns, trends
and push and pull factors.
missing or it is a frequent occurrence, they are offered interviews through an
independent provider or the youth service. The risk assessment tool is a live
document and, in the vast majority of cases, the assessment is holistic and
robust and leads to preventative actions and targeted support. Consultation
takes place with strategic managers when concerns escalate and they offer
additional oversight of the protection work. However, not all actions arising
from assessments or from MSET translate into childrens individual plans. The
response to risk is often subsumed within existing plans, which sometimes
makes it difficult to quickly extrapolate the concern and ensure a robust focus
on the risk. Inspectors referred one case back to senior managers where risks
to a child had not been recognised, resulting in immediate action being taken to
reassess the risk under child protection procedures.
including: running away; child sexual exploitation; developing healthy
relationships including same-sex relationships; internet safety; and drug and
alcohol use. The council has thorough procedures for those children missing


from education, including undertaking all the necessary statutory checks and
searches. Good links with the MSET and childrens social care risk assessment
processes ensure that risks to children who are missing from education are
effectively analysed. Frontline police officers have had training to identify young
women at risk and childrens social care have begun to roll out training on
Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) and trafficking to all staff. Currently 54
children are home educated. Good arrangements assist monitoring of the
quality of the education and ensure that safeguarding is considered. Health
professionals and childrens social care undertake risk assessments of the small
minority of families that are reluctant to engage with the service.
legislation and guidance. No young people have been placed in bed and
breakfast accommodation since 2011. While the majority of accommodation
provided is appropriate, inspectors visited one provision used in emergencies
for young people and care leavers that was not suitable and requested the
council reflect on its use. The homeless prevention service dedicated to young
people, which is a joint venture by childrens services and housing, provides a
daily drop-in that gives young people and their families easy access to support
and advice. Conciliation services between young people and their parents
prevent breakdown in some cases. In all cases where a young person cannot
remain at home, they receive a single assessment and, if they are 16 and still in
statutory education, they become looked after.
robust. The designated officer has taken targeted action to address underreporting from agencies, including health services, through a wide range of
awareness raising activities across the partnership including the voluntary
sector. This is leading to an increase in referrals and a safer organisational
culture is promoted through learning lessons at the conclusion of a case.
However, notifications for private fostering are low, with just one current
arrangement and only three notifications in the past six months. Despite
awareness-raising campaigns, the number has not increased. Agencies accept
this is likely to be under-reported and, although a wide range of activity has
been undertaken, further work is required to raise the profile of private
fostering with the public and to raise awareness within faith and community
groups.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Services for children looked after in Gateshead are good. Decisions to look after
children are generally timely, appropriate and in the best interests of the children.
The sufficiency strategy is informed by a clear needs analysis and is continually
reviewed to respond to changes within the children looked after population. The
success of recruiting good-quality carers and careful matching is illustrated through
very good placement stability. Foster carers are well supported.
Independent reviewing officers (IROs) performance in respect of the timelines of the
reviews of children looked after is very good at 99.4%. The Childrens Rights Service
is extremely effective in providing information, help and advice to children.
Assessments and reports are very comprehensive with good analysis of risks,
evidence of research, consistent use of chronologies, and effective consideration of
all relevant people in the childrens lives. Social workers are good at listening to
children and know them well. Conversely, the quality of care plans overall is not
consistent and means that childrens progress and outcomes, although good, could
be further improved. The local authority are aware of the deficiencies in care
planning and are actively addressing this matter.
Educational attainment in Gateshead is improving. Senior managers have taken
robust action with education partners to drive improvements in personal education
plans (PEPs). A successful raising education achievement for looked after childrens
team (REALAC) ensures that professionals focus on educational outcomes.
Consequently, the rate of progress for current pupils is showing positive
improvements, with 80% of the current cohort across all key stages making
expected progress in line with their peers. Robust actions plans are in place for the
remaining 20% of children.
Adoption performance is good. Children are identified at an early stage and their
parallel plans are effectively tracked to minimise delays. Recruitment practice is
robust. Children are well matched with adopters and effective ongoing support
promotes stability. The adoption panel is suitably robust but is not routinely
providing quality assurance feedback to contribute to monitoring and improving the
service.
There are effective arrangements for keeping in touch with care leavers who also
have good access to a range of suitable accommodation. However, not all services
for care leavers are good. Pathway plans are not always meaningful or effective and
not enough young people sustain their education, employment or training beyond
the age of 19. Care leavers are not always aware of their health histories and a small
number of care leavers with mental health difficulties are not getting sufficient


support in a timely way.
Inspection findings
appropriate and in the best interests of the children. The Public Law Outline
(PLO) is applied appropriately and ensures that children are supported and
protected well. Effective intensive family support services wrap around families
to keep children within their family where it is safe to do so. Social workers
carry out viability assessments and use family group conferences to explore
alternative options to being taken into care. This is resulting in effective use of
placements with family members through Regulation 24 assessments and
special guardianship orders.
Children are effectively tracked before their second review and from initial legal
meetings to securing their permanence plan.
increased from an average duration of 24 weeks in 201415 to 34 weeks for
Quarter 1 201516 (period ending 30th June 2015). This is above the national
average. These delays are not attributed to the quality of work and care
applications by the local authority, which are considered by the judiciary to be
good. They are the result of increased use of expert witnesses by parents and
of difficulties in the courts timetabling childrens cases. The Local Family Justice
Board and the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service
(Cafcass) have produced a clear action plan to address these matters.
wishes and feelings are well recorded in assessments. Social workers form good
relationships with children and there is some very good evidence of direct work
with children to support them. Decisions and planning for children to return
home are robust with clear evidence of senior management oversight and
support plans in place to address risks. Childrens wishes and feelings are at the
centre of the planning for returning home.
timescales set by the council. Children are seen alone where appropriate and,
importantly, the frequency of visits is increased where needed. The recording of
visits is generally good but in a few instances the entries on the childrens
electronic recording system had insufficient detail. Life story work in the
majority of childrens cases sampled is good. In addition to the work of social
workers, foster carers have worked well with children to complement this
process.
The childrens rights officer is passionate and highly motivated about his work
ensuring children and young people in care know their rights, are fairly treated


and their voices heard. A voice of the child email address is used to collate
childrens views to influence service design and improvements. In September
people to send their views to their IRO or social worker and comment on
services or raise concerns. Children from One Voice stated that they know their
rights and consider that since they first became children looked after, the
services in Gateshead have improved.
excess of 90 children. Caseloads are therefore outside the good practice
guidance of 50-70 identified in the IRO handbook. This is hindering some
aspects of their work, in particular their ability to monitor plans in between
reviews. The timeliness of looked after reviews is very good at 99.4%. IROs
endeavour to meet with children just before their reviews and the use of MOMO
to gather the views of children for their reviews is working well. The app was
only introduced in September 2015 and already 60 children looked after have
signed up to use it.
children looked after had three or more placements in 12 months compared to
October 2015 the figure for Gateshead children looked after is 5%. There has
also been a marked improvement for the percentage of children looked after in
the same placement for at least two years, rising from 74% in 201314 to 83%
at 31 October 2015.
children (65%) living in the local authority area and 112 (35%) living in
neighbouring local authorities. One third of Gateshead foster carers live out of
the area but are approved and supported by the council. Children are well
prepared to move to their permanent families and homes. Younger children are
supported well through direct work to help them understand their plan and
know about their family. Social workers take good account of childrens wishes
and feelings when considering where they should live and ensure that carers
are given very good information before children go to live with them. Foster
carers are skilled in moving children on to adoption.
informs recruitment activity and planning to maintain sufficient resources.
Initiatives to improve choices and meet the needs of identified groups of
children, for example complex older children, are ongoing. Those children
where a permanence plan of long term-fostering is decided are effectively
tracked to identify long-term families to meet their needs.
system for responding to enquiries to foster. Home visits are robust and clearly
focus on safeguarding, motivation and potential to foster. Managers oversee
decisions at each stage in the process and during assessments. Where workers


identify potential foster carers with supporting experience, there is a fast track
route to progress timely assessments. Foster carers are well supported by
experienced workers and receive effective supervision to ensure the quality of
standards are maintained. The service is clear on the expectations for children
and, where these fall short, decisive action is taken. Support groups are held
frequently and are popular with foster carers. Groups enable foster carers to
meet, build relationships and offer and receive support. The groups offer
themed sessions facilitated by workers and partner agencies on areas such as
advocacy, the law and fostering, equality and diversity and gathering evidence
to prepare for supervision. The fostering team offer an excellent out-of-hours
duty system for foster carers to support them in crisis.
outcomes for children placed outside Gateshead. In particular, the quality of
placements is very good with well-planned support for education and health
needs, risk reduction and providing stability.
reviewed to respond to changes within the children looked after population.
Placements for children with a disability and where children may have complex
needs are carefully considered and bespoke packages of support or specialised
placements are commissioned as appropriate for as long as required. The
council is good at promoting placements with relatives and friends and has
achieved improved placement stability through this as well as keeping children
closer to home in Gateshead. The council is currently on target to recruit 30
foster carers for 201516.
or better. There are five children in placements that are currently judged as
requiring improvement. No children are living in placements judged inadequate.
When services are not good, commissioners monitor the placement and, if
necessary, a plan is developed for individual children to ensure that they are
safe.
assessments in order to match children to workers and venues. The service is
overstretched at present but this is not causing undue delay. In the interim,
social workers are supervising some of the contact visits over and above what
they would normally undertake. It is a strength that children have continuity of
worker and that transport for children is provided either by the worker or the
foster carer. This means childrens development, emotional attachments and
security can be maintained. However, contact plans are not always clear about
when social workers should observe contact and formal reviews of contact are
not undertaken. This means that the impact of contact on children and the
behaviour of parents is not robustly explored or understood.
including reports for court, are comprehensive with good analysis of risks and


evidence of research. There is consistent use of chronologies and effective
consideration of all relevant people in the childrens lives, including wider family
members. The needs of children are well considered with good attention to
health matters and identity and diversity. When the needs of children change,
the local authority routinely undertakes a single assessment to consider what
further action is needed to support progress. This is very good practice.
undertaken with regard to court work, early permanence and when children
return home. However, the quality of planning is not consistent and means that
childrens progress and outcomes, although good, could be further improved.
The current care planning format focuses too much on the identified themes
contained in the template instead of addressing childrens needs according to
risk and importance. Transition planning for children with a disability is
appropriate. Adult services allocate a social worker at the young persons 17th
birthday and time is taken to build relationships and rapport with the young
person before transfer.
team in the North East to attain the Restorative Justice Quality Mark. This
award demonstrates that Gateshead YOT is delivering good-quality, safe and
sustainable restorative services that meet six set standards. Restorative justice
is offered to all victims in Gateshead. The YOT work effectively in trying not to
criminalise children looked after. This approach has been successful with 98
children currently being considered through preventative work and 50 through
statutory work, having received the minimum of a caution.
exploitation receive a well-coordinated response to the risks. The missing
sexual exploitation and trafficked group (MSET) collects information about
children who go missing from care and those who experience or who are at risk
of child sexual exploitation. When children go missing frequently or there is a
concern a return home interview is undertaken by an independent provider.
Strong relationships with the police ensure rapid responses when concerns
escalate. However, this information does not always translate into a bespoke
missing or child sexual exploitation plan, but is included within the children
looked after plan where these specific needs are not always prioritised.
completed within the year. This is an increase from 96% in 201214.
Performance information about initial health assessments is recorded on a
monthly basis. The most recent monthly figure shows that only 52% of initial
health assessments were completed within 28 days. This delay is attributable to
additional consents being required by South Tyneside NHS Foundation Trust,
looked after children and young peoples team (LACYP) before they can
undertake the initial health assessments. In 201415, 94.4% of dental checks
were undertaken within 12 months of a child becoming looked after. This is
better than 88.4% reported in 201314. There is a clear action plan in place to


improve performance on health and new guidance has been published and
circulated to health professionals to ensure that they understand their
responsibilities and continue to promote the health of children looked after.
work. This includes seeking childrens views from which an action plan is drawn
up. The review of February 2015 noted that 96% of children felt that the health
assessment experience was great or OK.
health performance and provision. These have been appropriately identified in
action plans and are being addressed. Improvements can be seen in waiting
times for children and young peoples service (CYPS), previously known as child
and adolescent mental health services. Children referred as urgent are seen
within 48 hours and the average waiting time from referral to initial
consultation is now 13.6 weeks, with evidence more recently of the last 14
children being seen within 10 weeks. These timescales are an improvement on
previous performance but there is still no clear risk assessment criteria for
referrals. The local authority is aware of these issues and is taking action with
partners to achieve improvements.
treatment services for substance misuse ensure that children in Gateshead
receive appropriate responses. Services are aligned with adult provision,
enabling effective support when children reach 18 years of age. In order to
support children looked after, three drop-in sessions have been delivered in
childrens homes and there is a regular drop-in service at one of the childrens
homes.
whom attend schools out of the borough. The team works effectively with
schools and social workers in and out of the borough to raise attainment for
children and young people. Progress is thoroughly tracked and monitored and
those children at risk of falling behind or with increased barriers to learning are
discussed on a weekly basis. Good monitoring by the REALAC team means that
attendance for children looked after compares favourably with all pupils, at
children looked after attend schools that are less than good. Wherever possible
when children enter the care system and need to change schools, every effort
is made to place them in a good school. Where children are in a school that are
less than good, their progress is closely monitored and supported by the virtual
school.
comparators across all the key stages. Over time, the gap between children
looked after and other children in Gateshead have been closing but is not yet


consistently across all stages. For example at Key Stage 1, improvements have
been made across all main subjects resulting in reading, writing and
mathematics being in line with or just below all Gateshead pupils in 2015.
However, at Key Stage 2, Gateshead is performing below comparators in
writing, grammar and reading and significantly below in mathematics.
disappointing, particularly for A*-C including English and mathematics, which
declined from 35% to just 9%.The local authority recognised the need to act on
this poor performance and put a range of measures in place, for example
additional one-to-one tuition for English and mathematics and coaching for
exams. These are having an impact and rates for the cohort have improved to
improvements and 80% of the current cohort across all key stages are making
expected progress in line with their peers.
One Voice youth network, which is highly influential in shaping services for
children looked after. There are strong links with the local authority scrutiny
committee and corporate parents. Despite a recent change in representatives in
One Voice, the work has continued and very good progress has been achieved
on changing how children in care are supported, how services are provided and
in providing a social networking forum for the children and young people.
Achievements include the introduction of MOMO in September 2015. The young
people really appreciate this in preference to the written documents that they
used to complete. In addition, One Voice has devised a new one-page care plan
format to simplify the planning documents for them. IRO business cards, the
Care Pledge and fostering guides have also been introduced, following
suggestions by the children and young people involved.
educational and recreational opportunities. Social events are part of the One
Voice youth network. One Voice also has good links with neighbouring and
national children in care councils. Some young people recently attended a
residential event in the Lake District to develop a regional care leaver event
that is to be held in North Tyneside in Spring 2016. The event will focus on
ensuring that care leavers are fully aware of their entitlements.
to reductions in entry costs to local attractions not run by council and a Go
card for access to leisure facilities run by the council. These are appreciated by
the foster carers and children. Unfortunately, there are no reciprocal
arrangements with other authorities for those children in foster care outside
Gateshead. Staff from the REALAC team carefully monitor the use of the pupil
premium, which is being applied well to support the individual progress of
pupils in different ways including one-to-one support, providing equipment such
as laptops, and enabling children looked after to fully participate in all out-ofschool activities.


after and care leavers. A recent celebration event was attended by
approximately 150 children and care leavers. It was a wonderful, professionally
managed and organised event. There were a number of care leavers in
attendance who performed and received awards in recognition of their
achievements. The event was very well attended by social workers, family
members, carers and council members.

Adoption performance is good
part of their plan for permanence. Childrens progress through care proceedings
and planning is effectively tracked to avoid unnecessary delay. An early alert
system ensures the adoption team is fully informed of children who may
potentially progress to adoption. This enables the adoption team to consider
the adopters already approved and those who may be currently in assessment
as potential options for children.
the likely predicted numbers, needs and profiles of children. Marketing activities
are effective and interest and enquiries have increased. Adopters report very
positively on their initial contact with the service and the quality of information
and welcome they receive. Prospective adopters are well informed about
adoption through information evenings and the pre-approval training prepares
them well. The majority of assessments are timely, robust and child centred
with clear analysis supporting the recommendations. Where a few delays occur,
there are viable reasons that are recorded and these delays are not due to the
lack of urgency by the service. Assessments are currently underway with nine
prospective adoptive families.
for children through a range of contacts, the national adoption register and
regional information sharing. There are eight children currently waiting and
there is active progress in pursuing options and potential links for all of them.
There are currently six adopters waiting, some with specific age ranges or
matching considerations. There is effective use of, and prompt referrals made
to, the National Adoption Register to initiate nationwide family finding. In the
last 12 months, seven children and eight adopters have been referred for
national finding family. In 201415, the majority of children (16 out of 22) were
matched successfully locally and within the wider region. There are currently 16
children placed with adopters with applications for adoption orders under
review or in progress.
for approvals and the quality of matching children with adopters. The agency


decision maker makes timely decisions and, where required, pursues additional
information to inform well-considered decisions for children. The chair of the
panel and the agency decision maker meet periodically but the panel is not
routinely providing analytical quality assurance feedback to contribute to
monitoring and improving the service. This is a requirement.
children, further time is taken to find the right family. There are no undue
delays. For a small number of children (six) where extensive national searches
have not found potential adopters, action has been taken to secure
permanence through long-term fostering, in three cases with their existing
foster carers. The service has a good record for placing older children and for
placing brothers and sisters together. In 201415, separate placements were
found for six groups of siblings, enabling them to live together in line with their
assessments and plans.
demonstrates the quality of matches for children and the post-adoption support
available. The potential lessons from a review of the disrupted placement have
been reflected on by the service and the panel.
permanence through adoption for children. Four families have been specifically
approved to foster children at the point they became looked after with the
plans to become their adopters, should adoption become the final care plan. In
three of the four families, children are now adopted. One fostering-to-adopt
couple spoke positively of how they were able to care for a new-born baby
through early medical treatments in hospital. The baby had the opportunity to
form early attachments from birth. For one child, plans are not at the stage to
determine whether permanence through adoption is the outcome and this
remains a foster placement. There are currently two families in the assessment
process expressing an interest in fostering to adopt . This is a very positive start
and the service is actively promoting this initiative as part of the options for
adoption in all recruitment activity.
effective and responsive. Timely assessments are completed to identify
individual needs and tailor support packages. Adopters are well informed of
their entitlements and the availability of the adoption support fund. Adopters
spoken with valued the support they receive and the difference it made to their
confidence, relationships with children, understanding of attachment patterns
and the improved stability in the family. In the last 12 months the service
supported 31 families. A further 57 families are receiving assessed financial
support.
range of individual and group support options for children and adopters. This
agency is currently providing support for 20 individuals. The agency provides


specific training to support adopters understanding of and parenting responses
to childrens attachment needs. This is particularly highly regarded by adopters.
Individual therapy and psychological support has been effective in helping
families to improve relationships and attachments between child and adopter.
The success of adoption support is demonstrated by the extremely low
disruption rate. One adoptive parent described the impact for their child and
family after receiving excellent specialised behaviour management training,
adding that without the support from the service the adoptive parent doubted if
the family would still be together. It is significant that this family have recently
adopted a second child; such is their confidence in the support from the
service.
nationally agreed thresholds and extensively analyse their adoption
performance to understand and predict the picture.
average time in days between entering care and moving in with an adoptive
family was 531 days, which is 44 days above the national threshold for the
period 201215 of 487 days. Of the 26 children, 11 were placed within the
national threshold of 487 days.
an improving picture, with 10 children placed within an average of 474 days
and six out of 10 children placed within an adoptive family within the target 487
days.
is 20 days more than the agreed national threshold of 121 days. Of 11 children
placed but not yet adopted, six were matched within the target 121 days. The
timeliness for those children placed in 2015 looks more positive but previous
figures will continue to impact on meeting overall performance indicators.
a lack of purposeful planning. Overall timeliness is influenced by six childrens
plans that changed from adoption to long-term foster care, following extensive
national searches for adoptive families. The figures are also influenced by three
children adopted by their current long-term foster carers. These are very
positive outcomes for the children who have continued to experience long-term
stability and consistent parenting. For some children, matching took longer but
has resulted in very good matches with adopters who are able to meet the
childrens specific needs in the longer term.
at 34 children in 201415. The vast majority of children requiring adoption are
white British, which is reflective of the local population.


The experience and progress of care leavers requires improvement
are in touch with 140 of 145 care leavers. Personal advisers are proactive in
staying in touch, making regular telephone calls, sending texts, emails and
unannounced visits. Personal advisers use birthdays as an additional incentive
for young people to get in touch by providing a 50 birthday payment. At
present one young person, an unaccompanied asylum seeker has been missing
from the service since March 2013. All necessary safeguarding procedures have
been followed in an attempt to locate the young person. This includes holding a
number of strategy meetings, widespread investigation and searches by police
and contact with the Border Agency.
advisers and other support staff working with care leavers. They are effectively
supported and challenged to identify risk and also to do something themselves
about reducing their involvement in risky behaviour and to understand the
consequence if they continue. Support is carefully calibrated to meet the
specific needs of care leavers over time and to deal with the scale of the issues
they may confront. This includes information and advice about the risks of
sexual exploitation, substance and alcohol misuse, sexual health and safe
relationships. When necessary, personal advisers skilfully coordinate input from
other agencies and professionals to prevent the risky behaviours of a small
minority of care leavers before they escalate out of control. Care leavers have
also been involved in developing a care leavers charter. The young people
value the relationships they have with their personal advisers and the support
they receive. As one young person put it, I see them as family; they are always
there for me.
histories, although wider access to health interventions and support is more
variable. For example, GPs offer telephone assessments to access talking
therapies but there is a delay in offering treatment. As a result, young people
do not always take up the offer even when it is clear they would benefit from
the service.
are registered with a GP. Delays remain in care leavers accessing mental health
services. Young people spoken to were not sure if they had been given their
health histories, but some thought they had been. Most were very clear about
taking responsibility for their own health issues. One young person had been
able to access counselling with the support of a personal adviser.


descriptive and lack focus on the outcomes to be achieved. Line managers are
not sufficiently monitoring the quality of pathway plans or providing senior
managers with the information they need to inform the strategic action required
to achieve positive outcomes for care leavers. All young people spoken to
during the inspection were not clear if they had completed pathway plans and
therefore were unable to comment whether or not they had found them
helpful.
care leavers aged 19 to 21 in education, training and employment at 57%,
which is higher than the national average of 45%, education outcomes and
employment opportunities for care leavers remain too variable. In 18 sampled
and tracked pathway plans seen by inspectors, only seven (39%) care leavers
aged 18-21 were in education, training or employment at the time of
inspection.
departments. Very recently approval has been given to reprioritise
apprenticeship places for care leavers. Despite the authoritys learning and skills
service having a wide apprenticeship offer across the whole region with local
employers, offering 400 apprenticeships, the service only knew of two care
leavers who have successfully completed an apprenticeship programme. At
present, seven care leavers are being well supported to attend local
universities, including help with fees and maintenance costs and additional
payments to foster carers providing staying put arrangements.
inspectors had received written confirmation about what these were. However,
it was clear from discussion that they received their entitlements, for example
financial support to attend higher education. For the very small number of care
leavers who have disabilities, thorough and well-managed transition
arrangements ensure they continue to be effectively supported by adult
services. Particularly good attention is paid to their ongoing education and
training needs.
where appropriate, become looked after. All young people and care leavers now
live in safe and secure accommodation. Three care leavers are in custody. No
young people are placed in bed and breakfast accommodation. The council last
used this type of provision in 2011.
increasing numbers who are benefitting from the staying put policy now in
place. There are 15 care leavers supported under these arrangements. Taster
flats are managed in partnership with the Councils Housing Services. Care


leavers use these properties to develop their independent living skills before
being granted a tenancy of their own.
Childrens Services in response to an identified need for supported
accommodation for young people in Gateshead. The project was a result of a bid
for funding to Changing Places and it was successful due to its innovative use of
sport to engage and develop young people. This project currently provides five
supported living placements for 16-17 year olds and an additional 15 placements
for young adults aged 18 and over, including care leavers.
people at risk of losing their tenancies or becoming homeless are quickly
identified through a RAG rating system. This proactive and more strategic
approach is having a positive impact on increasing the numbers of care leavers
successfully taking up and sustaining their own tenancies. A working group has
been established between childrens and housing services to plan for and
support care leavers moving into Gateshead Council tenancies. The group wrap
care and support around the young people to maximise the chances of
successful transition providing young persons floating support.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Leadership, management and governance is good. In particular: the engagement
and participation of children, young people and families; workforce development;
commissioning of services for children and families. Performance management and
monitoring is good with outstanding features. This is contributing to the provision of
good quality sustainable services and positive outcomes for the majority of children
and young people in Gateshead.
Children and young people are at the heart of good practice in Gateshead. Political
leaders and members led by the CEO are good advocates for vulnerable children and
young people. The Strategic Director of Care, Wellbeing and Learning is a skilled and
confident leader. He is effectively supported by other directorates within the council
and a strong, cohesive senior management team. The council has systematically
addressed the poor practice identified in 2011 by Ofsted and more recently areas for
development in relation to the Care Quality Commission (CQC) inspection findings of
prioritisation and a shared understanding of the vision that Gateshead and its
partners have for children, young people and families. Governance is strong and solid
foundations are in place for taking services forward.
Much work has been undertaken with partners to ensure confidence in applying the
threshold to childrens services, which is now firmly embedded. Leaders use change
management well and have effectively consulted with staff and partners for the
planned transformation of services for children and families. Successful, effective
practice is being used appropriately to identify how childrens, adult and health
services will be aligned under one directorate from April 2016 and improve
efficiencies and effective working arrangements.
There is particular strength in the alignment of adult and childrens commissioning,
for example in relation to service provision for parents including domestic violence,
adult mental health, and substance misuse. Management oversight is good. The
quality assurance framework is very comprehensive and well informed by
outstanding performance management arrangements.
While many services for care leavers have improved, the strategic oversight and
monitoring of educational outcomes for care leavers needs to strengthen. There is
more to do to ensure that care leavers receive consistently good-quality services.


Inspection findings
Strategic Director of Care, Wellbeing and Learning (DCS) has approached
challenges and the plans for transformation in a sustained, measured and
systematic way. His encouraging manner is ensuring that services for children
and their families are sustained. There is a strong ethos of collective
responsibility across the council, which is helping to achieve the best outcomes
for children. The director is effectively supported and challenged by the CEO,
elected members, other directorates within the council, and a strong, cohesive
senior management team.
responsibilities for both childrens and adults services is coherent. Although its
review is slightly delayed, there is a clear understanding of statutory
responsibilities to ensure effective oversight and delivery of services for
children.
childrens services is well inducted and supported to meet the responsibilities of
the role and has shown effective challenge, for example, in relation to CYPS
waiting times, appropriate payment for foster carers and enabling young people
to remain with their foster carers beyond the age of 18. She has helped raise
awareness about child sexual exploitation through her work with the parents
forum and this is good practice. The lead member does not attend children in
care council meetings routinely or regional meetings with other lead members.
This reduces opportunities for further improving service quality and sharing
good practice.
level of challenge by elected members, which is robust and very impactful.
Areas of strength and improvement are well understood and this leads to
effective and timely challenge of key issues. Examples include educational
attainment for children looked after, which is now improving; and childrens
health, which has led to a review of emotional health and wellbeing provision.
There is comprehensive understanding and support for workforce development
and regular meetings with frontline staff, children and young people.
through all of the strategic plans for children, young people and families, both
within childrens social care and across the partnership. This is underpinned by
an outstanding performance management and outcomes framework that is
contributing to a shared ambition for and prioritisation of services for children
and families. This includes a good focus on children and young people in the
work of the Health and Wellbeing Board and Community Safety Partnership.


There are effective arrangements with Gateshead Local Safeguarding Childrens
Board (LSCB).
Fostering Association chair, representatives from housing, and the voluntary
and community sector, is ensuring that children looked after are prioritised
across the borough. Current challenges facing care leavers are understood.
However, the strategic drive seen in relation to improving education outcomes
for children looked after has not been as robust in ensuring that education,
employment and training opportunities are secured and maintained for all care
leavers.
service needs well. The JSNA has a particular focus on vulnerable groups;
including children looked after and care leavers, through a well-informed and
appropriately aligned sufficiency strategy. There are clear pathways established
for accessing a comprehensive range of services to support children and
families in need of early help, targeted and specialist support. Services are
robustly monitored and evaluated for their effectiveness. This includes, for
example, joint commissioning with health in providing good-quality short break
services for children with complex health needs.
commissioning, for example in relation to service provision for parents in
domestic violence, adult mental health, and substance misuse. Because
prevalence is very well understood, children are receiving good levels of
support in relation to substance and alcohol misuse. The pathway for care
leavers requiring mental health support is less clear and some care leavers are
not receiving the support they need in a timely way.
delivered by the children and young peoples service, is under review in order
to improve the timeliness and quality of provision for children and young
people. There is evidence that waiting times are improved following appropriate
challenge by senior leaders.
been distributed for consultation. The strategy aims to align partners together
to tackle all areas of bullying and harassment. The fostering service bullying
policy and procedure and the childrens guide all have clear and easy-to-follow
guidance.
There is effective monitoring of contract compliance by the childrens
commissioning team through, for example, membership of regional consortiums
for childrens homes, independent fostering agencies and provider forums. This
is ensuring good quality and choice of accommodation for children looked after
and care leavers, which are promoting very good placement stability.


outstanding features and is facilitating robust challenge from elected members,
leaders and managers in order to improve the quality of services for children.
Managers readily access a SharePoint site for live performance information that
effectively supports them in their task of driving service improvement. This has
led to, for example, robust action being taken to prioritise dips in performance
such as educational attainment and health provision for children looked after.
There is an appropriate focus on improving consistency in quality across the
service. However, evaluation of the challenges by IROs is not formally
undertaken and an annual adoption panel report 201415 is not available. As a
result, these areas of provision are not contributing as effectively as they could
to driving service improvement.
supports a rigorous programme of management oversight and continuous
improvement within the local authority. Routine auditing is strong with good
attention to the consistency of the work and effective consideration of both
qualitative and quantitative standards. Outcomes from audits are monitored
and actions and improvement in practice reviewed at monthly performance
clinics. Through this process, senior managers have identified childrens plans
are not effective tools for improving childrens outcomes and are in the process
of redeveloping the care planning template and rolling out targeted training for
social workers and managers.
providing a good overview of the effectiveness of early intervention within the
family intervention team, Positive Pathways, childrens centres and youth
support. A quarterly health check is undertaken around a scorecard of
workforce, quality performance and resources, demonstrating an established
connection between performance and quality. The council is aware of the need
to accelerate its focus on care leavers now that the protection of children is
assured. The council has already sought to challenge, for example, the pause in
provision of apprenticeships for care leavers.
partners to promote continual professional development and inspectors saw
many examples of highly effective social work. The workforce strategy
appropriately includes clear expectations for learning and continuous
professional development to improve and inform workers practice. The principal
social worker is well established and has a positive impact on improving quality
and the recruitment and retention of social workers through implementing an
attractive workforce offer and clear career pathways. Newly qualified social
workers are effectively supported in their post-qualifying year. There are clear
career pathways for managers and practitioners through first line, a regional
pre-pilot programme for managers and front line, the FastTrack programme
for student social workers. There are effective links with local universities to
support student social workers and a step up to social work programme
enhances recruitment opportunities and service learning.


social workers and managers. Examples include regular briefings, e-learning
courses, subscription to social work publications as well as group training
courses. There is good learning from serious case reviews regionally and
nationally. Training is well informed by feedback and service needs. There is
effective use of partnerships through the Public Service Academy, which
delivers broader training opportunities to the workforce. However, learning
from the neglect review undertaken by LSCB is not yet implemented.
recent turnover of staff is well understood, with responsive action being taken
to ensure competitive remuneration packages and securing the stability of the
workforce in the longer term. The number of vacancies across the social care
workforce is low. Existing staff are supported in maintaining appropriate
caseloads with a stable group of agency staff to cover any vacancies and
absence. Caseloads for IROs and conference chairs are slightly higher than
recommended and this is hindering aspects of their work in relation to
evaluating quality of practice.
for example through conferences, effective work with the LFJB to reduce court
timescales, and in work undertaken with universities to provide developmental
opportunities for student social workers, qualified social workers and managers.
Good practice is shared and adopted by other authorities, for example in
relation to the development of a combined Special Guardianship and Regulation
assessment of potential permanent carers.
cases is routine and comprehensive in most cases seen. There is a consistent
focus on continual professional development through supervision, observations
of practice and through appraisal. There is helpful guidance to providing goodquality supervision. Performance management and learning from training are
routinely reviewed. There is a strong focus on compliance through supervision,
but there are consistent elements of reflective practice and a focus on quality,
particularly through appraisal and observed practice. Permanence for children
and driving childrens plans are a consistent focus of supervision. This includes
supervision of IROs and child protection chairs, where the level of challenge is
reviewed.
complaints, advocacy and the provision of independent visitors for children,
young people and their families. Services to promote childrens participation are
accessible, through imaginative use of technology like the MOMO app and a
variety of tools to positively engage children and young people. There are many
excellent examples of operational staff going the extra mile to ensure that
children and young people are helped to understand interventions and
contribute to planning. Two workers based in the referral and assessment team


are ensuring that all children over the age of ten can contribute to initial child
protection conferences. In addition, regular meetings are held with advocates
to ensure that children receiving short break services stay with other children
and young people with similar interests and abilities.
team and childrens rights service, which help children express their views well
both formally and informally when they are not happy about a service. A
strong corporate parenting responsibility was seen operationally and this is rolemodelled effectively by the childrens rights worker. High numbers of children
make a positive contribution across all areas of service delivery and this was
consistently seen through direct work.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement

Executive summary
The Local Safeguarding Childrens Board (LSCB) in Gateshead requires improvement
to be good. While it fulfils its statutory responsibilities and there is clear strong
commitment from key statutory agencies, there are gaps in its membership, activities
and monitoring of frontline practice that limit its effectiveness. However, much of the
work it undertakes it does well and some, very well.
The LSCB has not yet forged strong enough partnerships with the Health and
Wellbeing Board to enable it to assert its influence. Membership of the LSCB is not
sufficiently representative of the whole community. It does not currently have a lay
member and, although it is actively exploring ways of promoting young peoples and
faith groups involvement, plans are at an early stage. The annual report is too
descriptive and not easily accessible to the lay reader. It does not report on private
fostering arrangements. This is a missed opportunity to raise awareness.
The LSCBs analysis of the training it provides is not sufficiently robust for it to be
assured that training is sufficient to meet local need or to measure its effectiveness
in improving frontline practice. The multi-agency data set used by the LSCB does not
assist scrutiny of the full range of issues that influence frontline practice. A lack of
evaluative commentary or reporting by some agencies limits its usefulness further.
The LSCB exerts its challenge function appropriately, with some examples of strong
challenge to partners resulting in improved engagement with safeguarding. However,
it does not currently keep a challenge log. The LSCB has not developed a
performance framework for measuring its own effectiveness. Nonetheless, the LSCB
identified most of the areas for development seen in this inspection in March 2015
and is taking action to address them.
The LSCB scrutinises agencies compliance with safeguarding policies and procedures
through annual section 11 audits. The LSCB has recognised the quality of audits is
too variable. For example, arrangements in individual schools under section 175 of
the Education Act 2002 are not included. The LSCB has taken authoritative action to
strengthen arrangements for next year and has introduced a peer review process to
further assure the effectiveness of policies and procedures on the ground.
Good collaborative working between sub-groups has resulted in an effective whole
systems approach to safeguarding, including child sexual exploitation and extremism.
The boards auditing activity is used to improve practice. For example, the Neglect
Inquiry has led to the development of comprehensive guidance for all agencies.


Recommendations

including learning from the participation and testimony of children and young
people, increased engagement with faith and ethnic minority groups, and timely
recruitment of lay members (paragraphs 118 and 133).
influence on the work of the Health and Wellbeing Board to ensure the
experience of children and young people are given appropriate consideration in
all activity (paragraph 121).
needs analysis that includes analysis of impact on practice over time and the
difference it has made to outcomes for children (paragraph 125).
the LSCB to increase its oversight of practice (paragraph 127).
LSCB priorities and includes all relevant activity that impacts on frontline
practice, including workforce information (paragraph 128).
performance management framework (paragraph 129).
the LSCB and its strengths and areas for improvement that is easily understood
by a lay reader (paragraph 137).

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
together 2015. The LSCB is appropriately constituted although it has had no lay
member since June 2015. This recruitment has been purposely delayed due to
a plan to recruit jointly with the Adult Safeguarding Board as part of a general
strategy to align the work of the boards in a whole-life approach to
safeguarding. While the LSCB anticipates that this will bring clear benefits in
ensuring continuity, it means it has not benefited from a regular lay member
perspective for some considerable time. The representation of the voice of
young people on the LSCB is insufficient and, consequently, learning from their
experience and their direct influence on board priorities is diluted. The LSCB
had already recognised this gap before this inspection and is exploring ways of


strengthening young peoples input. A report on the voice of the child is being
collated, creation of a youth LSCB is under consideration and the chair has
recently met with the Children in Care Council One Voice to explore how the
experience of children looked after can be represented.
LSCB by key statutory partners is strong, attendance logs show a high degree
of variability in LSCB members attendance at meetings. This includes key
decision makers in statutory partner agencies. Although they have ensured
representatives from their agencies attend regularly and relevant issues are fed
back promptly, attendees are not always at the required level of seniority to
commit to proposed actions. This leads to increased activity outside LSCB
meetings and potential delay. The independent chair has put forward proposals
to reshape the LSCB. While the chair anticipates this will facilitate attendance
and increase the LSCBs efficiency, plans remain at an early stage.
period. Yearly action plans build on progress from the previous year. Plans are
well aligned to other strategic plans such as the Childrens Trust and the Health
and Wellbeing Board (HWB) as part of an overarching shared strategic vision.
They are well informed by identified local needs, shared priorities and findings
from local LSCB auditing activity as well as national learning. For example, the
action plan for 2015/16 appropriately includes implementation of new neglect
guidance based on learning from the Neglect Inquiry and a review of the multiagency threshold document. This will ensure it contains specific guidance in
relation to early identification of potential risk of child sexual exploitation,
extremism and cyber-crime. However, the plan is too recent for it to have had a
discernible impact in improving the functioning or effectiveness of the LSCB.
This shared vision has not yet been realised into fully joined up activity.
Although links with the Childrens Trust are strong, the LSCB has appropriately
identified that its influence on the HWB requires strengthening. The HWBs
governance arrangements do not include sufficient opportunity for the LSCB to
exert its influence. This reduces the HWBs ability to test if it is robustly fulfilling
its responsibilities to help protect and care for young people. The LSCB chair
only attends the HWB annually and there is no current LSCB representation on
the HWB. This limits the effectiveness of both boards. For example, a homeless
health needs audit presented to the HWB in June 2015 did not report on the
health needs of homeless 16 and 17 year olds or include any specific focus on
care leavers. This was a missed opportunity.
skilled and knowledgeable across all areas of the business. He is supported by
an experienced business manager who is pivotal to the smooth functioning of
the LSCB. While all partner agencies confirm a mutual culture of robust
challenge and debate and could give examples of effective challenge, the LSCB
does not currently hold a challenge log. This means there is no clear audit trail
for issues raised across the partnerships or systematic analysis of progress or


themes. The LSCB has recognised this gap and proposals to introduce a
challenge log were agreed by the LSCB before this inspection.
the LSCBs key statutory responsibilities and priorities. Police, health and
childrens social care are well represented on the subgroups and the LSCB
business planning group. They play a strong role in scrutiny arrangements and
in updating the LSCB on developments in their respective agencies, including
highlighting potential areas of concern. Schools contribution has been far more
variable but has improved in recent months. All sub-group chairs report to the
LSCB at least bi-annually. They are members of the LSCB business group and
this is supported by the LSCB business managers membership of all sub-groups
and chairing of two. As a result, communication across the groups is generally
effective, leading to well-coordinated activities based on an established cycle of
scrutiny, learning training and action.
events held in 2014/15. Training is regularly updated to inform staff of changes
in legislation and to share national and local best practice. The majority of LSCB
training is delivered by partner organisations. While this ensures it is specialist
and Gateshead-specific, the availability of trainers has reduced due to other
pressures. As a result, some training in 2014/15 was cancelled. Many events
were oversubscribed and 35% of all applicants were unsuccessful in obtaining a
place (176) while a similar number (164) were offered a place and did not
attend. The LSCB launched a programme of e-learning modules in December
slow, but have improved. The LSCBs analysis of the quality of training and
whether it is reaching those who would benefit most is not robust. It has not
undertaken any recent training needs analysis and evaluation of the quality of
training is over-reliant on self-reporting on the day. This is almost always very
positive but cannot measure the impact of learning on outcomes for children.
Participants are asked to complete a survey three months after the event to
identify the difference that training has made to their practice but managers are
not included and response rates are poor. Consequently, the impact of training
on practice over time is not fully evaluated or understood. The LSCB plans to
develop a quality assessment tool over the coming months to evaluate current
training and its delivery more effectively.
as a result of some training. As a result of LSCB challenge to the clinical
commissioning group (CCG), 100% of GPs in Gateshead have completed multiagency (level 3) training. This increased awareness, combined with a new post
commissioned by the CCG to assist GPs in writing reports for child protection
conferences, has led to a significant improvement in the numbers of GP reports
provided, from 10% in 201415 to 38% in quarter one 201516.
through a series of inquiries informed by national research and local drivers.


The LSCB undertook the first inquiry into neglect in 2014-2015 due to high
numbers of children subject to child protection plans under the category. A
further inquiry into child sexual exploitation is planned for 201516. The
Neglect Inquiry scrutinised the application of thresholds and effectiveness of
services provided at every stage of the childs journey. It identified that while
no children were subject to child protection plans inappropriately, some
opportunities to intervene at an earlier stage had been missed. As a result of
this learning, new guidance has been developed for practitioners and a
commissioned service has been engaged to train all staff in using a tool to
identify and respond to neglect based on the graded care profile. While the
LSCB anticipates this should result in a more consistent identification of neglect
and lead to more effective help at an early stage, the guidance is yet to be
disseminated and monitoring of other practice has reduced. For example, no
single agency auditing has been reported to or analysed by the LSCB
performance management sub-group in the last 12 months.
monitoring and evaluation of all frontline practice. Although it considers
childrens and young peoples experience from early help to care leavers, it is
insufficiently linked to board priorities. The data set does not include some
performance information in relation to children the LSCB has identified as
particularly vulnerable, such as disabled children. Until very recently it did not
include children missing from home or care or are at risk of child sexual
exploitation. The LSCB recognises this has hampered its monitoring of
prevalence and its analysis of the effectiveness of the wide range of multiagency and single agency initiatives taking place. A failure to provide data by
some agencies including CYPS and probation and no workforce information
mean that the LSCB does not have a complete picture of the performance and
effectiveness of local services at a time of widespread organisational change.
any performance indicators to measure its performance. Statutory partners in
Gateshead know each other well and operate in a culture of mutual trust and
shared ambition for children. Nonetheless, it is important that the LSCB has
clearly defined quantitative and qualitative measures for holding partners to
account and for assessing its own effectiveness. In the absence of a clear
quality assurance framework, the LSCB is overly reliant on partners bringing
issues in their own agencies to the LSCBs attention. Agencies perceptions of
the relevance of issues within their own organisation or the LSCB as a whole
can be inaccurate. Some LSCB members spoken to had an overly positive view
of the LSCBs performance.
changes nationally and locally, with clear links to detailed guidance. They are
included in the LSCB training offer. For example, training on FGM has been
updated to include recently revised guidance. This proactive approach,
combined with a focus on FGM in the summer edition of the LSCB newsletter,


ensured increased awareness in a wide range of agencies at a time when
women and girls are most at risk.
consistent with revised guidance. The delivery plan is robust. It includes key
ACPO strategic priorities of Prevent; Protect; Pursue and Prepare. Good
collaborative working between LSCB sub-groups has resulted in a holistic,
whole-systems approach to child sexual exploitation. Initiatives include
workshops based on the theatre production of Chelseas choice, which 2,500
children attended in November 2014, and 700 taxi drivers received mandatory
training as part of the conditions of retaining their licence in August 2015. Over
exploitation in October 2015. This collaboration and the ongoing work of the
licensing sub-group to use its powers to oppose licensing applications that may
present a risk to children, for example by selling legal highs to young people,
is a significant strength.
appropriately and partners report progress to the LSCB regularly. The LSCB has
taken a lead in awareness-raising activities. Prevention of extremism is included
in its multi-agency training offer. In August 2015, a workshop was held to raise
awareness of the Prevent duty for frontline staff. As a result of these initiatives,
understanding of the potential targeting of young people by extremist groups
as a form of exploitation has increased. The LSCB recognises that it needs to
engage more meaningfully with this and other faith groups to promote the
safeguarding agenda. Plans to establish a multi-faith group sub-group are at an
early stage of development. The involvement of faith and ethnic minority
groups in the LSCB at the point of inspection was underdeveloped.
a result of effective challenge by the LSCB, the majority of agencies had
provided a sufficient response by March 2015. More recently, as a result of
good collaboration between the LSCB and the CCG, as of November 2015
almost all GP practices had submitted an audit. While the initial findings of the
Section 11 audits were positive, some responses were too limited for the LSCB
to be fully satisfied that effective arrangements were in place. Education
Gateshead, for example, provided an overarching response but did not report
on individual audits completed by schools under section 175 of the Education
Act 2002. The LSCB has taken authoritative action to strengthen arrangements
for next year and outcomes of all schools section 175 audits will be included.
Peer reviews of safeguarding arrangements have been identified as a means of
further assurance. To date, one visit has been completed. This initiative shows
promise but is in the early stages and not all agencies have committed to the
process.
statutory partners, including procedures for serious case reviews (SCRs) and
multi-agency and single-agency learning reviews. This represents a proactive


response by agencies to improve practice as a result of learning. Multi-agency
briefings were held around the time of publication to ensure that staff
understood the lessons and the resulting changes in practice. All practitioners
spoken to during the inspection had attended briefings and almost all could
articulate the lessons learned. Wider learning from local and national SCRs is
included in the LSCB training offer.
authorities. Although publication of the CDOP annual report has been
significantly delayed, Gateshead-specific information was included in the LSCB
annual report. Findings show that the pattern of modifiable child deaths seen
locally reflects those seen nationally, such as in relation to co-sleeping or
smoking. Gateshead participates in regional campaigns to raise awareness.
contextual information on areas for development, which makes it difficult for
the lay reader to understand the link to performance. It does not include
reference to private fostering arrangements. This is a missed opportunity to
promote awareness of this vulnerable group of children to a wider audience.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team
The inspection team included 6 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
Lead inspector: Tracey Metcalfe HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Fiona Millns HMI
Team inspectors: Sarah Urding HMI, Catherine McEvoy HMI, Fiona Parker, Shirley
Bailey HMI, Pamela Blackman HMI
Shadow inspectors: Regulatory Inspection Manager Rachel Holden, Charles Searle
HMI
Senior data analyst: Pete McLaughlin
Quality assurance manager: Paul Armitage


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for children looked after and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Text phone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


