Royal Borough of Greenwich
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board1
Inspection date: 23 May 2016 to 16 June 2016
Report published: 5 August 2016

Childrens services in the Royal Borough of Greenwich are good

Good

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Vulnerable children and their families benefit from good support from the Royal
Borough of Greenwich childrens services. Early help partnership work is well
coordinated and, in particular, the support provided by schools and childrens centres
is good. Agencies work well together. They have a good understanding of the
thresholds for assistance from childrens services and make referrals appropriately
and promptly. In the main, the response to referrals by childrens services is good
and the multi-agency safeguarding hub is effective, further demonstrating the quality
of partnership working. Urgent child protection issues are responded to well. Most
assessments are of high quality and timely, and identify when further assistance is
required. Direct work is of a high standard, and is provided by social workers who
know the children and young people well. Children and young people who talked to
inspectors spoke highly of the frequency of visits and their positive relationships with
social workers. Plans are well focused and reviewed regularly. Advocacy
arrangements to support children and young people to express their views, including
those who are looked after, are underdeveloped.
Children looked after are supported well. Education support through the virtual
school is of a very high quality and ensures good performance by children and young
people of all ages. Support for national testing, apprenticeships and university
admission demonstrates well the ambition of the local authority for its most
vulnerable children. Health support is good, although initial health assessments are
not always timely. Foster placements are of good quality, and the childrens home
operated by the local authority was judged to be outstanding by Ofsted at its most
recent inspection. Children placed out of borough achieve similarly high-quality
outcomes to those who are resident in Greenwich. Social work support to children in
placements is good, although a small number of young people have returned home
without thorough plans. Children are seen alone and their views are sought by social
workers. Independent reviewing officers carry out reviews in a timely manner, and
see the children and young people outside of the reviews to seek their opinions.
Contact arrangements with family members are well considered in those meetings.
However, only a limited number of children and young people have access to
independent visitors.
The Children in Care Council (CiCC) has recently been relaunched. However, the
views of children with disabilities and those placed outside of the borough are not
yet represented. Children looked after and care leavers who met with inspectors did
not have an understanding of their rights, and the written guarantee of their
entitlements (the pledge) has not been refreshed for some time.
Adoption services are good and improving. The quality of this work is high, with a
particular focus on ensuring good outcomes for hard-to-place children. Permanence
options, including returning home, adoption and special guardianship orders, are
considered at an appropriately early stage. The judiciary and the Children and Family
Court Advisory and Support Service spoke to inspectors positively about the work of


Greenwich social workers. Child permanence reports and the recording of the
matching process do not consistently provide children with a clear understanding of
the reasons for key decisions about their lives. Arrangements for fostering-to-adopt
are not well developed.
Services for care leavers are of high quality. Much of this work is provided through
the multi-agency services situated in The Point. Personal advisers, and housing and
health support, including for sexual health and mental health, are all provided in this
excellent central resource. Education, employment and training opportunities have
improved over the last year, although too many care leavers continue to be not in
education, employment or training. At the time of the inspection, 15 care leavers
were in custody. However, good work is taking place to prepare them for further
education and work opportunities when they return to their communities.
Leadership, management and governance are mostly strong, providing an
environment for good social work to thrive. The local authority has continued to
make progress on the previous Ofsted inspections of child protection (in 2012),
which judged services to be good, and of children looked after (in 2010), which
judged services to be adequate. Good performance management, quality assurance
and auditing ensure that senior managers are well informed about the strengths and
weaknesses of frontline practice. Performance in the longer-term childcare teams is
of a good quality. However, in a small number of the more pressured assessment
teams, there is too much variability in the timeliness and quality of social work
support. In weaker cases, diversity and ethnicity are not sufficiently considered.
Change management and development work are of high quality, with workers across
childrens services contributing to improvements in services. A range of innovative
projects is beginning to demonstrate positive impact on the outcomes achieved by
children and their families. Due to an excellent focus on recruitment and retention,
Greenwich has a workforce composed mainly of permanent staff. Social work
supervision is generally of a good quality. However, the recording and planning from
this is inconsistent. At the time of the inspection, management oversight was weak in
relation to the response to allegations against professionals. Senior managers had
not identified that the recently restructured local authority designated officer service
was not robust. Once alerted by inspectors, senior managers responded well and
reviewed all of the recent contacts with the designated officer, reopening some for
further scrutiny and revising the structure and management oversight.
The multi-agency strategic and operational response to child sexual exploitation is
good, with strong links to the local priority of tackling gangs and gang culture.
Interviews with missing children on their return to home or care had not been
carried out robustly and a new system has been in operation since May 2016. This
has not yet been embedded, and information has not yet been analysed to identify
patterns and trends. Work to address radicalisation is of a high standard, with
excellent partnership work focused on safeguarding vulnerable children and young
people.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home, which was judged to be
outstanding at its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the
protection of children was in December 2012. The local authority was
judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked
after was in June 2010. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services has been in post since April 2008. She is
retiring in August 2016. The local authority completed the recruitment
process for her successor during this inspection.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since October 2014.
Children living in this area3
 Approximately 64,676 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Greenwich. This is 24.1% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 29.2% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 20.3% (the national level is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 18.4% (the national level is 13.9%).
 The proportion of children who meet the criteria for pupil premium funding:
 in primary schools is 36% (the national level is 26%)
 in secondary schools is 46% (the national level is 29%).

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data, where this was available.
Figures taken from Profile of children and young people in Greenwich, 2015.


 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 49.6%
of all children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a
whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are from Black African and any other White backgrounds.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an
additional language:
 in primary schools is 42.4% (the national level is 19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 33.9% (the national level is 15.0%).
 The 0 to 18 child population in Greenwich has grown by 9% over the past
five years, with the fastest growing group being 0- to 10-year-olds. The
Greater London Authority estimates a further rise of 13% (8,400 children)
by 2021, with the fastest growth among 10- to 15-year-olds.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2016, 2,401 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a small
decrease from 2,411 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 March 2016, 272 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan, the same number as at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 March 2016, 15 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement, one more than at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, five serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted and two serious case reviews have been completed.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2016, 518 children were being looked after by the local
authority, two fewer than at 31 March 2015 (the same rate of 80 per 10,000
children). Of the 518 children looked after in March 2016:
the local authority area or one of its neighbouring boroughs
authority area
 no children lived in residential special schools
area


 seven lived with parents, of whom five lived out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 20 adoptions
returned to be looked after
to independent living
living in houses in multiple occupation. None are in bed and breakfast
accommodation.


Recommendations

Ensure that robust management oversight of the designated officer function is
embedded, and that it enables allegations against professionals to be dealt
with appropriately.


Continue to improve the consistency of management oversight and
performance across all frontline social work teams.


Embed the management process for undertaking return home interviews of
children who go missing, and analyse the information to identify patterns and
trends in order to aid planning.


Improve the consistency of the recording of management decision making,
supervision and report writing, including child permanence and matching
reports, and ensure that the reasons for decisions are clear.


Ensure that issues of cultural background and diversity are consistently taken
into account in assessments and subsequent planning.


Ensure that plans are in place for all children looked after who return home, to
coordinate available support more effectively.


Improve the timeliness of initial health assessments for children looked after.


Make available sufficient advocacy services and independent visitors to meet
the needs of children and young people.


Continue to develop the Children in Care Council, and ensure that children
with disabilities and those placed out of borough are enabled to contribute.


Refresh the pledge and ensure that all children and young people looked
after and care leavers receive a copy, to support them to understand their
rights and entitlements.


Explore the opportunities available from a fostering-to-adopt approach in
order to improve further the availability of good-quality carers.


Increase the number of care leavers who are in education, employment and
training.


Summary for children and young people
 Childrens services in Greenwich provide children and their families with a lot of
help when they are having problems or when parents are finding it difficult to
look after their children properly. Help is provided quickly and at an early stage,
which usually stops small problems becoming worse.
 When children and young people are in urgent need of protection, action is taken
quickly to make them safe.
 Staff across services work together well to tackle gangs and their effect on young
people, and they also work well to protect children and young people who are at
risk of being sexually exploited.
 Children and young people get on well with their social workers. Social workers
and other staff are good at listening to children and young people. They pay
attention to the views of children looked after and make sure that they know
what children would like to happen.
 When children or young people are brought into care because their parents are
not able to look after them, the local authority makes sure that they live with
foster carers who understand them or that they live in good-quality childrens
homes. Children and young people are looked after well and attend good schools,
where they make good progress.
 When young people leave care, they are helped to find jobs, and many go to
apprenticeships and university. Young people receive good help to learn how to
live independently, and can access a wide range of good-quality services at The
Point. However, social workers do not always have clear enough plans for
working with older young people who do not want to be looked after to help
them to keep out of trouble.
 The Children in Care Council is being developed to make sure that children and
young people have more of an influence over the way in which they are looked
after. Although staff and councillors care very much about children looked after,
the pledge, which describes what children and young people are entitled to, is
not clear enough.
 The local authority is good at making sure that children are adopted quickly by
families when that is the best course of action, although it could sometimes do
more to make sure that children understand why and how things are done.
 Leaders and managers are good at what they do. This helps social workers and
other staff to do their jobs well and to work with other services, such as police
and health, to make sure that children and young people have good experiences
and outcomes. However, sometimes the quality of social work is too variable. For
example, assessments do not always consider the family background and culture
enough.
 At the time of the inspection, the services for investigating allegations against
professionals were not effective. The local authority made improvements straight
away.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Children, young people and their families who need help and protection benefit from
improved outcomes through effective multi-agency working. Services respond
quickly, and children are safer as a result.
Effective early help work in Greenwich provides families with good support, in
particular from schools and childrens centres. Thresholds between early help and
childrens social care are understood well. The multi-agency safeguarding hub
(MASH) provides a good and thorough response to referrals from other agencies. In
many cases, assessments provide a good analysis of need and lead to plans to meet
that need. However, a small number of assessments are not completed in a timely
manner or do not include sufficient consideration of cultural and ethnic background.
Children are visited, and they and their families are engaged in high-quality direct
work which reduces risk and promotes their welfare. Child protection plans identify
what needs to change to keep children safe, with timely progress and better
outcomes for children as a result.
When children are at risk of sexual exploitation, or go missing or absent from home
or school, there are highly effective arrangements to ensure a multi-agency response
to support them and to take action to reduce their vulnerabilities. Young people are
made aware of the dangers of inappropriate relationships and are helped to
recognise unsafe situations. When domestic violence and drug and alcohol abuse are
putting children at risk, parents receive a good range of help, including services to
help victims to understand the impact on themselves and their families.
Arrangements for identifying and responding to children and young people who are
privately fostered are well developed, and ensure that these children are kept safe
and are appropriately cared for. Young people who present as homeless have their
needs carefully considered and are very well supported to return home or to move to
alternative provision. The dangers of radicalisation are understood well by the local
authority and partner agencies. Effective processes identify young people at risk and
help to build better relationships between communities. At the time of the inspection,
the managerial oversight of the designated officer arrangements was not sufficiently
thorough.
Children and young people in Greenwich are listened to by their social workers and
their views are actively sought. Staff know the children well and engage with them to
explore their circumstances and to assess what needs to change for them in order
for them to feel more secure. However, advocacy services are limited and are not
always timely.


Inspection findings

Children and young people are well protected in Greenwich through good
multi-agency partnership working.


Early help support is good. The early help framework is clear and is used
effectively by agencies across Greenwich, in particular the 23 childrens
centres and all of the 83 schools. Services are well coordinated by a
consultation service provided by experienced social workers, together with a
team of early help staff. As a result, the volume of early help assessments has
increased from 539 completed in 201415 to 765 in 201516. The framework
is also underpinned by a range of tools and training to help agencies to
identify needs and how these can best be met. Most early help assessments
seen by inspectors were comprehensive and led to specific actions to support
families and to prevent escalation to statutory services. The team around the
child (TAC) approach is embedded well, with 854 children supported in this
way over the last year. Children and young people also benefit from the
provision of a broad range of universal, targeted and specialist services
including family and parenting support through Families 1st, through early
help services targeting older young people through The Point, and through
support for first-time, vulnerable mothers through the family nurse
partnership. Work with troubled families has successfully achieved a 100%
turnaround of those families identified. There are a number of good initiatives
that enhance intercommunity understanding and tolerance, including a local
authority presence at the Islamic Centre to facilitate access to all local
authority services.


Thresholds between early help and social care services are well understood,
and partner agencies seek advice and escalate concerns in a timely manner.
The MASH is appropriately resourced with staff from childrens social care
services, the police, health and education. Decision making is informed by
thorough information gathering and good consideration of previous
involvement with agencies. Consent is sought appropriately from parents and
carers to share information and, when necessary, repeated efforts are made
to secure it.


Management oversight is evident, with decisions recorded in all cases.
Decisions to step down or progress cases to further assessment are made
quickly, ensuring that families receive timely responses to their needs and
offers of support, when necessary. Strategy meetings are thorough and most
involve a good range of agencies. Interventions are proportionate to risk and,
when children and young people need to be safeguarded, actions are taken
promptly to ensure that they are kept safe. There are effective arrangements
in place to provide a response out of hours. Access to information on current
cases and history of past involvement is readily available, helping to ensure
that decisions are timely and appropriate.



The majority of assessments of need seen by inspectors are good. They are
informed by previous history and take account of significant difficulties
affecting family members, such as domestic violence, and alcohol and drug
misuse. In most assessments seen by inspectors, there was evidence of a
good understanding of the impact of neglect. Assessments also provide a clear
analysis of risk and relevant recommendations for future action. However, in
some of the assessment teams, not all of the assessments are completed
within the identified timescales. A very small number seen by inspectors were
completed significantly beyond this period, although this did not leave any
children at risk. In these teams, inspectors also saw variability in the quality of
assessments, including limited analysis, in particular of diversity and identity
issues. (Recommendation)


When no further social care involvement is required, there is a well embedded
step-down process to early help, with a TAC and an identified lead
professional continuing to support the family. This ensures that there is no
gap in services between social care closure and other services that provide
support. The transfer of cases between teams is effective and does not lead
to delay in allocation of work.


Child protection enquiries are held promptly, and children and young people
are not subjected to these investigations unnecessarily. Investigations are
undertaken by qualified staff, who ensure that children are seen and spoken
to alone. Child protection assessments identify risk effectively. Plans have
clear, timely actions to minimise those risks, together with appropriate support
to allow families to make changes. Conferences are timely. There are
management reviews of cases when child protection plans have been in place
for more than a year, and close monitoring of progress has resulted in low
numbers of children remaining on plans for more than two years. In addition,
there is excellent use of impact review meetings to consider whether multiagency plans and actions are reducing the risks sufficiently or whether other
options need to be considered. The local authority demonstrates a willingness
to take further robust action to safeguard children if required, including
through the use of care proceedings.


Core groups are held regularly, with good levels of multi-agency involvement.
They are used effectively to review and update the child protection plan.
Recordings of core group meetings demonstrate progress and reduction in
levels of risk. Visits to young people on child protection plans are regular, with
all young people seen within timescales agreed at conferences and core
groups.



Managerial oversight was evident in almost all cases seen by inspectors.
Mostly, inspectors saw good oversight with well-recorded decision making,
reflection and clear guidance to staff. However, the designated officer service
has received insufficient management attention. The service was restructured
in April 2016. Inspectors found that these new arrangements are not robust.
The local authority took swift action during this inspection to review all
referrals to the service since 1 April 2016, ensuring that children and young
people were safe. Immediate changes were made to the management
arrangements. (Recommendation)


Children and young people in Greenwich are listened to by their social workers
and their views are actively sought. Social workers know their cases well. In
the vast majority of cases, inspectors saw direct work with children, young
people and their families that focuses on what needs to change to improve
their safety and welfare. Recording of work undertaken is often of high quality
and includes analysis of visits made. Children and young people are seen and
seen alone, when appropriate, and their wishes and feelings are recorded in
detail and included in the plans for children. However, availability of advocacy
support at child protection meetings is limited and not always timely.
(Recommendation)


There are good arrangements to support children in need who require
assistance from childrens services. These include multi-agency child-in-need
plans, which are regularly reviewed and updated through well attended
meetings. Work with children in need is detailed and benefits from a clear
understanding by social work staff of what needs to change in order to effect
progress.


The local authoritys response to those children and young people who go
missing from home is improving. Children and young people are offered a
return interview through a commissioned service, with police carrying out a
separate safe-and-well visit. In the last quarter of 201516, 40% of all those
missing from home were not offered an interview within 72 hours. A new
service has been commissioned and, although 93% of young people reported
missing have not gone missing for a second time, it remains too early to
establish impact. (Recommendation)



Arrangements for identifying those young people who may be at risk of sexual
exploitation are well developed. Partner agencies work together effectively to
assess the levels of risk to which young people are exposed. Associated risks,
such as connections with gangs, are closely monitored, and the local authority
and partners are well informed about hotspots and areas of concern, such as
peer-on-peer abuse. The local authority captures information on those young
people who may be considered vulnerable by using a comprehensive data
tool. This allows the local authority to identify and target young people who
may be at risk of a range of issues, including going missing from home, sexual
exploitation, poor school attendance rates, gang association, early help status,
not in education, employment or training (NEET) status, or having a
statement of educational needs. This is a potentially powerful tool which has
already enabled the local authority to identify emerging concerns such as
gang-based activity at secondary schools.


The local authority also uses a child sexual exploitation assessment tool to
assess overall risk and vulnerability. It is used by social workers on a regular
basis to measure progress and reduction of risk, and has been adapted for
multi-agency use. Social workers have a good understanding of risks
associated with child sexual exploitation. Plans and actions seen by inspectors
to help and support young people at risk of child sexual exploitation were
clearly focused. Progress was seen in most cases, and risk reduction had been
demonstrated over time.


Attendance of children in need at school is higher than the national average,
and the proportion of those children who are persistently absent is lower.
There have been no recent permanent exclusions of children in need, but the
proportion with at least one fixed-term exclusion, although reducing, is higher
than the level for England. For children in need who are also subject to a child
protection plan, overall absence is the same as the national average.


At the time of the inspection, 216 children and young people were electively
home educated (EHE). Schools contact the EHE officer promptly when parents
decide to educate their children at home. Procedures for assessing the
suitability of EHE are robust. Pupils are checked against the social care
database and a list of all children with identified vulnerabilities. In addition, for
all cases open to social care, risk factors are reviewed by a social work
manager and the EHE officer. The EHE officer carefully assesses the
appropriateness of the education provided. There is a willingness to act when
the education provided is unsuitable. Seven school attendance orders were
issued last year, with one resulting in court proceedings.



Clear procedures are in place for schools to alert the local authority when
pupils are removed from school and their destinations are unknown. Schools
immediately refer the case to the MASH if there are any known concerns
about the pupil. Information from a wide range of sources, such as the
National Health Service, Her Majestys Revenue and Customs, and the Home
Office, are checked in order to track parents. During the period January to
December 2015, 233 children and young people were referred to the children
missing education officer. Following appropriate and exhaustive
investigations, the education placements of 34 children could not be traced
and these were placed on the national missing childrens list.


All pupils attending pupil referral units have 25 hours of education a week,
with the exception of a small number attending for assessment or who attend
specialist provision for medical reasons. Four other providers of alternative
provision are used by the authority, mostly for pupils with emotional needs.
They are registered as alternative provision schools, quality assured by the
authority, and visited regularly by a school leader and the alternative
education officer.


A good range of support is offered to adults and young people experiencing
the effects and impact of substance misuse, domestic violence and mental
health issues. There is also a good range of services relating to raising
awareness about safeguarding, particularly among young people at school.
Inspectors saw that, when part of the child protection plan, social workers are
equipped and trained in the use of drug and alcohol testing kits to ensure that
concerns are identified, explored and responded to quickly.


Multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARAC) and multi-agency public
protection arrangements (MAPPA) are well established, and focus on those
most at risk and those who pose risk. Some responses to tackling domestic
violence are innovative, including joint funding by the local authority and the
police, with a team of officers forming the domestic violence intervention team
to target the top 15 perpetrators in the borough, and to work with victims and
perpetrators separately on a longer-term basis. This includes a programme
called Yuva for young people who are perpetrators of violence.


Arrangements for identifying and responding to children and young people
who are privately fostered are good. At the time of the inspection, 16 children
and young people were supported through these arrangements. All of the
children have received timely assessments, and are visited and reviewed
regularly. There are also awareness days and public events in libraries and
leisure centres to improve public knowledge and understanding of private
fostering.



Young people who present as homeless are supported well. Assessments are
conducted through The Point, which provides an excellent range of multiagency services to support young people in crisis. Following assessments, a
good range of support services is provided, which may include provision of
accommodation or the opportunity to become looked after. As a result, no
young person has been accommodated in unsuitable accommodation,
including bed and breakfast provision, in the last 12 months, and this is good
practice.


The Royal Borough of Greenwich has been a Prevent priority area since
sensitive and complex multi-agency support, which is effective in safeguarding
the child while at the same time protecting the public. A small number of
cases are currently being managed through the multi-agency Channel panel.
Workshops to raise awareness of radicalisation have also been held across the
early help workforce and schools.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Children and young people looked after in the Royal Borough of Greenwich receive a
good service. Decisions about whether children need to become looked after are
appropriate and timely. Good assessments inform plans, which are reviewed
regularly. Social workers know children well and visit them often, ensuring that their
views are captured. The large majority of children looked after, including those
placed out of borough, have much-improved outcomes as a result of the support that
they receive. Children looked after are very well supported in all areas of their
education by the excellent virtual school. Childrens and young peoples educational
progress is good at all key stages. In the majority of cases, childrens and young
peoples health needs are identified and met, although the timeliness of initial health
assessments needs improving.
The vast majority of children are in settled, good-quality placements. Social work
support to placements is good, although a small number of young people have
returned home without thorough plans. Support to young people at risk of child
sexual exploitation is good, with recent improvements in response to children who go
missing. The Children in Care Council (CiCC) is growing in numbers, but the views of
children placed outside the borough and children with disabilities are not currently
represented. Advocacy and independent visitor services are limited. Not all children
and young people looked after and care leavers are informed about the local
authoritys commitment to them. The pledge is out of date, although plans are in
place to update it.
The quality of permanence work is good. The local authority is committed to
pursuing adoption for all children, whenever possible, and progress is tracked
effectively. Timeliness of adoption is close to the national level and improving.
Fostering-to-adopt approaches are underdeveloped. The quality of planning and
assessments is generally good, although the quality of child permanence and
matching reports is too variable. Adoption support to children and adults is often
excellent and is valued highly by those who receive it. Disruption rates are low.
Care leavers are well supported by social workers and personal advisers, who have
good relationships with them. The local authority is in contact with the vast majority
of care leavers, most of whom have up-to-date pathway plans. Young people are
supported well by the virtual school, resulting in a high number at university and in
apprenticeships. They receive prompt and effective advice and guidance on
education, training and employment opportunities through the excellent multi-agency
services located at The Point. Although improving, further work is needed to increase
the numbers of care leavers in employment, education or training. Too many young
people are in custody, although the support that they receive on discharge is good.


Inspection findings

Children and young people looked after in the Royal Borough of Greenwich
receive a good service. Decisions to look after children are appropriate and
are timely in almost all cases. Placements are of good quality. The large
majority of children enjoy improved outcomes as a result of being looked
after.


Assessments evaluate risks, and parallel planning is in place to ensure that
children are only looked after if there are no suitable alternatives. Family
group conferences are timely. They are used to inform care planning and to
identify extended family members who are willing to care for the child.
Viability assessments to evaluate the ability of extended family members to
care for children and young people are of good quality, with appropriate
management oversight in place.


Effective legal planning meetings and close monitoring and tracking of cases
under the Public Law Outline mean that children move swiftly through the
legal system. This has resulted in average timeliness of proceedings improving
to 30 weeks in the third quarter of 201516, from 32 weeks in 201415.


The quality of work placed before the court is good, and less experienced
social workers are well supported by managers. The Children and Family Court
Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and the local judiciary report good
working relationships with the authority. In particular, work that is undertaken
as part of the South London care proceedings pilot has a positive impact on
resolving issues proactively and on improving the timeliness of court
proceedings.


The local authority has recently reviewed all children looked after in voluntary
agreements under section 20 of the Children Act 1989. This has resulted in a
small number of proceedings being issued. Inspectors saw cases that pose
significant challenges to the local authority when young people over the age
of 16 had effectively discharged themselves from care and, while tenacious
efforts were being made to engage the young people, not all were successful.
Plans are not always in place for those young people who discharge
themselves from care, which could potentially result in families not being
provided with the support that they need. Plans are in place for younger
children, and include appropriate arrangements for support and monitoring.
(Recommendation)


Contact arrangements for children and young people are appropriately
assessed. They are well supported to maintain contact with their families and
friends. Inspectors saw good examples of reports from supervised contact
informing plans for children. Contact issues were considered in all matches for
permanence seen by inspectors.



Social workers know their children and young people well. Childrens views
influence their assessments, plans and reviews. Inspectors saw examples of
sensitive direct work with children to support their understanding of their
earlier experiences. The majority of statutory visits are undertaken within
timescales. In all cases, when appropriate, children are seen alone. While
there is a fixed age range in the permanency teams which requires children to
change social workers at 13, this transition is well managed and planned for.
In the majority of cases from the longer-term childcare teams that were seen
by inspectors, childrens identity and diversity needs were considered well,
including sensitive attention being paid to meeting needs arising from their
sexuality.


The local authority and partner agencies show great commitment to ensuring
that children placed outside the borough are not disadvantaged. In the vast
majority of cases, children and young people looked after outside of the
borough receive regular visits from their social workers, reviews are timely,
designated health nurses travel to undertake health assessments, and young
people are supported to maintain contact with their families and friends.


Children and young people looked after have access to advocacy and
independent visitors through a commissioned service although, at the time of
the inspection, only 11% of children looked after had access to an advocate.
Twelve young people are currently matched to an independent visitor.
However, a waiting list is in operation. (Recommendation)


There has been a net increase in the pool of available in-house foster
placements in the last 12 months, despite the significant challenges faced by
London local authorities in recruiting and retaining foster carers. Foster care
recruitment activity is targeted effectively, based on a good understanding of
the current and projected needs of the children looked after population. There
is a continuing reliance on independent fostering agency (IFA) carers, but this
does not adversely affect the level of support or commitment to such
placements. One IFA carer with longstanding experience of caring for children
from a range of local authorities said, I love working with Greenwich.


Local foster carers are valued and feel valued by the local authority as key
members of the professional team that is working with and caring for children.
Carers have good access to an excellent training programme that is wideranging, relevant and responsive to individual needs. Similarly, a wide range
of support groups, strongly promoted by the fostering service and well
attended, is a significant part of the good support network for carers. The
groups take very good account of foster carers individual and collective
support needs. Foster carers are well supported by their supervising social
workers. Supervisory visits, including unannounced visits, are generally
purposeful and well recorded.



The Mockingbird innovation programme is having a positive impact on
children whose foster carers are supported by a hub of experienced foster
carers. Children who are looked after widen their social networks and increase
the number of adults with whom they can have trusting relationships. Foster
carers receive support, which helps them to meet the needs of the children
whom they care for. One foster carer spoke to inspectors about how respite
care is offered by carers already known to her and the young person. She
described it as like a family.


The quality of placements is good. Cases seen by inspectors of children and
young people being placed in specialist placements were appropriate, in
response to identified need, and meeting childrens educational and health
needs. The local authoritys placement and commissioning sufficiency strategy
is rigorously monitored. It is meeting targets and demonstrates a good
understanding of placement needs for children looked after, both current and
future.


In the vast majority of cases seen, children are settled where they live and
there is evidence of a sustained improvement in placement stability. The most
recently published data compares favourably with that of similar authorities
and national performance, and only 9% of children looked after moved more
than once during 201516. This is good.


Recording of the decision making about the matches of children to suitable
foster placements is not always sufficiently clear. For younger children in longterm foster care, practice is generally good and includes careful consideration
of proposals at the local authoritys fostering panel. For older children, when
agreement to a long-term match is made by the permanence service manager
following discussion at a childs statutory review, case records do not always
demonstrate a clear rationale for proposing or agreeing matches. Similarly,
when children first enter care, discussions during the matching process are
not always clearly recorded, including the reasons for agreeing a match.
Despite the increasing stability of placements and the high quality of support
provided to carers, this deficit might have an impact on the later life
experience of young people, who will have the opportunity to review their
case files to seek the reasons why key decisions were made.
(Recommendation)


There is a suitably strong, service-wide focus on achieving permanence for all
children looked after, through options that suit the needs of individual
children. Permanence is considered at an early stage, either routinely at
second statutory reviews or earlier via early permanence meetings, and was
being pursued vigorously in the vast majority of cases that were seen by
inspectors.


The increased use of special guardianship orders (SGOs) as a path to
permanence for children is appropriate. SGO assessments are thorough and
consider well the relationship between the prospective special guardian and
the child. Support plans involving key agencies are relevant and realistic, and
include appropriate financial packages to help to sustain placements.



Inspectors saw evidence of very good direct work undertaken to help young
people to understand their life histories and to develop their sense of identity
and belonging. This included examples of good life-story work.


Independent reviewing officers are consistent for children and young people
looked after. Reviews are timely, in the vast majority of cases. Reviews drive
plans forward effectively, with clear decisions and recommendations.
Childrens views are represented in the vast majority of cases, and
independent reviewing officers meet them before the review. In 201516,
There is a clear emphasis on holding reviews at a time and place that are
appropriate for the young person. There is also good attendance by relevant
professionals.


The overall performance data on the health of children looked after is very
good, with numbers of completed health assessments at 98.4% in 201516.
Although the timeliness of initial health assessments for children and young
people looked after is improving, only 50% are recorded as having been
completed within 28 days. A proactive approach is taken to identifying health
needs. For example, a speech and language therapist attends reviews in
schools to raise awareness of the potential communication difficulties of
children looked after. (Recommendation)


Child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) operate a prioritisation
system for children looked after. CAMHS also provide training in schools and
to foster carers. Feedback is extremely positive about how this has helped
carers to support children and young people with the issues that they are
facing. Inspectors saw examples of interventions helping children and young
people to cope with the traumatic issues that they have experienced. New
arrangements for regular case consultation by CAMHS for social workers have
been put in place and their impact will be reviewed after six months.


The virtual school provides an excellent service to promote the education of
children looked after. The head of the virtual school provides a high level of
challenge and support to education and training providers. Key stage officers
monitor the attendance, progress and attainment of children and young
people very well, prioritising interventions for those not making expected
progress appropriately. The virtual school has access for two days a week to
two educational psychologists who observe and assess pupils placed out of
borough, advise and support staff and provide multi-agency training. The
virtual school reviews the education and training placements of all children
and young people, advises social workers appropriately and ensures admission
to schools that best meet the needs of individual pupils. Overall, 86% of
children and young people, and 90% of those placed outside the borough, are
in good or better schools. Provision for children and young people attending
schools that are not yet good or outstanding is reviewed carefully to ensure
that it meets the needs of individual pupils. Additional support is provided as
required and moves are minimised.



The large majority of personal education plans (PEPs) are completed to a high
standard. They are prepared by education settings, including early years and
post-16 providers, which ensures that they are focused on childrens and
young peoples progress and that the use of pupil premium funding is
effective. The PEPs are ambitious, clarify attainment levels and required
improvements, and set and review targets appropriately. PEP audits carried
out by the virtual school indicate that targets are increasingly aspirational.
Almost all reviews are timely.


Pupil premium funding is targeted well to the greatest needs, and the focused
work of the virtual school is having a noticeable impact on raising attainment
and improving attendance and behaviour. One-to-one tuition is used well. The
virtual school is ambitious in its expectations for children and young people to
take up a musical instrument, and a homework club provides valuable one-toone support for up to 30 children and young people.


The attendance of children and young people looked after has improved over
the last five years and is good, at 94% overall and 97% for primary-aged
children. Attendance is tracked carefully by the virtual school, enabling prompt
intervention. There is no significant difference in attendance between children
placed within or outside the borough, and overall levels of persistent absence
are below the levels for similar authorities and for England overall. There have
been no recent permanent exclusions of children and young people looked
after, and a smaller proportion of them than the national level are excluded
for a fixed term. Due to the effective use of restorative approaches and
prompt actions following exclusions, the overall number of exclusion days has
reduced by 30% over the last three years. A specific bullying policy has been
developed to support designated teachers, and the virtual school maintains a
register of incidents in order to facilitate intervention.


The large majority of children and young people looked after make expected
educational progress. Attainment in 2015, at all key stages, was above the
outcomes are good, with 73% achieving a good level of development, just
below the national level of 77% for all children. At key stage 1, the proportion
of pupils achieving Level 2 or higher in reading, writing and mathematics in
previous year in writing and mathematics. Likewise, at key stage 2, the
proportion of pupils achieving Level 4 or above in reading, writing and
mathematics was higher than the England proportion level. Outcomes at key
stage 4 were particularly good in 2015, with 27% achieving five A* to C
grades including English and mathematics.


Effective action is taken when child sexual exploitation concerns are identified.
This includes a risk assessment which is regularly monitored and an
appropriate plan to reduce risk. Inspectors saw direct work being undertaken
to support young people to minimise risk-taking behaviour.



Senior managers had recognised that they were not effectively offering return
home interviews to all children and young people missing from care, and a
new system has been in operation since May 2016. It is too early to identify
its impact. Inspectors sampled a small number of return home interviews
conducted since this date and found them to be of good quality, with risks
explored and actions taken as appropriate. (Recommendation)


Children and young people have access to a wide range of social and
educational opportunities. There is good attention to considering and agreeing
the delegated authority for day-to-day decisions about childrens lives and,
whenever possible, these decisions are made by foster carers. Inspectors saw
examples of social workers using leisure activities to engage young people
creatively in order to build trusting relationships. Local authority funding to
encourage extra-curricular activities and childrens and young peoples
personal interests and development is used increasingly well. A panel
administers health bursaries aimed at improving emotional well-being. For
example, this has been used to fund gym membership. In 201516, 153
children and young people received bursaries of between 50 and 150 each.


The numbers of children and young people involved in the CiCC are small, but
growing. There are plans in place to develop this service further, and the
introduction in November 2015 of a group for younger children already has 12
members. There is currently insufficient involvement by children placed
outside the borough and children with disabilities. Young people told
inspectors that they feel that they are really listened to by senior managers
and the lead member. (Recommendation)


The pledge has not been refreshed for 18 months, and young people from
the CiCC told inspectors that they had not heard of it. This demonstrates that
some children and young people looked after are not sufficiently informed
about their entitlements. (Recommendation)

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good


Adoption is considered appropriately and promptly for children looked after,
including for those who are typically less easy to place for adoption, such as
groups of brothers and sisters and children from Black and ethnic minority
families. Greenwich has a strong track record of pursuing and achieving
adoption for children aged five years and over.


The number of children adopted from care remains relatively low, although it
increased to 22 in 201516 after a significant drop in the previous year. The
reduction in the numbers of adopted children coincided with an increase in the
percentage of children looked after leaving care under a special guardianship
order. Inspectors saw plans and assessments appropriately focused on the
needs of individual children and prospective adopters, and there was no
evidence of missed opportunities to pursue adoption for children.



Overall, the timeliness of adoption is improving. The adoption scorecard data
for 201215 shows that performance is close to the national average, and the
local authority reports a continued overall improvement in 201516. This
improvement is underpinned by effective oversight of childrens plans,
including regular early warning meetings that focus professionals attention on
effective parallel planning when it has been identified that adoption may be
possible for children who have entered care. The recently established familyfinding role, based within the adoption team, and an adoption worker linked
to each of the childrens social care teams promote good early permanence
planning across the service.


Family-finding activity is initiated as early as possible and is widened, when
necessary, by the routine use of national and regional search mechanisms and
interagency placements. As a result, children and young people who are
matched with carers from other adoption agencies do not experience delay in
achieving permanence.


Adopter recruitment activity, often undertaken in partnership with the wellestablished regional consortium, is based on a sound analysis of the needs of
local children, and reflects the local authoritys commitment to adoption for
children with diverse needs and backgrounds. Recruitment policy, materials
and practice mirror the firmly held views of the adopters who spoke to
inspectors, that Greenwich is positive and highly inclusive in its approach to
applicants, such as same-sex couples and those from minority ethnic groups.
A recently approved adopter said that he and his partner had been blown
away by Greenwichs upbeat, welcoming and authoritative response to their
interest in adoption.


Although some foster carers have gone on to adopt children whom they have
looked after, Greenwich has no fostering-for-adoption placements yet, and its
strategy is focused on a consortium approach to securing such placements.
(Recommendation)


Assessments of adopters are of consistently good quality. They are thorough
and suitably probing. The adoption teams work with potential adopters is
skilful, sensitive and assertive, leading to increased insight on the part of
adopters into the nature of the task. There are occasional delays in
assessments, but these are generally purposeful and lead to better outcomes
for children. Meeting the required new national timescales for the completion
of assessments remains challenging but, overall, the average time for
completing assessments is improving. The local authority was able to
complete a significant majority of two-stage assessments within the required
timescales in 201415. Adopters spoken to by inspectors said that they feel
that the pace of assessments is proportionate, and sensitive to their needs
and wishes.



For adoptive placements, the consideration of potential matches is careful and
systematic, leading to clear, well-evidenced reasons for decisions and to
appropriate support for children and carers. The overall quality of assessments
is high, particularly adoption placement reports and prospective adopter
reports. Inspectors saw some examples of good-quality child permanence
reports (CPRs), but the quality of these was too variable. The local authority is
aware of the importance of consistently good-quality CPRs and has put in
place sensible actions for improvement, including enhanced guidance and
support for childrens social workers, but it is too early to evidence the impact.
(Recommendation)


The adoption panel meets regularly and fulfils its role well. It is suitably
interrogative of plans and assessments presented to panel. Potential adopters
are enabled to participate effectively at panel meetings. The panel performs
its wider quality assurance function effectively. Timeliness of plans and
assessments is monitored by the panel. Its experienced and effective chair
provides regular feedback on panel activity and adoption performance to the
agency decision maker (ADM). Recently, the panel raised concerns with the
ADM over weaknesses in reports presented to the panel, and this has led to
specific actions to improve the consistency of the quality of reports.


Post-adoption support is accessible, responsive and valued highly by those
who receive it. Therapeutic support is prioritised and put in place, as
necessary. Inspectors saw examples of very sensitive and thorough postadoption support, including high-quality family support, intermediary work and
help in accessing birth records, that potentially will have a lasting positive
impact on the lives of adopted adults and children.


This individual support is complemented by a varied range of support groups
and events, such as a group for adopted teenagers, annual fun days and the
recently established birth mothers group, which are valued by those who
attend. Feedback from service users about the support and training that they
receive helps to shape future planning and support. The virtual school offers
good support to children placed for adoption, and the regular and creative use
of the adoption support fund has benefited children and adopters. Disruption
figures relating to children who have been placed for adoption are consistently
low.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good


The support for care leavers is good. The Royal Borough of Greenwich has
inspection. The proportion of 16-year-olds who remain looked after until they
reach the age of 18 has improved over the last two years and was 73% in
good relationships with their social workers and personal advisers. There is
very good coordinated work to support the young people, including in relation
to education, employment, housing and health. Despite this support, too
many care leavers are in custody, too many are not in education, employment
or training (NEET), and guidance on rights and entitlements is limited.


Almost all care leavers have up-to-date pathway plans which provide a clear
overview of young peoples histories and aspirations. Plans focus well on
young peoples successes, and clarify priorities and actions. When young
people are vulnerable or challenging, pathway planning is supported through
regular meetings of a team around the young person. These meetings are
used effectively to facilitate multi-agency responses and to set targets for
achieving the actions set out in pathway plans. The effectiveness of pathway
planning is reviewed by independent reviewing officers for those under the
age of 18, and by team leaders for 19- to 21-year-olds. Personal advisers who
spoke to inspectors were very positive about the support that this provided,
particularly when working with challenging young people with multiple
vulnerabilities.


At the time of the inspection, the virtual school was in its second year of
supporting the progress and attainment of 16- to 25-year-olds and is having a
significant impact on standards. The virtual school tracks the progress of
young people and works well with social workers, personal advisers and
providers of post-16 education and training. Young people receive prompt and
effective advice and guidance on education, training and employment
opportunities through the highly accessible multi-agency services located at
The Point.


All young people looked after progressed to positive destinations at the end of
Year 11, with 94% achieving some form of qualification in 201415. Likewise,
end of 201415. Increasing levels of support provided by the virtual school,
and a clear focus on improving education and training outcomes through PEPs
and the work of personal advisers, are having a positive effect on maintaining
the engagement of care leavers aged 19 to 21 in education, employment or
training. The proportion of young people in education, employment or training
improved substantially from 47% at the end of March 201415 to 57% at the
same point in 201516, with further progress to be achieved.
(Recommendation)



There is a very good provision of apprenticeships by the local authority.
Twelve young people were engaged in apprenticeships at the time of the
inspection, with a further five in traineeships and preparing to progress to
apprenticeships. A former care leaver who had completed an apprenticeship
spoke very positively to inspectors about the experience that she and her
colleagues had had while working in the local authoritys childrens services.
They were made welcome and were treated as colleagues, which helped to
improve their confidence and self-esteem.


The local authority is very good at encouraging and supporting young people
to progress to higher education. Thirty-two care leavers were at university at
the time of the inspection, and a further nine had firm offers for September
way in which they had been encouraged to broaden their horizons, had high
aspirations and were working hard to achieve their goals.


At the time of the inspection, too many (15) care leavers were in custody.
However, they are visited regularly by their personal advisers, who work well
with youth offending services and the virtual school to help young people to
develop a positive attitude. All have pathway plans that are appropriately
focused on preparing young people for release, on ensuring that they have
suitable accommodation, and that they engage with education or training and
progress to employment. One care leaver who was recently released from
youth custody was settled in his own tenancy and at university. Personal
advisers do not give up on more challenging young people, and work hard to
engage them in activities that will divert them from gang- and drug-related
activities on release. (Recommendation)


Young people are supported well by the designated looked after health service
until they leave care. On leaving care, they are provided with a personalised
letter that summarises their health history and includes useful contact details
for different services. Health-related advice and support, including drug and
alcohol and emotional health support, are easily accessible to care leavers
through the comprehensive multi-agency services located at The Point. Young
people who spoke to inspectors were very positive about the health-related
services provided through The Point. CAMHS support young people until the
age of 18 within the borough and to a radius of 60 miles. CAMHS also support
transitions to adult services for up to six months, to ensure continuity. For
young people living further from Greenwich, most of whom are in therapeutic
placements, CAMHS work with local trusts to ensure that the support that
young people receive adheres to National Health Service guidelines. Social
workers and personal advisers are informed promptly when young people
miss appointments, in order to facilitate intervention.


Pregnant young women and young mothers receive good support. Their
parenting skills are assessed carefully, when necessary, and they are
supported well by the family nurse partnership. Personal advisers ensure that
they access the benefits to which they are entitled. They are helped to access
appropriate tenancies or supported accommodation, and floating support
services are provided as required.



Care leavers who misuse substances are strongly encouraged by their
personal advisers to engage with drug and alcohol intervention services and
services that address the frequently associated mental health concerns,
although young people are often reluctant to recognise the health implications
and dangers of their habit. Care leavers at risk of sexual exploitation are
appropriately safeguarded with good multi-agency support provided through
The Point.


Pathway plans focus on preparing young people for independence, and the
accommodation needs of care leavers are carefully reviewed by the leaving
care workers and housing services at The Point to ensure that young people
are placed in suitable accommodation. Commissioned housing meets the
support needs of different groups of young people well. No care leavers were
placed in bed and breakfast accommodation or overnight emergency
accommodation provided by private landlords during the 12 months prior to
the inspection. At 31 March 2016, the proportion of former relevant care
leavers in suitable accommodation was 85%. Those who were not in suitable
accommodation were in custody or were out of contact with the service.


Young people are encouraged to remain with their foster carers after their
for foster carers are maintained at pre-18 levels. Twenty-three young people
were staying put at the time of the inspection. Young people who met
inspectors and who had taken advantage of this option spoke highly of the
stability it provided as they progressed their education and, in particular,
prepared for university. However, guidance for children looked after, including
care leavers, is limited and does not ensure that they know what they are
entitled to and how to access it. Care leavers who spoke to inspectors also
raised this as an issue. (Recommendation)


At the time of the inspection, a participation team had recently been
commissioned to improve the involvement of care leavers and to widen
opportunities to celebrate young peoples successes. A care leavers forum
now meets regularly, produces a newsletter, helps to appoint staff and
participates in activities such as visits to Parliament. Celebration events have
been reinstated, and a recent achievement evening recognised the progress
made by young people not only in education, but also in areas such as
overcoming barriers and developing independence skills.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Inspectors saw many features of effective leadership and innovation in the Royal
Borough of Greenwich. The local authority has invested heavily in developing a
culture where good social work can flourish. This includes ensuring that a model of
coaching is used to enable effective decision-making and to ensure that decisions are
owned by those who make them. There is a comprehensive workforce development
plan, and the workforce has stabilised over recent years with only a small number of
temporary and agency staff. This benefits children and their families in having social
workers whom they come to know and trust.
Multi-agency partnerships are well developed and information is shared well. There is
a comprehensive joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA) which is regularly refreshed,
and it gives leaders and managers a clear picture of the needs of local communities. A
children and young people plan (CYPP) prioritises effectively the work needed to
improve services for children and young people and their families further.
The local authority is a strong and effective corporate parent. There is a commitment
to improving outcomes for all children and young people looked after by the local
authority. A group of young commissioners has been recruited recently to work
alongside the commissioning team to ensure that the views of young people are
considered when services are designed and commissioned. These vocal and
committed young people have a clear passion for improving the local area.
The Royal Borough of Greenwich childrens services know themselves well, and the
strengths and areas for further development that were identified to inspectors were
confirmed by this inspection. The local authority has access to a wide range of data
and information, which enables it to identify quickly the areas for improvement and
to take swift action to address them. Performance management is focused on what
needs to happen to make a positive impact for children and young people. The
quality of auditing is good, and the audits that were carried out in preparation for
this inspection provided a robust analysis of the casework across the social work
teams.
Management oversight is apparent in almost all cases. Most work completed is to a
high quality, although there is too much variability, in particular in the assessment
teams, that results in delays in meeting the needs of children. Management oversight
had not identified that the changes to the local authority designated officer function
in April 2016 were not robust. Once made aware, the local authority responded very
promptly to ensure that children were safe and to restructure the service.
Recording in reports by managers and in supervision is also mostly to a high
standard. However, there is some variability across the teams, in particular in
detailing the reasons for decisions being taken.


Inspection findings

Inspectors saw many features of effective leadership and innovation in the
Royal Borough of Greenwich. Leaders and managers have facilitated a range
of evidence-based improvements, supported by innovative project work.
Social work has thrived due to the good support of members, senior managers
and partner agency representatives. As a result, most social work practice is
of a good standard.


There are clear lines of accountability between the chief executive, the
director of childrens services and elected members. Regular meetings enable
them to have a good understanding of what is happening at the front line.
Elected members regularly visit children and young people and ascertain their
views.


Senior managers are highly visible and are described by staff as approachable.
Staff feel listened to and are able to influence service developments through
their involvement in task and finish groups, which are set up to push forward
improvements. Task and finish groups include staff from all levels, ensuring
that they are not driven by a top-down approach. Cases seen by inspectors
demonstrate that areas for development identified by the local authority have
shown improvement. For example, the voice of the child is clearly seen in case
notes and assessments, and a creative range of direct work is used to enable
understanding of their wishes and feelings.


There are effective links between the Health and Wellbeing Board, the
Greenwich Safeguarding Children Board (GSCB), the childrens services
strategic partnership (Childrens Trust arrangements), the Safer Greenwich
Partnership and other boards. Priorities read across the boards and are
derived from the CYPP. The chairs of the children and adult safeguarding
boards, as well as the directors of childrens and adults services, meet with
the chief executive for support and challenge. There is evidence of challenge
that is ensuring that practice is improving, and that it is improving outcomes
for children and young people. For example, the safety of children placed out
of borough was raised as an issue by the GSCB. This led to mapping where
children were placed against crime hotspots. Those living in areas of high
crime were all reviewed to ensure that their accommodation was safe and that
they were achieving good outcomes.


Partnerships are mature and well developed, and partners hold each other to
account. Information is shared effectively across the partnerships, allowing
links to be made. For example, reports going to different boards highlighted
alcohol as a feature of issues such as crime, violence, health, safeguarding
and neglect. This was addressed by the partnership, which has now drawn up
an overarching alcohol strategy to ensure that these strands are pulled
together and addressed consistently.



There is a comprehensive JSNA which is regularly refreshed and gives leaders
and managers a clear picture of the needs of local communities. Priorities
across partnerships are aligned to the JSNA, which allows directors, groups
and teams within childrens social care to demonstrate how they are meeting
the priorities.


The commissioning strategy is comprehensive, and ensures that services are
commissioned to meet the identified needs of the communities in Greenwich.
Services are monitored regularly, and providers state that this process allows
them to have a focus on improving outcomes within their areas. A group of
young commissioners has been recruited recently to work alongside the
commissioning team to ensure that the views of young people are considered
when services are designed and commissioned. These vocal and committed
young people have a passion for improving the area in which they live. They
have already been engaged in evaluating competing tenders for services and
in interviewing the incoming director of childrens services. Some are also
involved in the young assessors scheme, which evaluates how welcoming the
services are for young people. Their views are incorporated into decision
making, and they feel listened to and appreciated by the local authority. The
Children in Care Council (CiCC) has recently been relaunched, with a
participation worker in post to ensure that it has influence.


The local authority is an effective corporate parent. There is a strong
commitment to improving outcomes for all children and young people looked
after by the local authority. This is evident from the focus on improving the
educational and health achievements and on the financial commitment to The
Point, with its high-quality multi-agency services for young people.


There is a good range of data and information, which enables the local
authority to identify areas for improvement quickly and to take swift action to
address them. This has assisted the authority to make progress on all the
issues identified in the previous Ofsted inspections. Data is focused on impact
for children and young people, and includes trackers that monitor children in
care proceedings, child protection, children in need and early help. It is also
used to redesign services, in conjunction with current research and good
practice from other local authorities. For example, the process of stepping
down children and families to early help services has been redesigned to
ensure that they receive the services that they need. Children who are
stepped down to early help now have their progress tracked, and cases that
are stepped back up to childrens social care are reviewed to ensure that
lessons are learned about good practice. Learning has ensured that the
process is now more robust, and partnership engagement enables children to
benefit from a team around the child that is led by a professional who knows
them well.


Audits are of a high standard and are focused on improving outcomes for
children and young people. The audits completed on the cases looked at in
depth by inspectors were mostly accurate, identifying clearly the strengths
and areas needing further development in the work with children and young
people and their families.



Weekly and monthly data reports, relating to performance across teams on
issues such as timeliness, caseloads, section 47 enquiries and strategy
meetings, are prepared by the performance analysis service. This allows
managers to identify differences in performance at an individual, team and
group level, and to act to address these issues. Inspectors saw mostly good
work across the teams, but performance, in particular that in the assessment
teams, is variable, resulting in some children, young people and their families
not being seen promptly and assessments not being concluded in a timely
way. (Recommendation)


Inspectors identified that the arrangements to coordinate the responses to
concerns about professionals potentially abusing children were not fit for
purpose. These had been reviewed to take into account the new national
guidance, and the restructured service commenced in April 2016. However,
management oversight of the new arrangements was not robust. When this
was identified by inspectors, the local authority responded immediately,
reviewed all of the cases referred in the last two months and put in place
immediate action plans, including changing the structure and management of
the team. The response was exemplary and the initial feedback was that no
children had been left at risk of significant harm. However, further work is
needed to embed the new structure. (Recommendation)


Information and data are used effectively across the partnership to target
services at the most vulnerable families. For example, the local authority
maintains a database of all children with an identified vulnerability. The list is
used to identify those children and young people who may be more vulnerable
or most at risk, so that services can be targeted effectively. It has also been
used to identify hotspots, such as in schools, where swift and appropriate
action was taken to reduce risk.


The local authority has commissioned a range of innovative services to ensure
that the needs of its communities are met. These include the Mockingbird
project, designed to offer an extended family approach to fostering, and the
Pause project, which is designed to intervene with young women who have
had one or more children removed from their care. The project offers support
and intensive interventions to interrupt cycles of neglect and to ensure that
women do not have more babies until they are able to care for them
appropriately. These services are relatively new to Greenwich, so the impact
on the local population has yet to be fully evaluated.


The number of complaints, compliments and representations has remained
relatively stable over the last three years. Better training, management
support and use of resolution meetings have improved the number of
complaints resolved at stage 1 and within statutory timescales. An annual
report details the learning identified, and this is shared well across the
organisation.



Management oversight is apparent in all cases, and senior managers are
involved in decision making when necessary. However, recording of the
rationale for decisions is not consistently to a good standard across all of the
teams. When further issues arise, it is sometimes difficult to evaluate the
reasoning behind previous actions being taken. (Recommendation)


Social workers report receiving challenging and supportive reflective
supervision. Inspectors saw cases where this was recorded to a very high
standard. However, there is inconsistency in the quality of recording. Impact
review meetings, chaired by a group leader, are another innovative local
approach to enable social workers to reflect on their work and to avoid delays.
(Recommendation)


Senior leaders and managers in Greenwich have invested heavily in
developing a culture where good social work can flourish, including ensuring
that a model of coaching is used to enable effective decision making and to
ensure that decisions are owned by those who make them. There is a
comprehensive workforce development plan, and the workforce has stabilised
over recent years. There is now a 10% use of agency staff, which is below
London and national levels. Staff are suitably qualified and trained. They are
offered opportunities for development to encourage them to stay in
Greenwich, and training is offered to team and group leaders to ensure
consistency and improvement in leadership. A social work teaching
partnership with Goldsmiths, University of London and two other London
boroughs is providing opportunities for social workers to develop their skills.
Professional educators are used to mentor and coach social workers, and to
provide additional reflection.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
The Greenwich Safeguarding Children Board (GSCB) is successfully delivering against
a substantial work programme to ensure that high-quality safeguarding services are
provided to children and their families. There are good governance arrangements
from local authority senior managers, effective linkages with other strategic bodies
and high levels of commitment from partner agencies. The board is led by an
experienced and challenging chair.
The GSCB undertakes relevant reviews of serious incidents involving children. This
year it has appropriately finalised and published two serious case reviews (SCRs).
The learning from these reviews and national SCRs informs the work plan and is
shared effectively across the partnership to raise awareness and improve services.
An innovative approach to completion of section 11 audits this year has led to a
broad range of relevant learning for the GSCB and individual agencies, to improve
safeguarding services for Greenwich children further.
The GSCB ensures that high-quality policies, procedures and training are provided for
professionals working with children. These are routinely updated to ensure that they
reflect current learning and guidance. The GSCB undertakes particularly detailed
evaluation of training to assure itself of the quality and relevance to professionals,
and to inform further developments. Much high-quality awareness raising and
training has also been undertaken to help professionals to support young people with
issues relating to peer-on-peer abuse.
The GSCB has undertaken three successful awareness raising campaigns regarding
forced marriage and female genital mutilation, e-safety and self-harm. It also held a
highly valued conference at the end of 2015, focusing on the safeguarding of young
people from risks such as child sexual exploitation, peer-on-peer abuse, gang activity
and radicalisation. Additionally, the GSCB has actively worked with partner agencies
to raise awareness of issues regarding physical chastisement of children within
particular cultures in Greenwich.
Although the chair and board members provide a high level of challenge across the
partnership regarding their safeguarding practice with children, a stronger level of
oversight and quality assurance of the GSCBs own work is required to achieve more
timely and effective follow-through of all actions.
Furthermore, the GSCB does not ensure that childrens views are considered
throughout all of its work.


Recommendations
 Embed the new approaches to quality assurance and oversight of GSCBs
work.
 Ensure that the voice of children and young people informs the GSCBs
monitoring and evaluation of safeguarding across Greenwich.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The GSCB works effectively to ensure that children and young people are
safeguarded. It is achieving this by delivering successfully against a
substantial work programme.


The GSCB has effective arrangements in place to work with other strategic
partnerships to contribute to the planning and priority setting for children. The
chairs of the main partnership boards, such as the Safer Greenwich
Partnership, the safeguarding adults board, the childrens trust and the GSCB,
meet regularly to share their respective annual reports and to ensure that
shared priorities are in place.


The GSCB meets its statutory duties within a strong governance structure.
The chair has regular meetings with the local authority chief executive, the
director of childrens services, the assistant director responsible for childrens
social care and the lead member. The executive board and the chairs group
coordinate the boards activity. There are 10 work groups that focus on
specific issues and undertake development work on key areas, for example
training and development, SCRs, child sexual exploitation, missing children
and the child death overview panel (CDOP).


The GSCB is well managed by an experienced chair who provides strong and
challenging leadership to the board, while enabling all partners to contribute
their views. Business support for the board is strong and well resourced, with
four staff to coordinate the organisation of the board, sub-groups and
training.


GSCB members attend regularly and are fully committed to progressing the
work of the board. The chair appropriately challenges those who have not
attended at least 75% of meetings. Financial contributions are received from
the relevant key agencies. In addition, they have agreed a contingency fund
to commission SCRs when required.


The GSCB is linked effectively to many of the formal meetings and groups
within the voluntary sector. These include faith groups, the youth crime
forum, the Black and minority ethnic (BME) forum and the Greenwich young
peoples council. These strong links have enabled a good level of awareness
raising to be undertaken in the communities in Greenwich regarding child
sexual exploitation, female genital mutilation and trafficking. There has also
been much good partnership work to address the issues of physical
chastisement.



The GSCB receives and reviews a range of relevant reports and updates. Over
the past year, these have included the local authority designated officer
service, private fostering, child sexual exploitation, missing children and
children affected by gangs. The GSCB also maintains an appropriate focus on
children at risk of radicalisation and of child trafficking. The GSCB reviews
progress from the MsUnderstood project, which focuses on peer-on-peer
violence, and other work relating to violence against women and girls. The
presentation of reports and documents to the board has resulted in a variety
of relevant challenge and actions. For example, analysis of the report on
missing in January and February 2016 led to robust challenge by the chair to
the local authority about how the data was presented, in order to differentiate
between those missing from home and care. Furthermore, the GSCB sought
data regarding the number of return home interviews that had been offered
to, and accepted by, children. As a result, the local authority reviewed this
service and improvements were introduced from May 2016.


The GSCB has developed a comprehensive dataset that enables it to
undertake routine analysis of key performance measures regarding
safeguarding across the partnership. The GSCB is continuing to work with
partners to develop this dataset further, including agreeing relevant
performance measures with the police, for example in relation to the
mandatory reporting of female genital mutilation.


Earlier this year, the GSCB identified that it needed to enhance the level of
oversight and challenge that it was providing. It was decided to restructure
the sub-groups and to create a monitoring and challenge group. The work of
this group will include monitoring action plans, approving work completed by
the groups, reviewing the dataset, and monitoring the quality assurance and
audit programme. The first meeting of this group took place during this
inspection. These new arrangements are in their earliest stages of
implementation, and it is too soon to evidence the impact on ensuring that
quality assurance and oversight are further improved. (Recommendation)


The GSCB introduced an innovative and highly effective approach to its
section 11 assessments this year. It used an online survey of staff who work
with children across the partner agencies. Approximately 3,050 staff
completed the survey. Each agency has undertaken a challenge conversation
to identify its respective learning. Agencies are currently developing relevant
action plans. All involved spoke highly of this new approach and of the depth
of learning that is coming from it.


The child death overview panel (CDOP) reviews child deaths in the local area,
and is currently working productively to complete child death reviews that
were delayed pending the outcome of criminal or other investigatory
processes (from 27 in March 2015 to 17 in March 2016). The last published
CDOP annual report, covering 201415, identified 14 premature deaths, of
which the vast majority were young babies with life-limiting conditions. Only
one death was identified as having modifiable factors that related to parental
smoking. There were two suicides, and one of these appropriately led to a
SCR. No issues were identified about practices within childrens services.



The GSCB has published two SCRs during the past year. These SCRs provide
detailed multi-agency exploration of the traumatic death of a young person by
suicide, and the death of a baby who was living in a highly mobile family. In
both cases, key learning was identified quickly and acted upon to improve
local safeguarding services ahead of publication. For example, much work has
been undertaken over the past year in relation to self-harm by young people.
The GSCB cascades the learning from local and national SCRs through
training, presentations and email briefings. Most of the social workers spoken
to during this inspection confirmed that they are kept up to date with learning
from SCRs.


The GSCB held a highly valued conference for partner representatives in
November 2015. Eighty-one per cent of participants rated the conference as
good or excellent. The focus was on local priorities such as reducing risks
associated with self-harm, gang activity, child sexual exploitation and
protecting young people from radicalisation. Over the last year, the GSCB has
also undertaken three successful campaigns to raise awareness of forced
marriage, female genital mutilation, e-safety and self-harm. Self-harm was an
issue arising from the local SCR. The boards website contains
helpful information about gangs for children, parents and carers, and
professionals, and how to help children and young people who are being
affected by these groups.


Most of the policies and procedures are developed as part of the pan-London
child protection procedures. These are routinely updated to reflect new
guidance and learning from local and national research. Over the past year,
the board has effectively developed and launched a range of relevant policies
to support further the safeguarding work across the partnership. These have
included the neglect strategy, the toxic trio protocol and practice guidance,
all of which were developed due to an awareness that professionals often
lacked confidence in working with families where these factors are present.


The GSCB maintains good oversight of child sexual exploitation services. This
has ensured that there is a greater focus on perpetrators, trends and the
identification of hotspots. Since the start of 2016, the GSCB has increased its
oversight of children who go missing from home and care. However, it is too
early to evidence the full impact of the boards work in relation to this
vulnerable group of children. The GSCB uses case file audits and surveys
effectively to improve multi-agency safeguarding practice for children. For
instance, in the past year, the board has successfully undertaken a deep-dive
investigation into domestic abuse. This included multi-agency audits of case
files, a discussion with a focus group of survivors and a survey of
practitioners. The board also undertook a multi-agency file audit of child
sexual exploitation cases. All audit and survey activities concluded with
thorough analysis of the findings and the development of detailed action
plans.



The GSCB has sought to gain childrens views to inform the work of the board
in a number of projects. However, this has yet to be embedded as integral to
the boards work. For example, not all the multi-agency audits this year
included a consideration of how the views of children and young people
inform assessments, planning or intervention. (Recommendation)


The GSCB provides a wide range of relevant training across Greenwich, aimed
at supporting practitioners and those who work with children. The training is
routinely updated to incorporate learning from new national and local issues.
The GSCB undertakes detailed evaluations of the training each year. This is
based on a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods such as
analysis of the feedback from participants, pre- and post-course
questionnaires, participative observation, surveys and interviews.


The draft annual report on the effectiveness of safeguarding children in the
Royal Borough of Greenwich 201516, which was shared with inspectors prior
to publication, provides a detailed overview of the work of the board and
partner agencies. It appropriately reports on key areas of safeguarding work
such as the quality of early help, support for children at risk of sexual
exploitation and the provision of private fostering. The report reviews the
progress against its priorities well, while identifying areas for improvement for
the coming year.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted, one additional inspector and one social care regulatory inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Neil Penswick
Deputy lead inspector: Anji Parker
Team inspectors: Peter McEntee, Anne Waterman, Matthew Brazier, Kenneth Jones,
Jansy Kelly, Kate Malleson, Sandra Jacobs-Walls
Shadow inspector: Joy Howick
Senior data analyst: Patrick Thomson
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


