London Borough of Hackney
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 4 July 201628 July 2016
Report published: 20 September 2016

Childrens services in the London Borough of Hackney are good

Good

permanence

Good


Good


Outstanding


Good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
The combination of ambitious leadership and long-term political and senior officer
commitment ensures that the large majority of Hackneys children and their families
continue to receive good-quality services that provide effective help and support.
Almost all areas for improvement identified in the inspection of safeguarding and
looked after childrens services in 2012 have been effectively addressed. The local
authority continues to focus on improving the quality and use of chronologies.
The interim director of childrens services has quickly established herself as a strong
leader of childrens services and is identifying relevant priorities to further improve
services for children and families. During the inspection, she took decisive action to
cease a practice of visiting families prior to taking threshold decisions for childrens
social care, and to establish more robust management oversight of early help visits
and more transparency for children and families.
Children and families are provided with effective help from a wide range of early help
services when needs and concerns first emerge. When children require immediate
protection, they are well protected through robust child protection processes. Almost
all children have detailed assessments of their needs that lead to a range of relevant
help and support services that improve their outcomes. Children who are at risk of
child sexual exploitation, including those who are looked after, receive good-quality
multi-agency planning and support that helps the majority to reduce risk. The local
authority maintains active and detailed oversight of children who are missing
education and responds well to safeguarding issues for these vulnerable children.
The local authority has more to do to ensure that all children benefit from
consistently good-quality provision. There is not a sufficiently robust system in place
to ensure that all assessments are completed within a timescale that meets the
childs needs. This means that a small minority of children wait too long for case
closure or multi-agency decisions and plans. Written plans contain clear actions, but
the majority lack the intended outcomes for children. Most assessments and plans do
not record childrens diversity issues well. Initial strategy discussions do not routinely
include all relevant professionals to inform safeguarding decisions. The local
authority is currently unable to be assured that all children who are missing are
offered a return home interview within 72 hours of their return. Although provided
with accommodation swiftly, assessments of need for almost all homeless 16- and
range of entitlements swiftly enough.
A noteworthy area of service is the local authoritys excellent in-house clinical
service, which provides swift access to child and adolescent mental health support
for those children who need this support. The service has an impressive range of
therapeutic options for children and their families and these are leading to
demonstrable benefits in childrens lives. The service provides real-time clinical input
and consultation for the social work units and this enhances social workers
understanding of the most beneficial approach to complex families.


A further example of excellent practice is the very interesting and targeted data
analysis being used to help the local authority understand the needs of the most
vulnerable children. Data and information from partner agencies is brought together
across a range of vulnerabilities, including risk of sexual exploitation, radicalisation,
gang affiliation and sexually harmful behaviour. This informs decisions about
reducing risk for individual children and decisions regarding service developments.
The local authority has high aspirations for its children looked after and care leavers
and their education, training and employment outcomes are very good. Children
become looked after appropriately to meet their needs and safeguard them. They
benefit from good-quality placements that promote contact with family and friends
when in their best interests, and they have good access to a wide range of leisure
and educational opportunities. Not all children have a timely assessment of their
health, which means that some needs may not be addressed. Good-quality services
are maintained for the many children who are looked after outside the local area,
and clear strategies are in place to increase local foster placements.
The adoption service is strong and ensures that permanence through adoption is
secured for a broad range of children. A continued focus on the timeliness of
placements for children is required to ensure that recent progress is maintained.
Adoption support is comprehensive. Care leavers receive outstanding services that
are leading to sustained improvement in their lives.
The local authority is innovative in its aim to improve outcomes for children and their
families. For example, Hackney was part of the successful national PAUSE project,
helping women who have had multiple children taken into care previously to turn
their lives around. This project is now being extended to seven other local authority
areas.
The use of performance management information, audit and learning from
complaints are areas of strength. The comprehensive workforce development
strategy is leading to significant improvements in the recruitment and selection of
social workers and managers.
While strong leadership is obvious across senior officers in the local authority,
management oversight of the day-to-day decision making for children is less evident.
The effectiveness of the social work unit model is predicated on having strong
consultant social workers, practice development managers and service managers to
provide oversight and supervision of individual childrens cases. Inspectors found too
much variability, particularly in the assessment and child in need teams, in
management oversight and delivery of this unit model.
The quality and timeliness of recording within childrens case files is an issue
identified across this inspection, including in relation to recording management
oversight. Although the senior management team has been actively seeking to
address this issue for three years, this has not yet led to strong recording practices
that fully inform and drive proactive work.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority does not operate any childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
July 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in July 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services is interim and has been in post since January
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since April 2013.
 The LSCB is shared with the City of London.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 60,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in the London borough of Hackney. This is 22.8% of the total population in the
area.
 Approximately 35.6% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 32.1% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 34.2% (the national average is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 58.5% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Black or Black British and Asian or Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 55.3% (the national average is 19.4%)
 in secondary schools is 45.1% (the national average is 15.0%).

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 Hackney's Orthodox Jewish (Charedi) population in Stamford Hill of around
the community is under the age of 19 years.
Child protection in this area
 At 4 July 2016, 2,348 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from 2,848 at
 At 4 July 2016, 289 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 216 at 31 March 2015.
 At 4 July 2016, 22 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement. This
is similar to 21 at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, seven serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and three serious case reviews have been completed at the time of the
inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 4 July 2016, 338 children were being looked after by the local authority (a rate
of 56 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 345 (58 per 10,000 children)
at 31 March 2015.
 Of this number, 247 (or 73%) live outside the local authority area
authority area
area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 17 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Revise the local authority protocol for 16- and 17-year-old homeless young
people to ensure that it is consistent with statutory guidance. The revised
protocol should ensure that young people are advised of their rights and
entitlements as soon as possible and that s20 status is applied appropriately
and within the young peoples timescales.


Ensure that assessment timescales are effectively planned for, overseen by
managers and completed within a timeframe appropriate to individual
childrens needs.


Involve health and other relevant professionals in initial strategy discussions
to ensure that decisions are informed by their knowledge, perspective and
insight of the child and their family.


Ensure that child in need plans and child protection plans focus on what
needs to change to improve outcomes for children, and include timescales
for completion of all actions.


Further develop processes to provide assurance that all children are offered
an independent return home interview after an incident of going missing,
that these occur within 72 hours of the childs return and they are recorded
appropriately within the childs file.


Ensure that the health needs of children looked after are fully understood
and met through timely health assessments.


Improve the oversight of outcomes and the timeliness of investigations of
allegations against professionals to ensure that there is a clear
understanding regarding the effectiveness of this role.


Ensure that a full understanding of the childs journey is achieved within case
records through good-quality, accurate and timely case recording. This is to
include consideration of the impact of diversity for children within all
assessments and plans.


Ensure that operational managers are held to account for providing effective
management oversight of day-to-day decision making, assessment and
service provision for children. This to include operational managers recording
case discussion from both unit meetings and case supervision, to inform
planning and decision making for children.


Summary for children and young people
 Inspectors found that services for children and young people in Hackney are of a
good quality.
 Senior managers and councillors in Hackney take their roles very seriously and
they are committed to improving the lives of children and young people.
 Managers do not always maintain a good enough oversight of day-to-day
decisions for children and this needs to improve.
 Children and their families who require extra help usually receive the support that
they need, at the time that they need it.
 Children and young people are helped to feel safe and are protected from harm.
Their needs are assessed well. More should be done to ensure that assessments
are completed within a timescale that meets childrens individual needs.
 Young people who are homeless do not always receive a fast enough service and
are not always advised of their right to be looked after quickly enough.
 Hackney has an excellent team of mental health specialists to help children and
young people who need extra help at difficult periods in their lives.
 Children who are at risk of sexual exploitation benefit from all professionals
working together well to help them reduce risk.
 Managers are doing some good work to share data information to make sure that
they know when children may be vulnerable to more than one risk, for example
going missing and having links with gangs. Some more work is needed to make
sure that all children who have been missing are being offered an independent
return home interview when they should.
 When children cannot live at home, their social workers make good decisions to
ensure that they are looked after by people who take good care of them.
 Children looked after do well at school and are encouraged to do a wide range of
additional activities and attend events. Children looked after are helped to keep in
touch with the people who are important to them.
 Social workers and managers regularly meet with children and listen to their
views. The children in care council, Hackney Gets Heard, works closely with
Hackney Borough Council to improve the lives of children looked after.
 When children need a family to care for them and adopt them, families are found
quickly. Adopted children have access to good support.
 Hackney is working hard to improve the lives of children looked after by trying to
find more local foster carers and improving the timeliness of adoption.
 More needs to be done to make sure that childrens records are up to date and
accurately reflect decisions and the support that children are receiving.
 Young people leaving care receive excellent support to help them to live
independent lives. They are given help with housing and a high level of support
with their education and employment.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Good

Summary
The London Borough of Hackney has a good range of early help services, provided
by both local authority staff and commissioned services, available to children and
their families. These are provided when needs are first identified and are helping
to improve outcomes for children at an early stage.
When children are at immediate risk of harm, referrals are dealt with swiftly and
children are seen to complete effective child protection enquiries. Appropriate
decisions are taken when risk is identified to safeguard children. However, initial
strategy discussions rarely involve health or other relevant professionals. The large
majority of assessments contain good consideration of family histories and analyse
parenting capacity, risk and protective factors well. A small minority of
assessments are not completed within the childs timeframe, leading to delays in
reaching decisions regarding service response for a small number of children.
Written plans address all the areas of identified need. However, the majority of
plans do require improvement to ensure that intended outcomes for children are
clear and that timescales for completion of all actions are included. Childrens
diversity and identity are not well recorded within most assessments and plans.
Effective multi-agency groups such as child in need meetings, core groups and
multi-agency planning (MAP) meetings ensure that need and risk are reducing for
children. The in-house clinical service, which offers therapeutic support, is a
particular strength and is improving outcomes for children and families.
There is clear evidence that children are seen and seen alone, where appropriate.
Their views are listened to and influence the help and support that they receive.
When 16- and 17-year-olds present as homeless, they are provided with a range of
services to enable them to remain within their families. However, some young
people are being accommodated under s17, even when it is their express wish to
be taken into care.
The prevalence of domestic violence, substance misuse and mental health issues is
well understood by the local authority and its partners and this leads to the
appropriate commissioning of services.
Professionals at all levels have a clear understanding of the risks of child sexual
exploitation and other vulnerabilities of individual young people, including harmful
sexual behaviour and radicalisation. This is enhanced by excellent data analysis
across agencies regarding issues of vulnerability for children.
Social workers understand the reasons why young people go missing, and usually
where they are going. While return home interviews seen by inspectors were well
recorded and detailed, the local authority cannot be assured that all children were
offered an interview following their return after being missing.


Inspection findings

The local authority receives referrals from a wide variety of sources. These
demonstrate a good understanding of the issues facing children and their
families. Consent is sought from parents when necessary to gather
information from partner agencies. Prior to the inspection, the local authority
had been undertaking visits before accepting a referral in a small number of
cases to assess whether the threshold for childrens social care intervention
had been met. These visits constituted a short assessment to assist with
decision making. However, this practice is outside of the local authoritys
own protocol and the director of childrens services took swift action during
the inspection to cease this practice.


There is an extensive range of early help services, both in-house and
commissioned, that are available to families when needs are first identified.
These are helping to improve outcomes for children at an early stage. Cases
are appropriately stepped up to childrens social care when concerns
escalate. When a referral is received, officers in the First Access and
Screening Team (FAST) identify whether individual families currently have, or
have had, an early help assessment. However, the local authority is currently
unable to collate comprehensive step-up information to inform future service
planning and identify themes and trends.


Step-down decisions to early help services are appropriate and a wide range
of professionals within universal and targeted services take on the role of
lead professional. Multi-agency meetings drive forward family support plans.
Cases that are referred to early help are effectively tracked via the multiagency team (MAT) and children and young peoples partnership panel
(CYPPP). Both of these panels effectively track cases that they have
considered. However, cases referred to early help services through other
routes are not currently monitored for effectiveness. The local authority has
appropriately recognised that it should improve the way that it tracks
referrals to and from early help. It is currently building a new information
technology system which will help track and monitor the effectiveness of
early help systematically.


Decision making for children is appropriate and thresholds are consistently
applied, including for decisions taken out of hours. Decision making in the
FAST team is, in the vast majority of cases, taken swiftly and cases are
appropriately passed through to assessment teams for further work. Decision
making is aided by detailed review of historical information. Decisions have a
clear rationale and, in most cases, identify direction for further work with
children and their families. Where children are at immediate risk of harm,
referrals from other professionals are dealt with swiftly and children are seen
promptly in order to undertake s47 child protection enquiries without delay.


Health colleagues, and other relevant professionals, are consulted about
initial safeguarding decisions in a minority of cases, and are invited to attend


when full face-to-face strategy meetings are held. However, there needs to
be more routine involvement of health and other agencies in initial strategy
discussions to gain their knowledge, insight and engagement in safeguarding
decisions. (recommendation)

Risks are appropriately identified in the vast majority of cases. In a very
small number of cases, it took too long to recognise the level of risk that
children were experiencing and the impact of long-term neglect should have
been recognised and led to decisive action at an earlier stage.


Assessments are, in the large majority of cases, of a good standard. They
consider historical involvement, analyse risk and protective factors well and
assess parenting capacity, with a focus on parents own experience of being
parented. A small minority include relevant research. Partner agencies are
appropriately involved in the assessment process and individual childrens
needs are, in the majority of cases, clearly identified. In just over a quarter
of cases seen, assessments were not completed within a timescale that
meets individual childrens needs. In some cases, this led to a delay in
decision making and case closure. In a very small number, there was a delay
in appropriate decision making, such as convening an initial child protection
conference (ICPC), or the development of a multi-agency plan. The impact of
this for children is minimised as support services are put in place as soon as
needs are identified, including during the assessment process when
appropriate. (recommendation)


There is no standard process in place to establish appropriate timescales for
assessments according to individual childrens needs, or to then
systematically review completion against key points. Consultant social
workers vary in the way that they monitor the timeliness of assessments and
inspectors found that in those units where this was more closely monitored,
assessments were completed more swiftly and were of a better quality. In
those units where this was monitored less closely, there were more very
lengthy assessments and more cases waiting for closure or transfer.
(recommendation)


Assessments lead to plans that include actions to address areas of identified
need. Plans do require improvement, though, to ensure that they identify the
desired outcomes for children and contain clear timescales for completion of
all actions. (recommendation)


Effective multi-agency meetings, such as child in need meetings, core groups
and multi-agency planning (MAP) meetings, ensure that plans are regularly
reviewed and that progress is achieved for children to meet their needs and
reduce risk. Child protection conferences, reviews and core groups are well
attended, although there is an issue with general practitioners not attending
or providing reports. This is recognised by the local authority and recent
work with the clinical commissioning group (CCG) is showing significant
improvement in this area. Inspectors saw cases where young people had


been supported well to attend and contribute to their reviews. The use of
advocacy in this regard is improving and chairs are thinking creatively about
how to involve children more practically in giving their views to conference.
There is evidence of challenge within reviews that is effective and that leads
to sound decision making, including escalation to legal planning processes
when risks to children increase.

There is clear evidence that children are seen and seen alone, when
appropriate. Social workers spend time building up relationships with families
and developing a rapport with children as part of their work. Their views are
listened to and influence the help and support that they receive. Inspectors
saw creative use of direct work to ensure that children were able to express
their wishes and feelings.


Social workers are tenacious in their efforts to engage families and, in some
cases, improvement in engagement is demonstrable over time. However, in
a very small minority of cases, escalation due to parental non-engagement
should have happened more quickly and this may have facilitated earlier
improvements in childrens experiences.


When 16- and 17-year-olds present as homeless, they are provided with a
good range of services to enable them to remain within their families. This
includes advice and support as well as specific adolescent parenting support.
This, combined with family network meetings, has successfully led to over
issue with assessment and legal status as the vast majority of young people
who are unable to return home are provided with accommodation as children
in need pending the outcome of assessments. This occurs even when, for
some, it is their express wish to be taken into local authority care. In the
large majority of cases, these assessments take too long to complete and
young people are left uncertain about their future, in some cases for several
months, while assessments are completed. Social workers do not always
adequately explain to young people their rights and entitlements as young
people who are homeless. (recommendation)


The local authority has a clear and detailed knowledge of whether children
are missing from education. Local authority staff go to great lengths to
identify and investigate children who are missing education and use data
well to understand the key issues and monitor progress of these
investigations. They also respond immediately to evidence about
safeguarding issues for children missing education and involve children,
families and the local authority designated officer well. The local authority
robustly monitors referrals for elective home education and those children
being home educated. They constantly push the boundaries of their statutory
authority to work extremely well and ensure that children have the education
they need.



The prevalence of domestic violence, substance misuse and mental health
issues is well understood by the local authority and its partners and this
leads to appropriately commissioned services. The local authority has been
commissioning services for perpetrators of domestic violence for a number of
years. The in-house domestic violence advocacy service is being reconfigured
to work with perpetrators as well as victims to provide an all-round approach
to prevention and intervention. There are several innovative projects which
are providing improved outcomes for children and families. The in-house
clinical service to promote emotional well-being and mental health for
children is a particular strength and enables bespoke work to be undertaken
with parents alongside direct work with children. This is leading to improved
outcomes in all areas of childrens lives.


Professionals at all levels have a clear understanding of the risks of child
sexual exploitation and other vulnerabilities for individual young people,
including harmful sexual behaviour and the risk of radicalisation. Young
people are discussed at the multi-agency sexual exploitation meeting (MASE)
when appropriate. Through good partnership working, risk, in many cases, is
reducing for children. When young people go missing, there is a good
understanding of the issues, with tenacious efforts to find and keep in touch
with them during episodes of going missing. Social workers understand the
reasons young people go missing and usually where they are going and why.


A list of children who are currently missing is maintained so that these
children can be monitored until their safe return. However, the local
authority cannot yet be assured that young people are always offered an
independent return home interview after they have been missing. The local
authority uses its childrens rights officer to conduct some return home
interviews and these are of a good quality and are analysed for trends and
patterns, with the views of young people beginning to influence service
design. However, other professionals, such as social workers, also undertake
return home interviews. Although, there is less analysis of these and it is
impossible at present to know how many are undertaken within 72 hours.
(recommendation)


The local authority is undertaking detailed data analysis, which is significantly
enhancing their understanding of risk in relation to vulnerable children. They
are scrutinising information, data and intelligence from a wide variety of
sources, including schools, police, health and probation as well as softer
sources such as social media. This is helping to identify young people who
are vulnerable to a range of issues, including child sexual exploitation, links
with gangs and harmful sexual behaviour. It is also enabling the partnership
to identify links between vulnerable young people and the places where they
may be at risk. This enables an appropriate and holistic response. All
relevant data is reported into MASE and also the strategic child sexual
exploitation group that sits under the LSCB to inform decision making for
children and promote service improvement.



There is a clear strategy regarding female genital mutilation, and an
accompanying action plan, which are leading to an increase in referrals. The
large majority of cases seen by inspectors showed a timely response, with
appropriate follow-on action being taken where relevant, including pursuing
a female genital mutilation order.


Work with privately fostered children and their carers is effective, and
benefits from good oversight by the service manager. There is an effective
private fostering strategy, which is increasing the appropriate identification
of private fostering arrangements.


Allegations against professionals working with children referred to the
designated officers within the local authority are responded to appropriately.
However, current oversight and monitoring of the outcomes and timeliness
of investigations is not sufficient to secure clear strategic understanding
regarding the effectiveness of this role. (recommendation)


Social workers are able to articulate the experiences and impact of diversity
and identity factors for children. However, in almost all the assessments and
plans seen by inspectors, diversity issues are not well explored, which means
that these important factors may not directly influence ongoing multi-agency
work with individual children.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Children who become looked after by the London Borough of Hackney are well
supported and their outcomes improve. Decisions about whether children need to
become looked after are appropriate and timely. Strong emphasis is placed upon
children remaining with their families when this is safe and appropriate and there is a
good range of edge of care support.
Family network meetings are used effectively and assessments for court are a
strength, with the length of care proceedings reducing. Social workers know children
well and see them frequently. Childrens views are represented within assessments,
plans and reviews. However, case records do not reflect the work that is being
undertaken and inclusion of too many key documents is delayed.
The provision of an in-house clinical service means that children looked after receive
high-quality, effective support, which improves their emotional well-being. Health
assessments are not always timely and this means that children looked after may
have unmet needs. Children looked after are very well supported by the virtual
school and educational progress is very good.
Although the majority of children looked after live outside the borough, clear
arrangements are made to support them to ensure that they are not disadvantaged
by this. Contact plans are clear and balance risk well. The authority recognises that
more needs to be done to recruit foster carers and improve long-term placement
stability. In-house carers are well supported and access relevant training.
The children in care council, while active, has small numbers and more needs to be
done to involve children from outside the borough as well as children with
disabilities. There is an inconsistent approach to return home interviews for children
who have been missing.
Plans for permanency are progressed in a timely way and consider the best interests
of the child. Adoption services are strong and ensure that adoption is achieved for a
broad range of children. Adopter recruitment is comprehensive and innovative
support programmes have been initiated to ensure good support and stable
placements.
The support that care leavers receive is outstanding. The vast majority of care
leavers live in suitable accommodation and are well supported to develop their skills
for independence. Their outcomes are exceptionally positive and they are
encouraged to aim high and to do well in education, employment or training.


Inspection findings

As at 31 March 2015, there were 345 children looked after by Hackney
Borough Council. This represents a rate of 58 per 10,000 of the population,
which is below the rate of statistical neighbours (69 per 10,000). At the time
of the inspection, there were 338 children looked after so there has been
little change.


The local authority has a strong commitment to keeping children with their
families when it is safe and appropriate to do so. There are effective edge of
care and preventative services, which include in-house clinical services,
family support, parenting groups and direct work provided by social workers.
For example, the clinical service has provided high levels of intervention for
some children with a plan to return home to ensure that they, and their
families, receive good-quality support to maximise the potential for success
with reunification. Family network meetings are used well. This means that
the number of children who enter care in Hackney remains consistently lower
than statistical neighbours.


Decisions for children and young people to become looked after are timely
and appropriately meet legal thresholds. Such decisions are well informed by
good assessments.


A weekly childrens resource panel, chaired by the assistant director,
approves plans for the Public Law Outline (PLO), care proceedings and
reunification. The panel comprises a wide membership across childrens
social care and includes the virtual school and health and placements
professionals, so a full discussion is held about plans and the panel has
access to a member of the legal team to give advice. Cases within PLO are
effectively tracked and monitored, with plans for reunification robustly
reviewed on a regular basis.


High-quality direct work with children and families results in effective
change, enabling children looked after to return home with clear support
plans in place. These are appropriately ratified by senior managers and
endorsed by the reviewing officer. A wide range of services are put in place
to support return home plans. This includes innovative work by the Family
Learning Intervention Project (FLIP), in which professionals work intensively
with the family away from their home environment to minimise distractions
and maximise opportunities for reflection and change. Therapeutic
interventions and parenting support are among the continuing services when
families return to their home environment to embed change.


The quality of work placed before the court is good. The social work units
and clinical services team undertake high-quality parenting assessments and
viability assessments which are well thought of by the court. The length of
care proceedings is reducing and is now at an average of 30 weeks. The
provision of an in-house clinical service means that children receive timely


specialist assessments for court, by clinicians who understand the family
well.

Children are seen frequently by their social workers and are appropriately
involved in their assessments, plans and reviews. Their wishes and feelings
are explored and, where children are pre-verbal, there is a good use of
observation feeding into assessments and plans. Social workers make
tenacious efforts to ensure that family members are involved, including when
parents are separated. Children receive care that is sensitive to their identity
in the large majority of cases. This includes issues within complex families
being well explored, appropriate involvement of wider family from overseas,
translation of key documents, sensitive exploration of identity issues with
young people and evidence within matching of balancing the childs best
interests in terms of their cultural background and risk.


Children looked after have access to an independent visitor service, which is
appropriately prioritised for those living outside the borough; 25 children are
currently successfully matched with an independent visitor. Although there
has been recent awareness raising with social workers by the childrens
rights officers, the local authority recognises that more needs to be done to
ensure that all children looked after are better informed about the availability
of the advocacy service. The local authority has clear plans in place to
address this.


The majority of children at risk of child sexual exploitation have clear risk
management plans in place. There was clear evidence that risk was reducing
in a minority of cases. However, frequent episodes of going missing by some
young people was hindering effective delivery of the risk management plans.
Regular multi-agency meetings monitor and agree actions to address risk.
There is clear evidence of good liaison with the police and childrens social
care. Foster carers and residential staff follow clear procedures when a child
goes missing.


The local authority cannot provide assurance that all children looked after
are offered, or receive, a return home interview after they have been
missing. Recording of return home interviews is inconsistent and, as a result,
they are not always used to inform plans for children looked after. Not all
interviews were on case records and in the vast majority of cases seen, there
was no evidence of an independent interview being offered.
(recommendation)


Health assessments for children looked after are not always timely and this
means that they may have unmet health needs. The local authoritys latest
data indicates that only 62% of children looked after for over 28 days had
received an initial heath assessment in the first quarter of 2016. Completion
rates for review health assessments for children looked after for 12 months
or more have declined in the past two years (93% in 201314, 89% 2014


this has dropped further to now be at 58.9%. The local authority has not
been swift enough to address this lack of timeliness, and delays in
understanding the individual health needs of some children have continued
for too long as a consequence. (recommendation)

Children looked after and their families have timely access to a wide range of
short- and long-term therapeutic interventions from the clinical service team
that, as part of the social work unit model, knows the families well. Positive
impact is evidenced by improved Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire
(SDQ) scores.


Children looked after achieve well at school. The proportions of children
gaining qualifications and making expected, or better, progress are much
higher than their peers nationally. While achievement gaps do exist between
children looked after in Hackney and all children in Hackney, they are lower
than those nationally and are reducing year on year. The proportion of
children looked after gaining five good GCSEs, including English and
mathematics, continues to improve and at 34% for 201415 is much higher
than the national average of 14%.


The local authority has developed an effective virtual school team. This team
manages education for children looked after, from early years all the way
through to post-16 education, which provides good continuity. The team
includes a range of well-qualified staff to cover the varying educational needs
of children looked after, for example the team includes two occupational
therapists. Schools report very good and effective support to help them
support children who are looked after. The large majority, 76%, of children
looked after are in schools rated good or better and 10% are in new schools
that are yet to be inspected. Where an Ofsted inspection results in a change
of grade, virtual school staff and social workers always consider the best
interests of the child when considering whether to move schools and they
ensure that the right support is in place.


The local authority works extremely well to safeguard children online.
Hackney Learning Trust and Young Hackney work closely with all schools to
educate, inform and support staff to ensure that they are knowledgeable
about the risk areas and challenges that young people face. The virtual
school also works very well with foster carers to provide advice and
guidance, and with social workers to provide training on emerging topics
such as new technologies.


Too many personal education plans (PEPs) require improvement as they lack
detail and do not provide continuity between one PEP and the next. Some
targets that are set are not based on analysis of need. The local authority is
aware of this weakness and has taken action to improve the process. From
the start of the next academic year, to improve quality, all first PEPs will be
completed by virtual school staff in collaboration with school staff and social
workers.



The local authority has a detailed knowledge of all children looked after not
receiving at least 25 hours of education. At the time of inspection, there
were six such children looked after. Virtual school staff had detailed
knowledge of the reasons why these children are on reduced hours and were
working on plans to ensure that they received at least 25 hours of education
or transfer to a more appropriate education setting.


Foster carers ensure that children are able to access a range of social and
leisure activities of their choosing and clear agreements about delegated
authority are in place to enable this. Children are actively supported to
access a range of additional activities and events organised by virtual school
staff.


Long-term placement stability within the local authority is below that of
statistical neighbours (61% in 201415, compared with statistical neighbours
at 66% and England at 68%). The local authority, although recognising that
this as an issue, has not been swift in its response. A recently formed (May
understand what may be done to improve placement stability, develop timely
support and avoid placement breakdowns. It is too early to have yet
demonstrated an impact.


For the large majority of children looked after, their plans are comprehensive
and clear. Childrens views influence their plans in most cases. A delay in
some plans being uploaded onto the case recording system means that
professionals would not be able to fully check that progress against plans
was being achieved. (recommendation)


Children are supported to maintain contact with family and friends, including
those who live outside the borough. Clear contact plans were in place in
almost all cases seen by inspectors and contact is considered in all matches
for permanence. Where applicable, children are supported to maintain links
with those people who are significant to them through plans that carefully
consider risk and appropriately consider transport arrangements.


A small number of children looked after live within the local authority
boundary, 19% as at 31 March 2015, with a further 60% who are placed
outside the borough but still 20 miles or less from home. Local authority data
for 2016 indicates that this placement profile continues. All out of borough
placements are approved by the head of service. Notification is
systematically sent to receiving authorities. Children who live out of area are
well supported. The clinical service travels to see children placed out of area
and independent reviewing officers (IROs) carry out reviews within
placements across the country to ensure continuity. There is regular
oversight of numbers of children who live in placements which are outside of
Hackney, and a clear process is in place to make sure that they are not
disadvantaged by this. However, the local authority does not analyse the


difference, if it exists, between the educational outcomes of those children
educated in the borough and those educated outside.

A total of 77% of children looked after as at 31 March 2015 were in foster
placements, with the majority being placed with independent fostering
agencies (IFAs). The local authority recognises that it does not have
sufficient in-house foster carers and is actively recruiting. There is no
evidence that the shortage of in-house carers is unduly impacting on
children. The wishes of children inform placements and there is careful
consideration to ensure that children are matched to carers who are able to
meet their needs. IFA placements are identified swiftly when required and
the local authoritys communication with these placements is strong. When
possible, children meet with their potential foster carers prior to moving in to
reassure them about these moves. There is a detailed fostering recruitment
and retention strategy, but the authority acknowledges it has set an overly
ambitious target.


Hackneys in-house fostering service is effective and supports its carers to
ensure good-quality care for children. Foster carers help to further develop
the fostering service through the Foster Carers Council. The new
ambassador scheme will develop this further through making payment to
experienced foster carers to, for example, build networks within the foster
carer community and mentor foster carers who require additional support.
Foster carers feel well supported by their social workers and supervisory
visits and annual reviews are meaningful for them. Carers have good access
to relevant training, targeted at developing their own skills and addressing
the individual needs of the children for whom they care.


Plans for permanency are progressed in a timely way and consider the best
interests of children. Progress is tracked effectively by independent reviewing
officers at the second review meeting. Parallel planning is evident within
childrens records. IROs refer cases which are not progressing to the care
planning panel, where senior managers agree plans and resources to
minimise further delays. The panel ensures that there is a clear approval
process for long-term foster care matches, makes decisions about private
fostering arrangements and also tracks all residential placements. Special
guardianship orders re appropriately progressed as a route for permanence
and special guardians attend helpful preparation sessions. Permanency plans
include reunification with the family. When permanence is secured for
children in foster care, this is appropriately and formally confirmed to
children and their carers.


The local authority has only recently started to conduct a comprehensive
review of children looked after under voluntary agreements to assure itself
that their legal status is appropriate. Inspectors saw evidence of appropriate
decision making as a result of this review, which in turn resulted in initiation
of care proceedings where relevant. While this work is now underway, there


are children who have remained without an appropriate plan for permanence
for too long.

The quality of life story work for children who are fostered is not yet
consistently good and for some children there are delays in completion.
While there is much sensitive direct work being undertaken with children,
more needs to be done to ensure that all children looked after receive help
to understand their histories.


The majority of childrens plans are reviewed regularly within statutory
timeframes by IROs who have manageable caseloads. IROs meet children
prior to their review. Most children participate in their reviews either through
attending or having their views represented including through their own
written words or pictures. This means that their wishes and feelings are
represented and influence their plans. A formal escalation process is in place,
enabling themes to be used to inform onward planning, although issues are
often resolved informally. As a consequence of consulting with children
looked after through Hackney Gets Heard, there have been significant recent
changes to the review process to make them more child-centred. One young
person enthusiastically told an inspector about how empowered she had felt
by co-chairing her own review, engaging participants in a game and holding
it at a venue of her choice.


Social workers know the children well and were able to articulate this to
inspectors. However, case records do not reflect the work that is being
undertaken. In a minority of cases, recording was not contemporaneous and
many key documents, including reviews, were delayed in being uploaded to
childrens records. This means that planning is not always informed by the
latest information and has implications for children choosing to access their
records later in life. (recommendation)


Hackney Gets Heard, which is Hackneys children in care council, is rightly
proud of its work on the Hackney Promise: a comic-style, user-friendly
pledge with informative supporting leaflets. The children in care council has
contributed effectively to the updated corporate parenting priorities through
consultation and this is written against the headings within the promise.
Individual members have contributed well to the recruitment of staff and to
developing the new style child-friendly format for children looked after
reviews. However, the group has a relatively low number of children who
attend regularly. The local authority has plans in place to increase
membership and to ensure that children with disabilities and those who live
out of the local area have their views better represented to inform service
planning.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

Services are dynamic and well managed, leading to adoption being achieved
for a broad range of children in Hackney. This includes brothers and sisters
living together when it is in their best interests, children from a wide range
of cultures and religions and children with complex needs and disabilities.
Front-line managers have an excellent understanding of adoption practice
and monitor progress for children and adopters through detailed, up-to-date
trackers. Adoption service staff report being supported by managers to be
creative and dynamic in practice.


Seven children have been adopted since April 2016, 16 were adopted in
variation is because the timing of adoption orders for some placements made
in the previous year impacted positively on the current years figure. The
number of children being placed for adoption reflects the changing older
profile of the looked after population and the higher number of special
guardianship orders (19 since July 2015). There are seven children with a
placement order waiting to be matched, with two of these children due to go
to panel for a match with identified adopters. Active family finding work or
appropriate reconsideration of the plan is being undertaken for the remaining
five children. There are 13 children placed with their adoptive parents but
not yet adopted, demonstrating a good performance overall for children.


The adoption scorecard for 20122015 shows that children in Hackney
waited an average of 564 days between entering care and being placed for
adoption. This is 77 days short of the national threshold and has been
steadily improving. The average time that children with a placement order
waited to be matched in 20122015 at 126 days is better than both the
England average and statistical neighbours and is only five days from the
national threshold.


Timescales in both of these key measures had increased for children adopted
in the 12 months before the inspection period. Some improvement was seen
for children currently being matched and placed for adoption, with some
recent practice showing children being matched very swiftly (within two
months) and the service demonstrating determination and considerable
effort. Hackney has steadily worked to improve timeliness and this has
resulted in consistent improvement in the three year adoption scorecard
timeliness data. Consistent improvement over shorter periods of time has
been difficult to achieve and is, in part, due to the circumstances of a cohort
of children where it has taken more time to resolve their individual
circumstances. This includes a small group of seven children who required a
change of plan away from adoption, and those waiting to see if their current
placement was a viable adoption placement. The local authority showed a
tenacious approach to ensure that appropriate outcomes were found in


complex circumstances but needs to continue to ensure that progress is
sustained in a timely way for each child.

Managers have an excellent grasp of the service and the progress for each
child, and are continuing to build on the strong performance shown.
Oversight and thoughtfulness are shown for each child to achieve adoption
when this is the plan. All permanency planning meetings are chaired by the
head of service ensuring good senior overview and early planning. The
adoption service is made aware of children prior to the granting of a
placement order and commences anonymised family finding at the earliest
possible opportunity. A wide range of family finding strategies are used and
there is a dedicated family finding worker within the team to ensure effective
coordination. A helpful family finding chronology in the adoption service
supports the monitoring of progress and ensures that the consideration of
each potential match has been offered and explored for children. Child
appreciation days are used as routine good practice when placing older
children for adoption.


Foster to adopt is considered for children with prospective adopters but, so
far, has only led to one recent early placement. The local authority is
committed to the principle but this has not yet led to an outcome for many
children. Adoption disruptions are very rare, with the first disruption in six
years occurring recently. This was followed by a thoughtful analysis,
reflection and learning process embedded in an action plan.


The local authority has progressed actions since their last adoption
inspection and has successfully improved the quality of information provided
to children. A write it right campaign has led to child permanence reports
being strong overall and providing children with a clear and sensitive
understanding of their histories. The local authority continues to reinforce
consistency in practice in these reports. Quality assurance processes through
line management and the adoption panel are effective and have picked up
on a very small number of cases where child permanence reports needed to
be strengthened.


The adoption service is flexible and ensures that the right form of
permanence is considered and achieved for all children. This includes
comprehensive support packages for foster carers who adopt, and time and
space for everyone to be certain that the plan and placement are optimal
under an adoption order. The quality of these is variable, with a small
number primarily based on existing case records and lacking detailed
observations of the children and their views.


The recruitment, assessment and preparation of adopters is strong, with
prospective adopter reports being comprehensive, analytical and supporting
adopters in considering how they will meet the range of needs of a looked
after child. All adopters spoken with praised their experience and would
recommend the service highly, stating that they were so lucky to be in


Hackney with this marvellous service, and could provide concrete examples
of advice and support that had made a difference.

Twelve adopters were approved in 201516 and three have been approved
since April 2016, with six applicants in the first stage of recruitment and
three applicants currently being assessed. The local authority is not meeting
expected timescales for stage one of the recruitment process for four
applicants due to external factors such as timeliness of disclosure and
barring scheme checks. Managers have been proactive in challenging
external delays and expedite all recruitment work within their control.
Prospective adopters being assessed at stage two of the recruitment process
are processed promptly. The very small minority that go over time is either
at the request of the adopter or due to a complex assessment. Adopters
confirmed that they felt the process was undertaken at an appropriate pace.
A good range of diversity was seen in the adopters recruited.


The adoption panel is appropriately constituted and chaired by an
experienced independent chair. The panel and agency decision maker
process is effective and well managed. The matching process works well and
adopters are matched quickly with suitable children. Good, sensitive support
is provided to adopters awaiting a match and the local authority is active in
the local consortium, national exchange and profiling events for both
adopters and children. Sensitive consideration is given to diversity and the
adoption service is committed to finding the best possible match for each
child while being balanced and realistic about timescales.


The local authority has invested in the adoption service and has a dedicated
team for post-permanency support. There is no waiting list and, of the 45
children currently receiving a service, 10 of these are adoption cases. The
remainder receive support for other forms of permanence, including special
guardianship orders and child arrangement orders. Support is comprehensive
and includes financial support and therapeutic and educational support.
Some packages have been agreed until the child reached the age of 18
years, demonstrating an understanding of the life-long nature of adoption.


The service has initiated a range of exciting and innovative adoption support
services through successful bids to the adoption support fund. This includes
a creative partnership with an adoption agency for a therapeutic life story
work project. This two-year project started in September 2015 for a specific
cohort of 32 children. Other children have since been included and access
this service. Although it is too early to report on the impact, in cases seen
where consultation had been provided, considerable added value was
demonstrated through sensitive expert consultation and advice on behalf of
children. Other services include staff being specifically trained in a parenting
technique to support adopters using video observation and feedback. This is
supplemented by access to the high-quality in-house clinical service, which is
flexible in being able to offer bespoke packages of support through internal
services or via external agencies and this was confirmed by adopters. Life


story work is particularly strong, with outstanding examples seen that were
child-friendly, warm, attractive and personal. Letters for later life are
thorough and sensitive but some of these have not yet been provided to the
children.

The local authority is an active participant and contributor to the North
London Fostering and Adoption Consortium and accesses a range of
collective services including a shared statement of purpose, annual report,
recruitment and training. Most importantly, this economy of scale has
ensured that the local authority is able to access groups such as the Body
and Soul group for adopted young people, with teen spirit for young people
aged 13 to 18 years and young explorers for children aged eight to 12
years. Three young people in Hackney benefit from this service. Support to
birth parents is provided through the innovative PAUSE project where
success has been shown through only one of 20 parents having had a further
pregnancy. Take up of this service is monitored through the team manager.


The local authority listens to adopters and the adoption team describes there
being no barrier to help and support. Support groups for adopters are now
run by peer adopters through a London-based adopter-run charity. This was
the preference of adopters in Hackney and shows that the local authority
listens to families, and is also an example of a proactive service where the
manager now sits on the charitys steering group. This adopter-led charity
also co-facilitates parenting courses for adopters jointly with the adoption
team, reflecting strong partnerships with adopter-led services.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is outstanding

Young people leaving care in Hackney have exceptionally positive outcomes.
In 201415, the proportion of care leavers in employment, education or
training, at 70%, is much higher than Hackneys statistical neighbours (49%)
and care leavers nationally (48%). The proportion for 201516 remains high
at 69%. The proportion of care leavers who entered higher education last
year was also very good: at 13% this was almost twice the average for care
leavers nationally. The figure for this year has further increased to 16%. The
proportion of care leavers graduating each year is increasing.


The local authority employs social workers to provide the personal adviser
role with care leavers. Social workers are in touch with 94% of care leavers,
maintaining regular, and appropriate, contact with them wherever they live
across the country. This means that they have an extremely detailed
knowledge about individual care leavers, including any risks associated with
their behaviours. Through purposeful work, based on solid and trusting
relationships, care leavers are well supported to understand how their life


choices may affect their safety and well-being. Social workers work very well
with care leavers to identify and monitor actions to reduce risks.

Care leavers told inspectors that social workers are extremely effective at
managing the balance between interventions to help them and letting them
help themselves. Care leavers said that they are safe, and feel safe. A
regular theme in discussion with care leavers is their sense of improvement
in the quality of services over the last few years, for example the
introduction of the use of WhatsApp so that young people can contact their
social worker without using their text or phone credits. Care leavers spoken
to about the support that they receive were unanimously positive, including
statements such as my social worker was probably the only stable figure in
my life.


The local authority works extremely well to ensure that care leavers are in
suitable accommodation. In 201415, 83% of care leavers were in suitable
accommodation, a figure that is higher than statistical neighbours and the
national average. Social workers have a very good knowledge about the
availability and cost of housing in Hackney. They provide excellent support to
help care leavers find, and move into, independent or semi-independent
accommodation. Unit meetings focus well on the detail of each care leavers
case, including discussions about furniture needs and other key issues. Care
leavers have an opportunity to bid for council accommodation as part of an
innovative quota system developed in the borough. The local authority has
not used bed and breakfast accommodation in the past year.


The local authority provides key work support to young people living within
semi-independent accommodation. Care leavers report that these key
workers provide highly effective additional support for them. The local
authority has robust plans in place to address tenancy breakdown and pay
for emergency beds. Since November 2015, they have had 13 referrals to
assist care leavers with emergency accommodation. The local authority is
increasingly effective in encouraging young people to stay put with their
foster carers until they feel ready to move on. In 201516, 22% of young
people stayed put and in the first quarter of this year, the proportion is
higher at 24%. Care leavers report that the initiative is effective and helpful
for them to further develop their independent living skills.


Pathway planning is strong, with nearly all plans providing a rich picture of
the young person and their needs. Detailed analysis is recorded well and
actions to improve outcomes for care leavers are detailed. In many cases,
where appropriate, these actions are time-bound. In a small number of
cases, actions are recorded as ongoing and these plans would be enhanced
by establishing a completion date. Transition planning for young people,
particularly those with learning difficulties and disabilities, is recorded well.


The local authority acknowledges some pathway plans are due for review
and that the education elements of the young persons pathway are not


always recorded in sufficient detail. The local authority has introduced a 16+
learning contract, which it plans to include in the pathway plans. Where
these exist, they provide sufficient educational detail. The local authority
ensures that pathway plan review documents are scrutinised by the case
workers line manager.

Staff focus exceptionally well on ensuring that the health needs of care
leavers are met. Health records in pathway plans are particularly good: they
are detailed, actions are clear and social workers routinely follow them up.
Social workers have established good partnership working with other
agencies and the local authority has established a lead clinician post who
works well to provide immediate support to enhance care leavers emotional
well-being. Care leavers have access to, and understand well, their health
history. From the age of 14 years, when they are still looked after, they get a
copy of their health assessments. Care leavers are fully involved in
discussions about their health needs and access a wide range of information,
for example about substance misuse and sexual health.


Young people have good access to effective child and adolescent mental
health services. Care leavers make the transition to adult services smoothly
and with minimal delays in receiving support as a result of good working
relationships and a lead clinician working with the care leavers team.
However, in a few cases where care leavers are living outside of the
borough, access to adult mental health services are not as swift.


Staff work exceptionally well to help young people at all transition points.
Arrangements to ensure that continuity is maintained are highly effective. On
reaching 16 years old, children transfer to a different virtual school case
worker, who stays with them for the rest of their journey. Then, at age 18
years, care leavers transfer from their children looked after social worker to
one in the leaving care team. This means that there is always consistency of
support at each key transition point.


The local authority is very successful at establishing apprentice places. In the
last three years, 29 care leavers have started an apprenticeship, with an
additional nine planning to start this year. Apprenticeships are with a range
of local and international firms. For example, effective negotiations with a
major international consultancy firm have resulted in a number of places for
care leavers within this company. The borough is planning to establish their
own apprenticeship programme.


Staff work well with care leavers to help those who want to follow other
routes to employment. A high proportion of them are studying vocational or
employability qualifications, such as curriculum vitae (CV) writing, job search
and interview skills, which will help them gain employment. Overall, 83% of
care leavers who started a qualification at level 2 or above completed it last
year, with 2% being helped to change courses.



Care leavers benefit from a wide range of events and activities. For example,
the local authority uses its own outward bound property, Kench Hill, to
provide such opportunities. Staff organise other events, which are
informative and well attended, to help care leavers develop independent
living skills, such as how to budget and how to cook. The local authority has
appropriately started to further develop this service and focus even more
closely on care leavers.


Most young people are clear about their rights and entitlements. Staff work
closely with them to ensure that they have the correct information about
their rights and entitlements. The Hackney Promise to children looked after
and care leavers is clearly stated in a well-written and informative document.
Care leavers speak highly of their understanding of the promise and the way
in which the local authority delivers its promise. A small number of care
leavers reported that the process for accessing their records was too
complex.


The voice of care leavers is evident across the service area. They are
included in the development of relevant documents and leaflets and are
represented on most of the groups that affect them. For example, care
leavers are participants on the commissioning group working on new
contracts for housing. The local authority holds regular events to celebrate
care leavers achievements. Not only do care leavers attend, but all children
looked after aged 16 years and over are also invited, along with foster carers
and former foster carers. Young people value these celebrations. The local
authority also shows that it is extremely proud of the achievements of
children looked after and care leavers in other ways. For example, it ensures
that successes are celebrated in the local media. In addition, the virtual
school has an active YouTube channel with uploaded videos of information
and celebratory items.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Political and senior leaders in Hackney have high aspirations for Hackneys children
and this leads to good outcomes. However, there is a continued need to focus on
the fundamental elements of strong social work practice, such as good-quality
assessments and planning for all children, and clear and timely recording.
The chief executive, director of childrens services (DCS) and Mayor provide
effective leadership. They have developed a clear strategic vision and a strong
theoretical framework to support practice. Clear governance arrangements ensure
that a strong interface between relevant boards and priorities are well translated
into strategic plans that are responsive to the diverse needs of children.
The children and young people scrutiny commission is effective in maintaining a
critical oversight of services for children. The local authority takes its corporate
parenting responsibility seriously and is ambitious for children looked after and
care leavers.
The local authority actively seeks to develop and design creative services to
improve outcomes for children, evidenced through the strong and wide range of
services that are commissioned.
The performance management framework is established and systematic. It draws
on a wide range of approaches and enables senior managers to have a
comprehensive understanding regarding the quality of services provided to
children and families. The local authority makes effective use of the information
that it receives from children, families, complaints and audits to improve services.
The clinical service teams are a considerable strength and provide specialist
expertise and assessments, as well as offering a broad range of therapeutic
interventions that evidence a positive impact on childrens lives.
Supervision is undertaken regularly and provides good support to social workers.
However, it is not always effective in evidencing decision making, ensuring that
assessments are completed in a timescale that meets individual childrens needs or
that all plans are of a consistently good quality. In addition, there are weaknesses
in respect of the quality and consistency of recording across the service.
A comprehensive workforce development plan supports a strong focus on
recruitment, performance management and practice development. This provides
firm foundations for a confident, high-calibre workforce. Priority is effectively given
to learning and empowering social workers to practise with confidence. This
sustained and systematic approach has led to a reduction in vacancies and a more
consistent, stable workforce, particularly evident over recent months.


Inspection findings

Political and senior leaders have high aspirations to improve outcomes for
Hackneys children. Long-term investment and ambitious leadership have led
to the continued delivery of good services that provide the right help at the
right time for the large majority of children and their families. Senior
managers have addressed almost all areas for improvement identified at the
Safeguarding and Looked after Children inspection in 2012. There is still
work to do to strengthen the quality and consistency of chronologies but
there has been considerable investment to address this.


During a period of change and transition, strong relationships are emerging
across the senior leadership team. The recently appointed interim DCS has
demonstrated strong leadership skills and is quickly recognising where to
focus Hackneys priorities. The DCS, chief executive and LSCB chair work
effectively together and meet regularly to ensure clear communication. The
lead member for childrens services keeps abreast of safeguarding issues
through regular formal meetings with the LSCB chair. During the inspection,
the DCS responded swiftly and comprehensively to emerging inspection
findings, particularly in respect of visits to families in a small number of cases
prior to decisions regarding the threshold for childrens social care. This
resulted in changes in practice and strengthened management oversight.


Clear communication and governance arrangements are in place between
senior officers and leaders in Hackney. The lead member has regular contact
with the DCS to maintain oversight of childrens services. She effectively
maintains political oversight of childrens services to ensure that she
understands the views of children and parents and also those of front-line
staff. Comprehensive childrens social care biannual reports to members
ensure that leaders have a detailed understanding of developments and
priorities across the service.


The children and young people scrutiny commission is providing effective
oversight of childrens issues and scrutinises practice and data across a wide
range of areas. Membership is strong and includes three young people from
the Youth Parliament. There is regular reporting into the commission by
childrens services and the LSCB, which helps to strengthen members
understanding of how well children are helped and cared for across the
borough. The commission brings challenge and is confident to tackle
complex and sensitive issues. There is a detailed work programme, with a
plan to review unregistered settings and the impact of temporary
accommodation on children and young people within the next six months.


The local authority takes its corporate parenting responsibilities seriously and
has high aspirations for children looked after and care leavers. There is
political and senior officer commitment to delivering the corporate parenting


role, with the lead member for childrens services chairing the corporate
parenting board and councillors sitting as members of the fostering and
adoption panels. The corporate parenting board engages effectively with
Hackney Gets Heard. An example of their work together is the development
of the Hackney Promise. However, some actions within the corporate
parenting action plan have taken too long to reach a positive outcome, for
example improving timeliness of health assessments. A housing
representative has only very recently joined the corporate parenting officer
group in order to strengthen the focus on housing needs of care leavers.

Strategic priorities are translated effectively into action plans. Arrangements
between senior leaders, elected members, the Health and Well-being Board
(HWB) and the LSCB are clear and ensure that there is a shared focus across
the partnership. For example, partners have worked effectively together over
the past year to increase immunisation rates for babies and small children
within the Orthodox Jewish community. Relationships between the local
authority, the local judiciary and the child and family court advisory support
service (Cafcass) are constructive. The chief executive holds biannual interboard meetings with the LSCB chair and partners from the Adult
Safeguarding Board, HWB and the police to ensure that local issues are
proactively taken forward through shared priorities.


Commissioning arrangements are strong. Tenders are managed well and are
overseen by the corporate commissioning and cabinet procurement
committee when corporate commissioning threshold values are met. The
joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA) is adult focused and currently
provides limited consideration of the needs of vulnerable children, such as
those at risk or in need of specialist social care services. The local authority
is already addressing this weakness, with thematic chapters currently being
developed in respect of 025 year olds, as well as safeguarding. All contract
arrangements appropriately consider safeguarding practice and are subject
to rigorous quarterly contract management and performance monitoring.
Young commissioners receive training and support to contribute to the
commissioning process and evaluate tenders and interview providers. These
young people provide an additional layer of rigour as well as ensuring that
the voice of young people informs service developments.


Effective commissioning mechanisms are utilised to secure a good selection
of services for children looked after. This area of practice remains subject to
rigorous oversight in order to drive forward practice improvements. A
comprehensive sufficiency strategy demonstrates a clear understanding of
need in respect of children looked after and care leavers. The accompanying
action plan outlines a range of approaches to strengthen preventative work
for children on the edge of care through early help and innovation projects.
While good-quality placements are commissioned, there are not sufficient inhouse local foster placements to meet demand in respect of children who
need to be placed within the local area. A placement improvement board is


in place to respond to these issues and regularly monitors progress against
the action plan.

There is a comprehensive and effective child sexual exploitation strategy in
place, which is effective in leading to a reduction in risk for children. The
well-attended MASE panel considers individual cases and proactive work with
partners helps to identify themes, hotspots and trends. The appointment of a
specialist child sexual exploitation analyst ensures that information shared
across the partnership is amalgamated to provide a coherent and
comprehensive oversight of risk. Wider risks, such as sexually harmful
behaviour, as well as child sexual exploitation, risks relating to gangs,
involvement in youth crime and radicalisation are given equal weight and are
considered holistically.


The local authority is creative in seeking to actively develop and design
innovative services to improve outcomes for children. It has widened the
service offer through a number of projects, some of which are evidencing
real impact for children and families. Examples of this include working with
the PAUSE project, where successful outcomes are being realised for parents
who have had children removed from their care previously. Only one of 20
parents involved in the groups has gone on to have further pregnancies and
there has been increased take-up of education and voluntary or paid work
opportunities for the cohort. Further examples include social workers in
schools, the family learning intervention project (FLIP) and the innovative
Coach programme, aimed at seven- to 12-year-olds at risk of gang
involvement, which is evidencing real change in families, improving
outcomes for childrens education and social relationships. There is also a
council-wide corporate programme, led by the lead member for childrens
services, to explore and improve outcomes for young black men in Hackney,
who are disproportionately represented in the care or youth justice system or
who experience poor educational outcomes. This work is at early stages and
is informing the development of a strategy to support improved outcomes for
this group of young men.


There is a well-developed performance and quality assurance framework in
place across the service. Strong performance information, including live
reports, enables managers to track progress of key aspects of work in real
time. An updated version of the childrens information system, implemented
in 2015, is still under development to meet the specific needs of the local
authority. The local authority is not yet able to report effectively on return
home interviews and visits to children, both of which remain under
development and are adversely impacted by inconsistent recording practices
by practitioners.


A well-embedded audit programme is in place across the service, which
involves all managers from the assistant director (AD) through to consultant
social workers and also social workers. Regular and themed audits take place
and are subject to internal moderation to ensure consistency. Themed audits


have included audits of assessment team cases and child sexual exploitation,
as well as case review days focused on identity/diversity and another on the
involvement of fathers in assessment and ongoing intervention. Findings
from audits are systematically monitored to ensure that actions are
progressed and learning is widely disseminated. Although the audits provided
for the purpose of the inspection were comprehensive, inspectors found that
a minority were over-optimistic in respect of the quality of social work
practice.

The local authority responds appropriately to complaints and ensures that
learning is effectively disseminated through a range of communications.
Practice is developed as a result. The local authority gathers further feedback
from children and their families through its family feedback programme to
gain an understanding of users experience of the services provided. Audits
and case review days provide another detailed layer of scrutiny and
evaluation. These help to further develop a realistic understanding of issues
affecting children and their families. Findings from these audit days inform
thematic analysis, and learning is widely disseminated through a range of
forums, including regular champions meetings, learning bulletins and
development days. Learning systematically informs the workforce
development plan.


The local authority has developed an exemplary clinical service, which
comprises clinicians from a range of backgrounds and offers direct work,
consultation and training to staff and carers. It undertakes specialist
assessments and a comprehensive range of specialist therapeutic individual
and group work. The service runs without a waiting list and provides support
to children whose cases are open to childrens services, including children
looked after placed out of area. The service routinely and systematically
collects outcome data and service user feedback to ensure that it is
measuring effectiveness. The service is having a positive impact, evidenced
through a reduction in difficulties that children exhibit at the conclusion of
the intervention, overall satisfaction feedback from service users and positive
feedback from the judiciary, which identifies the service as a strength.


While senior managers reach decisions about significant and lifelong
decisions regarding childrens lives through a range of rigorous processes,
inspectors found it much more difficult to understand the rationale for dayto-day decision making by consultant social workers and practice
development managers. Unit meetings, chaired by consultant social workers
and practice development managers, are intended to be the forum in which
childrens cases are discussed and progressed, and where effective oversight
of practice is maintained. They should also provide the opportunity for
appropriate challenge and a shared understanding of the issues and needs
for particular children across the social work unit.


However, the quality of these meetings is variable. Some demonstrate
effective oversight of practice, while others lack the focus and rigour needed


to effectively progress childrens plans. Not all operational managers are
consistently ensuring compliance with fundamental areas of social work
practice. This includes setting timescales, and maintaining robust
management oversight of these, for all assessments so that they are
completed in a time consistent with individual childrens needs, or ensuring
that good-quality written plans are in place for all children.
(recommendation)

Recording in childrens case files is inconsistent, including the recording of
unit meetings. The local authority has worked to strengthen recording
practice over the last three-year period in response to internal audit findings
which have identified persistent weaknesses. Various approaches, such as
the development of a write it right guide, workshops and training have led
to some progress. However, issues regarding the quality, consistency and
timeliness of recording remain: it was identified as an area of concern by
inspectors, and in some cases, key records were absent from childrens
records. (recommendation)


Professional supervision is in place for staff and, in the vast majority of
cases, happens regularly. Supervision considers training, development and
learning needs. Appraisals are carried out and development needs are fed
into wider workforce planning, effectively informing practice development
plans. Although some supervision records evidence personalised goals and
clear and relevant actions, some would be improved if they were to record
follow-through actions from previous supervisions and include more
personalised targets.


Caseloads are shared by team members across social work units and are not
held individually. Variation was identified, particularly in respect of
assessment teams, with some higher caseloads identified. Caseloads in child
in need and looked after units were appropriately lower and within
manageable limits. The vast majority of staff spoken to by inspectors
reported that they feel well supported by managers and really value the unit
way of working, which enables a shared ownership of cases. Social workers
spoke about choosing to work in Hackney because of the culture of support
and shared accountability.


A comprehensive workforce strategy ensures a coordinated approach to
learning, professional development and recruitment. The workforce
development board, chaired by the AD, ensures that learning from across the
service is effectively triangulated and informs workforce planning. Over the
last two years, the local authority has sought to strengthen its approach to
recruitment, implementing a more rigorous approach, which includes online
testing in verbal reasoning, role play and written assessments as a
prerequisite to interview. This sustained and coordinated approach has
resulted in considerable progress, with vacancies reduced to its lowest in
three years, at 11% at the time of the inspection.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is outstanding

Executive summary
This is an outstanding LSCB. It is a dual board covering both the City of London
and Hackney. The board demonstrates an unwavering determination to safeguard
children, with a firm commitment to sustaining and improving partnerships.
The board has an ambitious resolve to be the best it can and to learn from itself,
external sources and, most importantly, from children in its communities. As a
result, it is making a real difference to childrens lives. An example is the chairs
persistent escalation to the Home Office, the Department for Education and the
National Police Chiefs Council of a recommendation from a serious case review.
The board has inspirational leadership, which is open and reflective, with a
relentless focus on quality and a passion for improvement. Outstanding partnership
working has enabled the board to respond to emerging safeguarding issues
through highly effective strategic responses that positively influence childrens
lives. The board robustly reviews progress and takes decisive and prompt action
where necessary in order to meet its objectives. The boards business plan is
pivotal in improving safeguarding practice.
The board is unrelenting in its challenge to partners to improve services to
safeguard children. The LSCB scrutinises agencies compliance with safeguarding
policies and procedures through effective biannual section 11 audits and
evaluation. The board is forward thinking, demonstrates an impressive ability to
reflect on a range of critical issues and robustly considers creative solutions to
address individual and collective partnership concerns. Serious case reviews (SCRs)
are initiated appropriately, and learning from these, in addition to SCRs from other
LSCBs and relevant research, is well embedded across the partnership.
The LSCB annual report provides a rigorous assessment and overview of key
strengths and weaknesses across safeguarding services in the City of London and
Hackney. Learning and practice improvement are systematically cascaded to frontline staff through a wide range of creative and highly effective opportunities. The
boards analysis and evaluation of performance is effective and helps partners to
understand the impact of services, the quality of practice and to identify areas for
improvement. However, the board cannot be assured that children receive timely
return home interviews following episodes of being missing.


Recommendations

Review the existing data set to ensure that it includes the timeliness of
return home interviews to enable the board to maintain effective oversight of
this critical provision for vulnerable children.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The LSCB is a highly accomplished safeguarding board, supported by solid
governance arrangements. It demonstrates exemplary effectiveness in
holding partners to account to ensure that they safeguard children. The
separate City of London and Hackney executive boards ensure that rigorous
oversight of safeguarding practice in each local authority area is achieved,
while also benefiting from economies of scale created through shared
subgroups.


The independent chair provides strong and credible leadership. He has
successfully facilitated a culture of openness and challenge that has
positively influenced wider partnership working. LSCB members express a
high level of confidence in the independent chair, who is extremely
knowledgeable across all areas of the boards business. As a result, board
members are motivated and engage fully with the work of the board.
Safeguarding is a firm priority for all board members, demonstrated by
consistently good levels of attendance, effective engagement in subgroups
and a strong culture of constructive challenge and debate.


Governance arrangements are robust, with clear lines of communication
between the chair, DCS, lead member and the chief executive. A productive
inter-boards chairs meeting, alongside clear protocols, links the chair of
LSCB, chief executive of the local authority, Health and Well-being Board
(HWB), Adult Safeguarding Board (ASB) and Community Safety Partnership
(CSP). These include the sharing of annual reports and business plans, which
feed into strategic documents. As a result, the board effectively influences
partner agencies and provides persistent challenge to ensure that
safeguarding is a golden thread running through all strategic priorities.


The senior professional adviser, board manager and community partnership
adviser provide highly effective support to the board. The senior professional
adviser has been pivotal in strengthening the boards scrutiny function, as
well as providing a valued resource to partners.


The board is forward thinking, demonstrating an impressive ability to reflect
on a range of critical issues. It robustly considers creative solutions to
safeguarding or partnership challenges. For example, the board is committed
to innovation concerning technology, and has secured agreement from the
local metropolitan police borough commander to pilot a Missing mobile
telephone application (app) to alert professionals of children missing in the


area. It has also developed an online booking system for training, with a
wide range of online training modules available through its website.

Board members describe the chair as seeking opportunities through horizon
scanning, to ensure that the board is proactive in anticipating new issues.
This enables the board to proactively and systematically investigate
emerging evidence, which might pose new and future safeguarding threats
to children. For example, the partnership has commissioned independent
research on effective intervention to tackle disproportionate outcomes for
young black men in Hackney. The board has also introduced a
comprehensive and up-to-date strategy to tackle online safeguarding
challenges. This sets out guiding principles for professionals about how to
keep children safe in the context of social media and technology.


Serious incident notifications are thoroughly scrutinised by board partners
through the joint SCR subgroup. This leads to appropriate and timely
recommendations that are reviewed and endorsed by the chair. The National
Panel of Independent Experts has validated these decisions, commending
the clear and analytical correspondence and the inclusion of childrens voices
in the process. Opportunities for learning from SCRs and multi-agency case
reviews are comprehensive. Lessons concerning neglect, sexual abuse and
domestic abuse are widely disseminated through well-attended learning
events, lunchtime seminars and things you should know (TUSK) briefings.
Discernible differences have been made, including the implementation of an
escalation policy for practitioners and managers. The majority of
practitioners spoken to during the inspection had attended briefings and
almost all articulated lessons learned.


The board demonstrates respectful, rigorous and tenacious challenge to
partners and agencies. There is significant evidence of the board holding
partner agencies to account. The board has an impressive and up-to-date log
that identifies challenges raised, and persistent tracking of recommendations
until sustained evidence of improved practice occurs. For example, the board
has successfully challenged, through the chair, a child and adolescent mental
health service (CAMHS) provision in another local authority for a child looked
after living out of borough. In addition, the board continues to challenge the
Home Office with regard to their position on a recommendation arising from
a serious case review. The board is requesting a review of Home Office
guidance for police on how to disclose soft intelligence. This is not yet fully
resolved, but the determination of the board in pursuing the issue is
testament to the culture of resolute challenge.


Hackney is a borough with a diverse range of communities and groups. The
board has a clear commitment to safeguard and promote the welfare of
children and to build partnerships based on mutual respect and trust. An
example of this is the work of the boards community partnership adviser
(CPA), who provides extensive support to community and voluntary
organisations on a range of issues such as economic and cultural diversity,


female genital mutilation, forced marriage, radicalisation, child trafficking and
honour-based violence. The work of the CPA is highly valued in delivering a
comprehensive range of training to children, parents and carers, schools,
foster carers and the voluntary sector, including bespoke safeguarding
training to the Orthodox Jewish community. The boards evaluation of the
training delivered by the CPA demonstrates direct impact on safeguarding
children. For example, safeguarding training provided by the CPA to housing
staff such as gas fitters and electricians following a recommendation from a
multi-agency case review has led to an increase of referrals from these
employees to childrens social care.

The board maintains a very strong focus on hearing the views of children
and using their experiences to influence developments to improve local
safeguarding arrangements. Board members are proactive in engaging with
children who have experienced services, and from a wider group, to inform
practice developments. As a result, childrens views are central to improving
safeguarding practice. For example, the engagement of Hackney Youth
Parliament by the board led to children making a successful bid, via
Hackneys Safer Neighbourhood Board, to access funding from the Mayors
Office for Policing and Crime to design, develop and deliver an awareness
raising campaign on child sexual exploitation. The Say Something if you See
Something campaign was launched at Hackneys Youth Conference,
following consultation with children who challenged professionals about their
original ideas for communication. The focus of the campaign changed from
raising awareness in the local communities to spot the signs of child sexual
exploitation to encouraging children to identify friends who may be at risk of,
or experiencing, exploitation.


The boards business plan is comprehensive. It has three key strategic
priorities that are underpinned by strategies to tackle safeguarding relating
to neglect, domestic violence, child sexual exploitation, preventing
radicalisation and female genital mutilation. Subgroup work plans provide a
robust framework detailing how the board works to safeguard children.
These plans are well coordinated, effectively monitored, challenged and used
to robustly drive through the priorities for children.


The board has made substantial progress in raising awareness of female
genital mutilation, forced marriage and child abuse through faith, belief or
culture. The board has worked closely with public health to influence and
monitor the multi-agency response to female genital mutilation. The chair
has hosted a number of meetings with the voluntary sector and survivors of
these abusive practices, enabling the board to take account of these voices
in the development of the female genital mutilation strategy.


The board closely monitors the local authoritys Prevent duty and holds
agencies and the Community Safety Partnership (CSP) to account for driving
the response, including awareness raising and recognition. There has been
comprehensive work in building resilience for children through work in


schools as part of the Prevent duty to combat extremism. A Prevent project
to increase resilience among vulnerable children has been rolled out in
educational settings and community organisations. Innovation is evident,
with discussions and challenge regarding the link of radicalisation to mental
health needs, as well as the use of social media to raise awareness.
Extensive awareness raising using a variety of mediums has been effective.
For example, it resulted in a foster carer reporting a concern of
radicalisation. Schools have been provided with a risk assessment template
to assist in early identification of children who may be at risk of
radicalisation.

The board continues to effectively drive the child sexual exploitation strategy
and action plan and coordinates the partnership response to child sexual
exploitation through a highly effective child sexual exploitation and missing
working (CSEMW) group. The appointment of a data analyst has ensured
that comprehensive information about children who go missing, have gang
affiliation or offending behaviours informs the detailed local child sexual
exploitation profile. Intelligence is mapped against local areas to identify
children at risk and to inform subsequent interventions. The remit of the
CSEMW group is being extended to address the needs of vulnerable
adolescents. This will include child sexual exploitation, missing children,
harmful sexual behaviour, radicalisation and gang and youth violence. A task
and finish group is currently working to develop a vulnerable adolescents
strategy and action plan.


The LSCB led the Say Something if you See Something campaign to raise
public awareness of child sexual exploitation. This included a film made by
young people for young people, sexual exploitation leaflets for parents and
young people and free sessions of the Chelseas Choice play attended by
over 1300 students across the City of London and Hackney. During 201516,
the LSCB delivered seven separate training sessions on child sexual
exploitation to 113 staff from the City of London and Hackney. A further 199
staff from the two local authorities attended the boards conference on the
theme of child sexual exploitation. Operation Makesafe continues to raise
awareness with the business community, including hotels, taxi companies
and licensed premises. Hackney childrens services and the NSPCC, in
conjunction with the LSCB, launched a helpline aimed at encouraging parents
and carers, families, friends and members of the public and professionals to
phone in with concerns or information about the exploitation of children
especially regarding sexual exploitation, extremism and gang involvement.


The board utilises a comprehensive range of multi-agency performance
information, which includes information on children with disabilities,
unregistered schools and, more recently, attendance and reports received by
partner agencies at child protection conferences. The data set is clear. It
represents all agencies contribution to safeguarding, and fully supports an
understanding of effective practice across the whole partnership. Data and
commentary are thoroughly scrutinised by the quality assurance subgroup,


executive group and the main board, with a particular focus on the boards
strategic priorities. The board has rightly recognised and challenged the low
number of children with disabilities subject to child protection plans and has
undertaken a multi-agency audit. The board receives regular reports
regarding children who go missing and the actions taken when they return,
including return home interviews. However, it is not receiving data regarding
the timeliness of these interviews, and so has missed the opportunity to
assure itself that all children receive a timely response after they have been
missing. (recommendation)

The board comprehensively monitors multi-agency front-line practice. An
extensive programme of themed audit activity is determined by the boards
priorities and local and national concerns. These include early help and
intervention, child sexual exploitation and children who go missing, the
journey of the child and the experience of children with disabilities. Learning
from audits is carefully fed back to staff and findings are incorporated into
additional courses in the training and development offer.


The board has ensured that safeguarding is a priority for all partner agencies
through rigorous scrutiny of agencies compliance with safeguarding policies
and procedures. A comprehensive section 11 audit process engages all
partner agencies, including schools. One member who sits on other boards
said that this board is the most challenging, rigorous and child-focused of all
he attends. Bespoke training to support multi-agency participation and peer
reviews provides the board with assurance that agencies are meeting their
safeguarding responsibilities. Training extends to diverse sections of the
community, with recent take-up by voluntary agencies and independent
schools in the Orthodox Jewish community. Previous section 11 audit returns
have been comprehensively analysed by the quality assurance subgroup and
reported to the board.


Early help remains a firm priority for the board, with the effectiveness of
early help services evaluated through the learning and improvement
framework. The board rigorously monitors the numbers of children receiving
early help assessments through its multi-agency monitoring data set. The
annual report provides a comprehensive overview of early help services. A
multi-agency audit of the effectiveness of early help identified strengths and
learning, which were widely disseminated through TUSK briefings.


The board has adopted pan-London LSCB policies and procedures, which are
adapted to Hackney where necessary and reviewed regularly. The boards
threshold document, The Hackney well-being framework, and the children
and young peoples resource guide are effective documents to help
professionals refer children to the right service for their needs. They provide
exceptionally good practical guidance for professionals and clearly set out
options for supporting children and families.



Arrangements for the review of child deaths are highly effective. The child
death overview panel (CDOP) is well attended by the right professionals and
has clear terms of reference. The CDOP annual report provides a
comprehensive analysis of local issues and appropriately sites this within a
national and regional context. It identifies issues of concern and themes, for
example, the risks associated with baby slings and co-sleeping with infants.
Both have resulted in well-targeted public awareness raising across the City
of London and Hackney. The panel identified the need to discuss a range of
issues with the senior coroner. As a result, all local coroner reports
concerning the prevention of future deaths are now sent to the panel to
ensure that learning is widely circulated.


The board has created and fostered an effective learning culture that
extends to front-line practitioners and embraces the community. The board
delivers a comprehensive range of training for managers and practitioners
relating directly to multi-agency improvement priorities. The training and
development subgroup ensures highly effective planning, monitoring and
oversight of all training activity. Regular reflection by the board on the
learning arising from SCRs, reviews and case audits further enhances the
training programme and relevant themes are shared effectively with trainers.
As a result, contemporary messages to improve safeguarding of children are
comprehensively included in the rolling programme of training. The board
regularly monitors the effectiveness of its training courses. This includes
observation of trainers, post-course evaluation, staff surveys and random
telephone calls to participants and their managers to assess how learning
has influenced their practice.


The annual report for 201415 is well written, comprehensive and
evaluative, providing rigorous and detailed overview of the boards work. The
report clearly identifies learning, and provides documented examples of
effective and constructive challenge to partner agencies and other boards.
The board has engaged with children, young adults from the group Talent
Match, schools, Hackney Youth Parliament and the children in care council to
produce a young person-friendly version of the LSCB annual report. The
boards website is accessible, mobile telephone friendly, easy to navigate and
well used. It includes a comprehensive, up-to-date set of procedures, with
links to research information, legislation and practice guidance. The website
highlights the latest news from the board on the home page and through
monthly TUSK briefings. It also uses a twitter account with regular tweets to
update staff.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and one
Social Care Regulatory Inspector (SCRI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Jansy Kelly
Deputy lead inspector: Donna Marriott
Team inspectors: Anji Parker, Anne Waterman, Linda Steele, Derrick Baughan, Louise
Hocking, Tara Geere, Natalie Trentham, Christy Wannop
Senior data analyst: Judith Swindell
Quality assurance manager: Sean Tarpey


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


