London Borough of Hammersmith and
Fulham
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 January 2016  4 February 2016
Report published: 29 March 2016

Childrens services in the London Borough of Hammersmith and
Fulham are good

Good

permanence

Good


Outstanding


Good


Outstanding


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Hammersmith and Fulham are of a consistently good quality.
Services are significantly enhanced by the innovative and highly effective tri-borough
partnership with the City of Westminster, and the Royal Borough of Kensington and
Chelsea. Economies of scale, achieved through shared administrative and managerial
functions, have created opportunities to develop and deliver a broad range of highly
effective and innovative services. This includes the focus on practice initiative that
clearly reflects the commitment of politicians, managers and the social care
workforce to create an environment where good-quality social work flourishes and a
culture of compassion, as described to inspectors, is evident. This leads to improved
outcomes for the majority of children and young people. Sustained investment, to
ensure that caseloads are manageable in all aspects of the service, supports this
achievement.
Other tri-borough collaborations exist within the commissioning framework, where a
dedicated specialist team operates to a well-established and highly coherent model,
including joint commissioning. Tri-borough commissioners are highly active in
shaping resources to meet need. They have very efficiently recommissioned some
services, such as semi-independent living for care leavers. Similarly, performance
management and quality assurance systems are well developed and are used
effectively across the boroughs to maintain and improve performance. Exemplary
workforce planning means that the tri-borough partnership generally has a stable
and experienced workforce. Although Hammersmith and Fulham has a greater
number of newly qualified workers, they are very well supported and additional
funding has secured additional experienced locum support, if and when required.
The tri-borough partnerships Executive Director of Childrens Services manages this
complex set of arrangements extremely well. Robust governance within the borough
ensures that senior managers have an accurate understanding of their service and
that they address service deficits robustly. There is no complacency; there is,
instead, a strong culture of continuous learning, professional accountability and
responsibility. The care leaving service provides a good example, where the need for
improvement has been addressed through considered planning and investment.
However, the local authority scrutiny committee lacks sufficient focus on childrens
social care. It does not identify areas for development and considers performance
management information too narrowly to be fully informed about the service. Further
work is required to ensure that the health and well-being board takes greater
account of children and young peoples issues.
Children and their families are able to access coordinated, effective and timely early
support from a broad range of universal and targeted services. If risks escalate,
referrals are prompt and appropriate. Partner agencies have a good understanding of
thresholds for referral, including the need to gain consent, where appropriate. When
children are referred to childrens social care, they almost always receive a prompt
response that ensures that they get the services they need as soon as possible.
Social workers know children and young people well and the voice of the child is


valued. Assessments are generally of good quality and lead to planned interventions
that make a positive difference. A minority of assessments and care plans for
children looked after were not thorough or updated at points of significant change.
Widespread access to the services of family assist, which supports children to
remain with their families if possible, clinical teams and other specialist provision, has
had a very positive impact on improving outcomes for many of the most vulnerable
young people in the borough, including those on the cusp of care.
The use of evaluated models of practice has had a positive impact in focusing
professionals to develop plans that are proportionate to reduce and manage risk.
There is a clear process for parents and carers to know what changes are required.
Further work is required to support children and young people to attend meetings
that affect them. The widespread use of family group conferences promotes childand family-focused solutions.
Decisions about whether children should become or remain looked after are timely
and are based on evidence about the child or young persons needs. When
necessary, care proceedings are initiated quickly to ensure that children are not
exposed to harm for extended periods. Services for children looked after remain
good, with almost all children and young people benefiting from stable and secure
placements. The virtual school supports children looked after well, in all areas of
their education.
The quality of the adoption service is outstanding. Adoption is considered for all
children looked after, including those with complex needs. This results in excellent
outcomes, with higher than average numbers from minority ethnic groups and
children over five being adopted.
The care leavers service has rapidly improved following restructuring and is now
delivering good-quality services and support to young people. However, areas for
development remain regarding the quality of pathway planning and support to young
people who are not in education, employment or training.
The emergency duty service does not instigate child protection processes in a timely
manner and is insufficiently resourced to ensure that children and young people are
supported to be placed in foster care or with relatives out of hours.
Children missing from home, care and education and those at risk of being sexually
exploited are known and well supported. Return home interviews, although
occurring, are not collated to identify patterns of behaviour to support proactive
planning to reduce risk. Close working with the police ensures that measures to
counter the risks posed to young people by radicalisation are effective and integrated
into the broader range of services for families. Work to raise awareness of female
genital mutilation and to identify those most at risk of the practice is highly
innovative and effective. This has led to an increase in referrals to childrens social
care.
Good attention is paid to the identity and diversity needs of children in most parts of


the service. For children looked after and those requiring permanence, it is a
particular strength.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)



Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home, which was judged to be good
at its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
July 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in July 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services (DCS) has been in post since September 2011.
 The DCS is Executive Director of Childrens Services for the tri-borough
partnership, which comprises the City of Westminster, the London Borough of
Hammersmith and Fulham, and the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since April 2012.
 The LSCB is shared with the City of Westminster and the Royal Borough of
Kensington and Chelsea.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 33,777 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Hammersmith and Fulham. This is 19% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 29.7% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 24% (the national average is 16%)
 in secondary schools is 22% (the national average is 14%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 46% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Black or Black British and Mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 49% (the national average is 19%).
 in secondary schools is 43% (the national average is 15%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2015, 1,559 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a slight increase
from 1,459 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 March 2015, 172 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 161 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 March 2015, four children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is no change from four at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection, two serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and three serious case reviews have been completed or are ongoing
(regarding incidents which had taken place in Hammersmith and Fulham or
involving resident children) at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2015, 185 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 56.9 per 10,000 children). This is a decrease from 200 (62 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014. Of this number:
authority area
 four live in residential special schools3, all of whom live outside the local
authority area
authority area
 one lives with parents, within the local authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 12 adoptions
 eight children became the subject of special guardianship orders
subsequently returned to be looked after
independent living.
 Eleven children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in
houses of multiple occupation.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Recommendations:

Collate information drawn from return home interviews of children who go
missing from home, to identify patterns and trends and assist disruption
activity.


Ensure that children who are subject to the child protection process have
access to a suitable independent advocate if they want one, to help them make
their views known and understood, and to inform decisions about their lives.


Review out-of-hours arrangements to ensure that children and young people
are offered a standard of practice consistent with daytime services.


Ensure that assessments and care plans for children looked after are updated
following significant events.


Increase the range and number of apprenticeship opportunities for care leavers
to reduce further the proportion who are not engaged in education,
employment or training.


Improve the quality of the minority of pathway plans that are not yet good, so
that outcomes are improved and the results of actions can be assessed more
effectively.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children and young people are good. Managers and staff in
Hammersmith and Fulham want the best for all children and young people. When
children and young people are unsafe, staff work well to protect them. The local
authority is working hard to improve the experiences of children in their care.
Children and young people told inspectors that they are very happy with the help
they receive and they know that their workers want them to do their very best.
 There is a wide range of early help services that help families. This includes the
excellent support provided by teams of different workers who work together to
decide on the best way to meet a child or young persons needs. Workers listen
to families and children, know them well and make sure that services meet the
different needs of children.
 Children who are in the care of the local authority live in good-quality homes that
meet their needs. These are found as quickly as possible so that they can stay in
the same school and keep in contact with friends and family. Wherever possible,
children from the same family live together.
 Children and young people have lots of opportunities to have their say about the
service they receive, to help make services even better. Their views are listened
to and they are involved in decisions about services. However, not enough
children are using the independent advocacy service to help them get their views
across at important meetings.
 The Children in Care Council now has more influence on decisions about services
for children looked after, including the development of an app (MOMO) to help
young people to give their views, for example about new arrangements for
accommodation.
 Children and young people who are looked after have really good support to stay
healthy. The authority makes sure that they are in good schools so they make
good progress. They do better at school than many children in the care of other
local authorities. When they reach 16 years old, they get good advice and help to
move on to the next step, but too few young people become apprentices. A high
proportion of young people are in education, employment or training, and those
who wish to go to university receive good help.
 Young people who are in Hammersmith and Fulhams care speak well of the very
good support they get from skilled workers, who are very good at helping them
to become independent adults. When they leave care, they are helped to move
into homes where they feel safe, with the support they need.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Children, young people and families benefit from a broad range of good-quality, wellcoordinated services, at all levels of need. Children and young people are able to
access early help support through the network of childrens centres and the early
help service. All services are of good quality and are regarded positively by parents.
Thresholds of concern are well understood and inform step up and step down
decisions that are appropriate and proportionate. Management oversight is a clear
strength, with social workers receiving regular, reflective supervision, providing clear
direction and a shared ownership of risk from frontline staff to senior management.
Children and young people referred to childrens social care receive a good service.
This includes a timely response to referrals and the undertaking of comprehensive
assessments, which routinely capture the views of children and young people.
However, children do not have routine access to an independent advocate to support
them through the child protection process. Multi-agency child protection enquiries
are effective for those identified as potentially being at risk of significant harm.
Planning to improve outcomes and reduce risk for children and young people is
robust. Regular reviews ensure that progress is measured and risk is reduced for
most children and young people. Sustained investment ensures that caseloads for
social workers are manageable. This enables social workers and other practitioners
to undertake direct and purposeful work with children, young people and their
families.
The focus on practice initiative has been demonstrably effective in skilling the
workforce to consider risk and resilience in order to achieve positive change for
families. There is extensive provision of highly effective and innovative services,
including the clinical and family assist teams, which utilise research-evaluated models
of services to engage service users and achieve improvements in their lives.
There is a robust and well-coordinated response to children at risk of experiencing
child sexual exploitation, informed by the effective sharing of information and
intelligence between all key agencies. Most children who have been missing from
home are provided with the opportunity to discuss with their social workers their
reasons for going missing on their return. However, the information from these
missing episodes is not systematically cross-referenced to identify emerging issues
for individual children, or to capture wider issues and trends within the borough.


Inspection findings

Good-quality early help is readily accessible to families in need of support
across Hammersmith and Fulham. For families with children under five years
old, this is usually through support from the boroughs childrens centres. For
older children, the majority of referrals are received from schools into the local
authority early help services. The boroughs team around approach ensures
effective multi-agency work at a number of levels involving schools, childrens
centres and families. Interventions are well supported through the engagement
of an appropriate range of professionals.


Having named contacts within all universal services ensures that early help
referrals are appropriately directed into the service. The vast majority of
referrals are assessed within a week, and the average length of case
involvement is seven months. Early help services are effective in keeping
families out of social work statutory services, and only 4% of cases escalated in
the year prior to inspection. Progress for families is well evaluated through the
use of family star, a recognised scale to provide evidence of parenting
progress.


Local authority early help teams include a good range of appropriate
professionals and, since the introduction of qualified social workers, escalations
to child in need and child protection services have reduced significantly, as risk
is managed well within the service. Teams have good access to a wide range of
appropriate professionals and work well with the early years team and settings,
especially to increase the number of vulnerable two-year-olds accessing free
early years places and to improve transition to school. Communication and
information sharing between partners working with families at all levels of early
help are good.

common assessment framework. Most contain focused, outcome-based action
plans, although some lack clear, time-limited actions. For this reason, progress
against intended outcomes for the family is not always clear. The findings of
monthly case audits by managers are used effectively to identify concerns
around practice and are shared with team managers, who use the information
in staff supervisions to improve service provision. The majority of early help
staff have either completed or are undertaking focus on practice systemic
training, and this is demonstrating improvements in their use of reflective
practice. Thresholds are well understood by the vast majority of services and
early help staff, with appropriate escalation or step-down where necessary.
seen, and seen alone, by social workers who know the children and young
people well. Sustained investment in the service enables workers to have
caseloads that are manageable. This ensures that direct work with children and


young people is well established in practice and creative methods are used to
gather the wishes and feelings of children. Children and young people receive
regular visits from workers, and the visits are recorded well in most case
records. An understanding of their circumstances and history is enhanced by
the routine use of chronologies and genograms. The local boroughs offer for
families with disabled children is well developed and ensures that a wide range
of services is provided to meet need. This includes a direct link with a child
protection adviser for the purpose of consultation and advice.
overall, with partner agency referrals being appropriate and timely. All contacts
are considered at the borough front door, leading to an initial risk analysis on
a blue, red, amber, green (BRAG) basis. For those considered red or amber, the
contacts are accepted as referrals and appropriate and timely statutory
safeguarding practice occurs. For those rated green or blue, or where there is
insufficient information, contacts are sent to the multi-agency safeguarding hub
(MASH) to gather agency information to inform decision-making.
information gathering process can build in delay for a small number of children
and young people. This may translate into further delays in the undertaking of
assessments. When this concern was shared by inspectors with senior
managers, practice was immediately changed to ensure that assessments now
commence in a timely manner. Within all casework, there is a clear
understanding of the need to work alongside parents and to gain consent to
undertake further enquiries, where appropriate.
appropriately address risk and need. Records demonstrate a clear rationale for
the decisions made in the large majority of cases. Decision-making and case
direction records are evident on case files following formal meetings, such as
supervision. Social workers report that they feel very well supported by
managers at all levels, who are knowledgeable and available to them for advice
and consultation. Social workers and their colleagues displayed confidence in
their work and were clearly proud to work in the borough.
strategy discussions do not routinely include other professionals. While this did
not adversely affect the outcomes in cases tracked or sampled, this practice
does not support the sharing of agency information to fully inform decisionmaking. Subsequent strategy meetings do, more routinely, include information
from other agencies.
including harm from neglect, child protection enquiries are conducted in a
timely way. Decisions to progress to formal enquiries are proportionate, and
children are not made subject to formal child protection investigations
unnecessarily. The Public Law Outline is used effectively to ensure that parents


understand professional concerns and what needs to improve for their children
to be safe from harm. The widespread use of family group conferences
increases the likelihood of child- and family-centred solutions. Where necessary,
care proceedings are initiated to safeguard children and young people. This
work is supported by good-quality legal advice.
conferences are generally well attended by all relevant professionals and, when
unable to attend, professionals submit a report to the meeting. The use of
research-evaluated models of practice has had a positive impact in ensuring
that there is a proportionate response to risk and, for parents, a greater
understanding of what needs to change. Children and young people are too
infrequently supported to attend and participate within their meetings. Senior
managers acknowledge that this is an aspect of the service that requires
development (Recommendation).
and a good level of challenge where child protection planning is not driving
change, to ensure that alternative actions are progressed. Although they
routinely gather information via post-conference individual monitoring reports,
these could be better aggregated in order to identify and improve practice
issues regarding whether conferences are quorate, advocacy for children at
conferences or the timeliness of the sharing of conference reports with parents
and carers. Social work reports are of good quality, but parents and carers do
not always receive reports in time to enable them to prepare and participate
fully in conferences.
a comprehensive range of services. Many are highly innovative, such as the
action for change programme that is working with positive impact to break the
cycle of mothers having children repeatedly removed from their care. Similarly,
the family assist team provides a highly effective service to support children,
young people and their families on the cusp of care. The team also works with
other young people with complex needs and there is evidence of both tenacity
and compassion in improving outcomes, while managing complex risks. The
flexibility of the team to work with young people beyond 18 years old is a
welcome development.
improving outcomes for children, young people and their families. Following
intensive accredited training, social workers and managers are employing a
range of models of practice, such as systemic thinking and strengthening
families to achieve sustained improvements in the lives of children and young
people. The clinical team, through the work of experienced psychologists and
family therapists, adds a further, highly regarded, dual service. The team has a
consultancy role for colleagues, while also undertaking direct work in complex
cases.


young peoples mental health also work effectively in improving outcomes for
children and young people. All undertake direct work to meet diverse and
complex needs. In addition, they provide consultation and advice to colleagues
and, on occasion, co-work on complex cases. Such work is used well to inform
risk assessments and plans, with several good examples of risks being reduced
as a result.
with regard to the timeliness of the completion of assessments within Working
Together 2015 guidance. The large majority of assessments and plans are of
good quality. Of the 445 completed assessments in the six months prior to this
inspection, 87% (386) were completed within 45 working days. For the majority
of assessments outside this timescale, there was purposeful delay and no
negative impact. Assessments consider current as well as historical concerns,
consider the effects on the child or young person, and routinely evaluate risk
and protective factors. Assessments include consideration of fathers, even
when they are absent. When needs are identified, children, young people and
their families do not need to wait for support until the assessment is completed.
Managers regularly review child in need plans to track progress and the child
protection advisers chair meetings where casework is complex. Overall,
assessments provide a sound basis for planning and intervention. However,
they do not demonstrate that they always fully consider childrens identity
needs, which means that plans cannot always fully address these.
specialist workers to provide consultation, advice and targeted interventions is a
considerable strength within the borough. Social workers benefit from formal
and informal opportunities to reflect on their practice and consider alternative
approaches in their work and the impact of the interventions on themselves.
Reflective practice groups provide further opportunities for staff support.
living in households where domestic abuse was present. For children living in
households where there is a high risk of domestic violence, multi-agency risk
assessment conferences (MARACs) are effective, with good representation and
input from partner agencies. The programme provides information to schools in
the borough within 24 hours, when pupils have been exposed to domestic
violence, so that support can be arranged if needed. Substance misuse services
provide effective support for young people and adults.
effective tri-borough multi-agency arrangements ensuring that information is
shared swiftly and that children at risk of child sexual exploitation are identified,
monitored by senior leaders and robustly assessed. The work of the dedicated
sexual exploitation workers linked to gangs contributes effectively to the
extensive tri-borough response. Awareness-raising activities have taken place
with children in schools and colleges.


suspected, there is good evidence that the work of the child sexual exploitation
lead officer is effective. The role serves to provide consultation to colleagues, to
raise awareness of the issue and to steer actions and decision-making for
identified vulnerable young people. Information sharing at multi-agency forums
 including the multi-agency sexual exploitation meetings, the borough child
sexual exploitation panels and the Deter and mapping bi-monthly meetings 
gives a focus on both victims and perpetrators. There is comprehensive
consideration of need, including sexual health and protection.
develop a version that contains evaluative data is intended to enhance its
effectiveness further. In several cases considered by inspectors, there was very
good work in engaging with victims of child sexual exploitation, with broad and
considered multi-agency activities, including out-of-borough exchanges to
protect the most vulnerable. Important contributions from the voluntary sector
agencies, including a specialist Barnardos project, help to expand the breadth
of support services.
cases and delivers training and consultation in relation to missing children and
young people. Information about children and young people missing is shared
weekly with heads of service, and persistent absconders are monitored at the
care panel. Risks are monitored effectively and are escalated. Incidents of
children and young people who frequently go missing result in strategy
meetings being held.
practitioners, including return interview guidance  areas to cover' and a triborough quick guide for missing children procedures. These provide clear,
short summaries on what social workers should do and include appropriate
prompts to understand push and pull factors. There is good evidence of this
facilitating social workers understanding and actions. The tri-borough strategic
panel has identified that they need to do more to aggregate patterns and
trends (Recommendation).
people attend schools and colleges. They have clear strategies for reducing
absence and increasing attendance, and respond quickly when children go
missing from education. Staff are particularly proud of the team around
approach in partnership with other agencies and schools, to support children
and young people who get into difficulties at school. The team managing
exclusions in the borough is highly motivated, and fully understands the
processes for absences and children missing education, which they implement
effectively.
that have occurred during this academic year. Staff fully understand the


overseeing role of the attendance, child employment and elective home
education and children missing team (ACE), which helps to identify and track
children and young people who go missing in the tri-borough area.
absences from 13.8% in 2012/13 to 7.5% in 2013/14, lower than similar
authorities at 13.2%, and England at 13.8%.
is taken to safeguard children if necessary. The number of electively homeeducated children was 65 in the autumn term 2015. Eight children are currently
in alternative provision.
range of issues, including health, offending and substance misuse. There is a
comprehensive joint protocol for the assessment and provision of help for
homeless 16- and 17-year-olds, jointly operated with the housing department.
Close working between social care and housing is enhanced through two jointly
funded posts. For this reason, those young people who cannot be supported to
return safely to home are placed in suitable alternative accommodation.
of hours and ensures that safe arrangements are in place and action is taken to
protect children and young people when required. The team does not follow
formal statutory child protection procedures and processes. This means that
while children may be safe, their situation remains unassessed and families are
left waiting until day-time services initiate child protection processes. In
addition, there is evidence of children and young people being placed in care
without being seen by a social worker. Carers were not provided with written
information to care for them most effectively (Recommendation).
members of the childrens workforce have been in place since October 2014.
They are suitably robust and effective. Each borough has retained responsibility
for progressing and dealing with referrals via the child protection advisers who
chair strategy meetings and ensure that cases are tracked and outcomes are
recorded. Cases sampled across each borough demonstrated that appropriate
action was taken and that outcomes were proportionate to the allegations
addressed. The designated officer retains performance data within each of the
boroughs, and has regular oversight. The designated officer role encompasses
the promotion of safe working environments and safe recruitment practices not
just allegation management, to help address safe working practices.
Inspectors saw appropriate actions and consideration through assessment and
strategy meetings. Multi-agency Channel meetings are convened where


appropriate, to consider and share information to inform risk assessment,
planning and preventative actions. Proactive work by the police, including the
use of legal orders, has effectively addressed immediate concerns and reduced
the risks of radicalisation and forced marriage, by ensuring that families remain
in this country and that their activities are appropriately monitored.
female genital mutilation, referrals to childrens social care are increasing. A triborough female genital mutilation project has been effective in extending the
existing work within female genital mutilation maternity clinics, through the
creation of a specialist social work post. This specialist undertakes assessments
jointly with health colleagues, seeking to develop a trusting relationship with
service users to include a safeguarding assessment of female children, including
those yet to be born. The addition of a male worker within the team has been
successful in engaging fathers and husbands, particularly those of Somalian
descent, in discussion and reflection on this practice.
with a knowledgeable, dedicated worker who undertakes all assessments and
offers continuous support to children and families in the four current
arrangements. Effective and innovative awareness-raising takes place on a
regular basis, including targeted work with general practitioner forums,
language schools, independent schools and UK Visas and Immigration. This has
led to an increase in enquiries and referrals in relation to private fostering
arrangements.
planning for children and young people. In cases where children are from
minority backgrounds, issues of culture are more readily identified and explored
to inform assessments and planning. Further work is required to ensure that
issues of identity and sense of self are explored sufficiently for all White British
children, for example, those growing up in areas of high deprivation or with
complex backgrounds, and with life experiences such as gang culture.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary

Decisions about whether children need to become looked after are timely and
appropriate. A wide range of multi-agency edge of care support is in place, which
enables children to remain safely at home, or return home from care where at all
possible. Practice before and after care proceedings is effective and well managed.
Permanence is given high priority across the tri-borough partnership and leads to the
majority of children and young people being placed in a timely fashion in permanent
families.
Social workers know children well, regularly visit them and give sensitive and
thoughtful consideration to their needs. As a result, children and young people
achieve positive outcomes. A minority of assessments and care plans are not always
updated or thorough and this is an area for development. Arrangements to track
children who go missing from care are robust and are appropriately in place.
Although there is accurate and timely recording of return home interviews on
childrens files, systems to establish and monitor high-risk young people and collate
patterns and trends are areas for development.
Children looked after are very well supported in all areas of their education by the
virtual school. The fostering service offers good-quality placements to children and
young people but requires more foster carers in order to improve choice and
availability. The tri-borough partnership is implementing a range of improvements to
increase placement choice.
The independent reviewing service regularly reviews care plans. Independent
reviewing officers know children and young people well, and provide positive support
outside of the reviewing process. There is a culture of informal and formal challenges
to care plans. The Children in Care Council is effective and well established.
The quality of adoption practice is outstanding. Adoption is considered for all children
looked after, including those with complex needs. Higher than average numbers from
minority ethnic groups and children over five are adopted. A particular strength of
the authority is the care that goes into the matching process.
The care leavers service has rapidly improved over the last year and is now
delivering good-quality services to young people. Areas for development are in the
quality of pathway planning and support to young people who are not in education,
employment or training.


Inspection findings
children. The rate of children becoming looked after, at 55 per 10,000 in 2014
respectively). There has been a slow and steady decrease in the number of
children looked after since 201213. This is the result of effectively investing in
a wide range of early help and flexible edge of care services, which support
children and young people to continue to live with their families, or to be
successfully returned home from care.
developments for children looked after are centralised and amalgamated. This
enables economies of scale, improvements in consistency and quality of
practice, flexibility in the use of resources and an enhanced profile across the
London region. Examples of strong practice include a tri-borough connected
persons team, the independent review service and the commissioning of
placements for children looked after.
result of becoming looked after. Their needs are met, they thrive in a variety of
placements and are kept safe. Decisions about whether children need to
become looked after are timely and appropriate, and safeguarding risks are
responded to well. A range of multi-agency partners provides extensive support
and early help services so that children and young people can live with their
families where at all possible. Almost all children and young people receive
good help to return home, and their views and wishes are considered. Parents
are appropriately engaged and supported. High levels of social work visits and
the involvement of a range of multi-agency partners enhance planning.
oversight where legal proceedings are required for children. The tri-borough
care proceedings manager reports to a strategic tri-borough management team
and other key professionals, to ensure timely placements for children, through
very effective and proactive monitoring of the Public Law Outline. Tri-borough
performance is variable, with average median timeliness of care proceedings at
but increasing to 32 weeks in the third quarter of 201516. Further
improvement is anticipated as long-standing cases conclude. The University of
East Anglia provides further independent scrutiny and analysis. Delays are
extensively tracked and are mostly attributed to long-standing, complex and
international casework.
Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and by managers in the tri-borough
partnership. Cafcass reported that the tri-borough partnership is leading the
way and a family proceedings judge reported that the tri-borough partnerships
arrangements stand out as leading good practice across London. Average


timeliness of proceedings is improving in Hammersmith and Fulham from 35
weeks in 201314 to 32 weeks in the third quarter of 201516.
conferences are used at an early stage to inform care planning and to identify
members of the extended family. Viability assessments are clear and of a good
quality, with appropriate management sign-off.
the highest importance, to ensure that all aspects of permanence are
developed, embedded and improved. A permanence board and a specific
permanence worker oversee a broad range of initiatives, for example clear
permanence guidance for staff, a sub-clause in independent fostering agency
(IFA) contracts regarding staying put, and assistance with childrens
permanence reports for social workers.
planning, and for some children this commences pre-birth. Permanence
planning meetings, overseen by managers, happen regularly for children and
young people, so that they are matched in a timely way to the most
appropriate placements.
well, and are appropriately involved and engaged with a range of professionals.
Social workers see children and young people alone, offer sensitive support and
care, and are in regular communication, visiting often beyond statutory
requirements. Case records are up to date, comprehensive and accurately
reflect the situation of the young person.
appropriately to themes arising at the corporate parenting board and within the
children looked after strategy. Children and young people who met with
inspectors during the inspection were aware of their entitlements, and relevant
issues such as pocket money or clothing allowances, as these are highlighted in
regular newsletters to them. The childrens rights service provided advocacy for
issues, attending meetings and helping with complaints. A tri-borough
complaints service works hard to resolve dissatisfaction for children looked after
at an early stage, which means formal complaints are relatively low. A wellestablished independent visitor scheme is in place, with eight young people
linked and 12 independent visitors in place.
appropriately, using a wide range of assessments, and incorporating the views
of families and other professionals to enhance outcomes. Not all assessments
seen by inspectors were updated or were properly completed as a child and
family assessment. This means that for some children, where there had been


significant change or emerging new risks and needs, this had not been
thoroughly assessed or updated (Recommendation).
which was effective and measurable. Some plans seen were not updated, or
had no measurable outcomes, and some lacked analysis. This means that
children and young people and their families cannot fully check that actions are
completed and that continual progress is being made in a timely manner. This
is an area of casework that requires further development (Recommendation).
In 20142015, the vast majority (96%) of children had regular reviews of their
care plans and 97% of young people participated in their reviews. There is a
culture across the tri-borough partnership of issues being resolved either at a
very early stage, or via informal and formal challenges, which leads to positive
changes to care plans for children and young people.
tri-borough training, including action learning sets six times a year, and good
links with managers and staff to keep abreast of developments. Independent
reviewing officers are able to get to know children and young people well and
to advocate for them, meeting them midway between statutory reviews and
providing additional reviews for more complex situations.
sisters. Short-term placement stability has improved considerably, from 20% in
looked after in July 2015, to include a focus on better matching, planning and
analysis of childrens needs. The diversity of childrens needs is fully
encompassed and carefully matched to ensure that the best placement is made
available to them, including appropriate attention to their cultural, ethnic and
religious needs. This means that most children and young people achieve good
outcomes, they settle and achieve, return to school, go missing on fewer
occasions, and build positive relationships with foster carers or other carers.
wide range of childrens interests. Delegated authority is in place for foster
carers to take some day-to-day decisions so that children and young people can
participate in the activities they enjoy.
people, are well coordinated and passed efficiently to appropriate staff. An
increased recent focus on the need to improve practice in return home
interviews for children who go missing from care has led to a more individual
and flexible approach, by identifying the best person to undertake these.
Additional training and briefing to staff has also been delivered. This is starting
to have an impact on practice, with the quality of interviews improving. The


accurate and timely recording of return home interviews on childrens files and
establishing systems to monitor high-risk young people and collate patterns and
trends continue to be areas for development (Recommendation).
well managed by a designated contact service, with permanent staff who
provide continuity and familiarity.
co-located with the children looked after teams and offer direct work and
appropriate support and advice to young people who offend or who are
misusing drugs and alcohol.
personalised and consistent service to children and young people, including
those who are placed out of the borough. For example, in 201516 to date,
only seven young people will have been seen by an external professional other
than the looked after children nurses. Care and attention are taken to keep in
touch with young people and to get to know them informally. As a result, the
performance of review health assessments was high at 93% in 201314 and is
anticipated to be 96% for 201516. This means that children and young people
are made aware of their health needs and immunisations and are well prepared
to manage their own health needs as they mature.
to children and young people looked after, including those placed out of the
borough. The focus on practice training and consultations also enable a range
of professionals to work therapeutically and systemically, to support children
and young people within their placements.
schools. The number of children looked after included in data at Key Stage 2 is
small. However, for these children, progress is good and the proportion that
attain the expected national levels is much improved and high. For example,
expected national level in reading, writing and mathematics compared to half in
mathematics between Key Stages 1 and 2, and this has improved since
small. Nevertheless, attainment is improving. In 2014/15, London borough data
indicate over a third (37%) of children looked after gained at least five GCSEs
at grades A* to C, including English and mathematics, up from a fifth in
English and mathematics. Most children (83%) looked after go to a good or
better school in or out of the borough and no children looked after attend an


inadequate school. The proportion in a good or better school has been steadily
rising over the last few years.
children looked after. They achieve this through a range of useful initiatives in
schools in the borough, skilled advisory teachers and the close tracking of
progress. The pursuit of good outcomes for children and young people looked
after, by improving their progression and attainment, is a key focus for the
virtual school. Monthly monitoring checks reinforce this aim and ensure that
increasing numbers are attending and achieving. School leaders recognise and
value the enthusiasm, visibility and expertise of virtual school staff in the
borough.
children looked after to 92%, three percentage points higher than the previous
year. Absences from school are reducing, and there have been no permanent
exclusions of children looked after for the last three years. Action in response to
children who fail to attend school or go missing is effective. A very few children
(eight) who find learning too difficult at school, due to complex barriers to
learning or behavioural issues, are allocated appropriate alternative provision.
Five children looked after post-16 are currently not engaged in education,
employment or training. The virtual school is constantly looking for ways to
improve provision and is focusing currently on further reducing fixed-term
exclusions and persistent absences of children looked after.
in different settings. Personal education plans (PEPs) effectively capture the
progress the child is making in their learning, their emotional needs and their
transitions to different schools and key stages. In one case, where a young
person had not achieved what they had expected, staff used the PEP well to
establish a purposeful study programme. This met the young persons needs,
and they are now achieving well in college. The processes for assessing and
allocating pupil premium needs are thorough, and staff monitor pupil premium
use well.
headteachers. They have introduced good initiatives to help improve
educational understanding of barriers to learning across the borough, such as
the emotional trauma and attachment difficulties that children looked after can
present. They facilitate useful enrichment and extra-curricular events to add
value to learning in schools. These include a family-learning project with a
national museum based in Kensington and a film project where children
achieved a qualification and celebrated their work with carers at a local theatre
in Hammersmith and Fulham.
initiatives for raising awareness of safeguarding, promoting safe learning
environments and taking action to keep young people safe. This includes


support to help children learn to use the internet safely, awareness of cyberbullying and work with other agencies to prevent radicalisation.
complete their learning in further education. The proportion of children looked
after in 2014/15 that progressed to study programmes, apprenticeships, or
other learning post-16 is 85%. However, few of these are apprenticeships and
it is insufficiently clear if any are on a study programme. While this is
improving, managers are acutely aware that, in a few cases, staff have not
always made sufficient links between personal education plans and pathway
plans as children progress through Key Stages 4 and 5.
possible, a well-established and experienced placements team ensures careful
planning and sensitive matching for children and young people. Children are
placed appropriately with their brothers and sisters and have carefully arranged
contact with their families. Every effort is made to ensure that children and
young people living out of their home borough are not disadvantaged by being
away from their school and local community.
understanding and approach to the placement needs of the whole children
looked after population, and work is progressing to improve placement choice.
Strong and effective relationships exist with independent providers, and the triborough partnership has been influential in commissioning improved
placements for young people with specialist needs.
result of being amalgamated, with wider flexibility to use staff, resources and
carers. However, there are recognised gaps in placement choice for young
people with challenging behaviour, brothers and sisters, children with
disabilities and children requiring long-term fostering or permanence. There is a
permanent placements or staying put arrangements. To address this, an
ambitious and proactive fostering recruitment programme to recruit 25 new
carers commenced in October 2015.
accompanying children and young people to school and making contact where
their existing carer is unable to do so, supporting children who return home to
parents, and acting as a mentor for young people involved in drug and gang
culture.
regulations. Social workers sensitively and thoroughly assess foster carers,
focusing on strengths and areas for development. A well-organised and
separate tri-borough connected persons team is in place to respond in a timely


and thorough way to all connected persons and special guardianship
assessments.
and retention of foster carers is strong. Respite care in fostering is used in a
child-focused way and only if really necessary to support placement stability. All
carers spoke very highly about their supervising social workers. Annual reviews
are regular, and are independently undertaken by dedicated fostering
independent reviewing officers, ensuring that effective practice is in place.
a dedicated family-finding social worker is allocated to progress this. Evidence
was seen of appropriate and careful matching of children to long-term carers or
permanent carers, and every effort is made to find the appropriate cultural and
ethnic match. Children and young people are helped to form strong
attachments with their carers. Five life story books seen were of a good
standard, and some were exceptional.
children looked after, with a real focus on informing and influencing the
decision-making and discussions at the corporate parenting board.
in changing or developing services include the development of an app to
improve participation for young people (MOMO), and being involved in
consultation relating to the new semi-independent accommodation framework.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is outstanding
through adoption for all children assessed as likely to benefit from being
adopted. This includes older children, children with complex health needs and
larger family groups. Children being placed for adoption receive high-quality
social work support and are well prepared. Placement matching is rigorous and
tenacious, with high priority given to securing the best possible match. One
consequence of this diligence is that no placements have broken down in the
last two years.
average time between a child entering care and moving in with their adoptive
family was significantly above the national average, as was the average time
between a local authority receiving court authority to place a child and the local
authority deciding on a match to an adoptive family.
children have been adopted by their foster carers after living with them for
several years, and by the authoritys determination to find the right match for


harder-to-place children. This is supported by the fact that the authoritys
performance in placing older children and children from minority ethnic groups
is good and better than in similar authorities. More recently, timescales overall
have been reducing. Younger children are placed without delay and, in all other
cases seen, delay was purposeful in terms of supporting a childs preparation
and identifying the right placement.
months to be placed with their permanent families for a variety of complex
reasons, including appeal against the court judgement. In all cases, the local
authority maintained the care plan that was in the best interests of children
and, in all cases, the outcomes for the children involved were positive.
well led by experienced leaders for whom this work is a specialism. It is their
clear aim to achieve the best outcome they can for children. In recent and
current cases of children being placed for adoption, there are examples where
the adoption process has exceeded the usual timescales, but in all of these the
reasons for this were centred on the needs of the child.
their child permanence reports, with their needs clearly identified and analysed.
Several examples were seen of children who were matched with agency
adopters who closely matched childrens complex ethnic and cultural identities,
even though the local authority had a surplus of adopters who might have met
the childs needs, albeit to a lesser extent. Children are well prepared for
adoption. All receive life story work that is of a consistently good quality.
Inspectors saw one exceptionally good example where the social worker had
gathered photos and information from abroad to record the familys history for
a child and had had the book professionally bound.
with prospective adopters across stage one and two assessments. A number of
adopters spoken to by inspectors had fast-track assessments in order to
undertake foster-to-adopt placements where the prospective adopters exactly
matched the needs of very young babies. Several second-time adopters had
their assessments fast-tracked to facilitate younger children being placed with
their already-adopted brothers and sisters. All prospective and new adopters
are offered an experienced mentor to support them and help them to find their
way around the systems, as well as to cope with introductions and help to
settle newly placed children. Adopters spoken to really appreciated their
support. Most adopters waiting to be linked or matched were open to
considering a wide range of children. Where prospective adopters were not
matched within three months, they were supported to join the national register
and their details were made available to other local authorities.


the timescales, although in nearly all cases, delays were beyond the control of
the local authority.
required safeguarding standards. Adopters spoken to valued the input they had
received and felt assessment timescales were challenging, but appropriate. The
tri-borough partnership has a surplus of approved adopters and 11 adopter
households have been enabled to provide good-quality homes for children
outside the borough in the last year.
adoption experience and is well informed on all issues affecting the timeliness
of assessments and placements. The agency decision maker meets with the
independent chairs quarterly and has carried out annual appraisals of both.
Feedback on practice from the panels is used as a basis for service
improvement.
They valued the confirmation of school-place priority and pupil premium and,
particularly, support with the medical and therapeutic needs of their children. In
all cases seen by inspectors where placement orders had been granted, there
was evidence of birth parents being offered referral to support services and
mothers were offered referrals to commissioned services to avoid repeat
pregnancies where proceedings were likely to result. Most adopters are able to
access good-quality support and some adopted children receive excellent
therapeutic support for extended periods of time, in accordance with their
assessed needs.
The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good
good for those leaving care now. Staff provide well-considered advice and
guidance to ensure that plans for young people moving towards independence
enable them to make a secure transition from care. They provide close support
to ensure that they are safe in their housing or sure of the next steps they need
to take in their learning, and they provide good support when care leavers get
into difficulties in their everyday lives. They are in touch with all but three care
leavers. Over three quarters of those leaving care now stay with their carers
until aged 18.
training to improve outcomes for young people and children through focus on
practice. This training helps to identify, among other things, systemic reasons
why successive generations fail educationally. For example, some care leavers
are hampered by inter-generational apathy to learning. Staff are putting the


training to good use to make the right decisions, to break down barriers that
perpetuate a cycle of poor outcomes, by encouraging or recognising where a
young person could improve their life chances in progressing to higher levels or
by engaging in learning.
markedly over the last few years, through improving the performance in
capturing and recording information in plans and reviews, and in the
recruitment of staff with a good range of skills and experience. Two thirds of
pathway plans are good, and this represents a rapid and sustained
improvement over the last two years. The best plans provide a detailed picture
of how the young person is making progress to be able to live independently of
support. Actions show good insight into the young person, are decisive, and are
in their best interests. Information in plans shows careful monitoring of the care
leavers entitlements and contains good actions to improve life skills, such as
financial management. Plans include the young persons voice effectively. The
virtual school staff and social workers consider personal education plans
carefully and more frequently, and use them increasingly effectively for guiding
young people towards moving to independence as part of pathway planning.
future. Targets are not clear enough and target dates are not tightly linked to
actions. Managers are fully aware of this and have good oversight of where
improvement is necessary, with plans in place to address this area of
improvement (Recommendation).
needs of care leavers prior to their 18th birthday. A final-review health
assessment provides comprehensive information for all young people, including
those placed out of the borough. The local authority is developing a new
moving on healthcare plan in conjunction with young people to improve the
quality of the information further. Nurses give young people all of their key
health information, including the dates of all of their immunisations, and discuss
carefully with them what they think they might need in the future.
authority is seeking to improve the arrangements further by negotiating a
formal health offer to care leavers over the age of 18 with the clinical
commissioning groups (CCGs). Transitions to adult mental health services,
including for young people who have disabilities, are progressed effectively
locally, or through the complex needs panel. A designated nurse attends where
appropriate and is effective in brokering services for young people. Pathway
plans contain sufficient information on care leavers health. The best plans
contain purposeful recommendations and timely targets for the young people to
access health services.
have greater faith and trust in the skills and empathy of their social workers,


and their abilities to help them. A few who have been care leavers for a while
say that this was not the case a few years ago. Those who have participated in
the CiCC for young people feel that it has a strong voice in improving the
quality of the care-leaving service. For example, one care leaver feels care
leavers views made a difference in changing a poor service provider for
accommodation to one that now provides a much better service.
improved. The proportion of care leavers in suitable accommodation is 94%,
according to local data, and this has increased from 82% in 201314. Staff
work together effectively to make sure accommodation is safe and in good
condition. Staff take good decisions to make sure that the type of
accommodation is in the best interests of the care leaver. Care leavers say they
feel safe in their accommodation. Where emergency accommodation is used, it
is rare and for good reason. Where young people feel unable to take the next
step into their own accommodation, they stay with their foster carers until they
are ready.
care leavers who progress into higher education, employment and training. The
proportion of care leavers in education, employment and training has been
steadily increasing over the last few years and, although still too low, increased
to 54% in 2014/15. Of these, London borough data indicate around 8%
progress to higher education, 13% enter employment or training and 34% go
into other learning. The proportion of care leavers not in education,
employment and training has decreased over the last few years: local authority
figures indicate 36% at the end of 2015.
learning and employment, the quality of the outcomes are better, as care
leavers follow courses and employment that they plan with staff more
thoughtfully to suit their prior attainment and needs. When they progress, care
leavers are all going into a range of full-time vocational training, employment
and higher education institutions. However, staff recognise the need to improve
the options and progression pathways for care leavers. A recent staff
appointment aims to increase, among other aspects of the role, the insufficient
range of apprenticeship opportunities that are currently available
(Recommendation).
setting up home, or 5,000 support to go to university. The information that
outlines entitlements for care leavers is clear online and in local authority
information booklets. Care leavers are fully aware of the support they can get
legally. The care-leaving service works effectively with other agencies to keep
care leavers safe and to support them when they get into difficulties. The range
of professionals on the one site enables good co-working and consultation to
make sure that care leavers receive good advice, guidance and support.


Leadership, management and
governance

Outstanding

Hammersmith and Fulhams arrangements for leadership, management and
governance are outstanding. The borough benefits extensively from the economies
of scale and quality of highly effective shared services afforded by its involvement in
the tri-borough agreement with Westminster, and Kensington and Chelsea. This
promotes solidly good social work practice, with some outstanding features. Progress
has been sustained and improved since the last inspection in July 2011. The triborough partnership focus on continuous learning is particularly impressive.
Elected members and most statutory partnership boards, including the LSCB,
effectively deliver governance of services. These link regularly and directly to the triborough partnerships Executive Director of Childrens Services (DCS) and other
senior managers, who manage this complex arrangement extremely well to ensure
that a culture of compassion is evident and effective in all social work practice.
Senior managers use the comprehensive tri-borough learning and improvement
framework well to ensure that they have an accurate understanding of their service.
Where weaknesses are identified, appropriate plans are put in place to improve
services and outcomes for children. A restructure of the children looked after and
care leavers service has led to tangible improvements in outcomes.
Children and young people in the borough benefit from good-quality services. The
highly effective focus on practice project, implemented across the tri-borough
partnership, enhances social work intervention by adopting a well thought-through
and extremely well-resourced model of practice. Social workers spoke with
enthusiasm about working in a child-focused and systemic manner to support
families and to effect positive change. They are supported very well to achieve this,
with manageable caseloads, regular supervision, access to expertise through
consultations and child-centred management oversight. Effective, targeted, strategic
workforce development has led to an increasingly stable workforce. Newly qualified
social workers have an effective induction and training programme. Additional
resources are provided to ensure that they are well supported.
Performance management arrangements are good overall, enhanced by a
programme of regular and rigorous auditing that includes innovative practice weeks,
where senior managers audit a high number of cases and undertake an analysis of
findings. Partnership working is strong, although the borough could do more to
engage the health and well-being board in childrens and young peoples issues.
Well-established and highly effective tri-borough commissioning arrangements
deliver a wide range of high-quality services for children and families. As a result,
social workers are able to identify services to meet the need of the families they
work with to increase the chances of better outcomes.


Inspection findings
improvements in services, all of which are now judged to be good, and, in the
field of adoption, outstanding. The authority has clear plans and political and
managerial commitment to continue on its journey to provide consistently highquality services for children.
innovation programme, this project enhances social work intervention by
adopting a well-considered and well-resourced model of practice. Innovative
elements include a comprehensive and accredited training programme, and
skills coaching from trained specialist practitioners. The model has been widely
disseminated but understandably is at different stages of development across
the three boroughs, and its impact was not evident in all the cases observed
and tracked by inspectors in Hammersmith and Fulham. Social workers were,
however, enthusiastic about the approach and its potential for improving
practice with children and their families.
effectively. They operate within a culture of respectful challenge and they will,
when necessary, hold each other to account. The senior management team,
including the DCS, is highly interactive with frontline services and knows
individual children and social workers very well. Robust lines of communication
from frontline social workers to senior managers enable managers to know
their services to children thoroughly and extensively.
such as the boroughs chief executives and elected members, ensures that they
are informed on matters for which they hold strategic responsibility. The lead
member demonstrates passion and commitment and undertakes extensive
activity to ensure a detailed knowledge of the service, which enables them to
offer challenge and to influence service provision.
high-quality services, assisted by a comprehensive suite of concise and
consistent performance reports. This ensures that managers and leaders are
knowledgeable and well-informed about their services performance against key
indicators, and this enables them to understand it well. There is, however, a
lack of regular reports from the service in relation to performance management
and quality assurance work to the relevant scrutiny committee. This means that
these political leaders are not always able to identify or focus on key
performance and quality issues for childrens services. In some cases, issues of
data accuracy, for example in recording the ethnicity of children referred to the
service, have led to delay in their ability to undertake effective analysis.


expectations, and ensures that senior managers thorough oversight is used to
drive improvements in practice. The Learning and improvement framework
quarterly report is highly effective in collating findings from serious case
reviews, user feedback (including young people, parents and carers),
complaints and compliments, monthly audits and practice weeks. Rigorous
performance management means that senior leaders in the tri-borough
partnership are very aware of the comparative performance of the services they
provide to children.
management team demonstrate a detailed understanding of the specific
challenges faced by children and young people in their borough. They know
themselves well and have worked effectively to improve services. This has led
to the majority of social work practice seen during the inspection being of good
quality. Effective assessment of childrens needs results in their protection and
support from a wide range of services. Children looked after receive a good
service, placement stability has improved and their need for permanence is very
well identified and met.
puts effective plans in place to improve and develop the service. The
restructure, over the last eight months, of the service for children looked after
and care leavers was undertaken to address identified weaknesses in pathway
planning and support for young people. The changes made have resulted in
improvements in the quality of planning. The local authority has also acted to
address weaknesses in the provision of return interviews for young people who
go missing from home and from care. Action taken has ensured that the
majority of young people are offered an interview with an appropriate person
and that interviews are recorded appropriately on young peoples files. This is
intended to enable the local authority to collate and evaluate the outcome of
these interviews more effectively, and to inform further interventions and
service planning.
that it is of a consistently high quality. Scrutiny of case records by inspectors
indicates that management supervision is frequent, regular and evident on the
childs file. Records generally evidence a very firm focus on the child. This childcentred approach is strongly supported by the work of innovation-funded
advanced and specialist practitioners, and clinicians. All of these highly skilled
and well-trained professionals are embedded within the social work teams as
part of focus on practice and they add significant value by ensuring that social
care services do not have to buy in specialist services at additional expense.
casework direction, agreed tasks and personal and professional development
considerations. Supervision records seen were mostly good. In a minority, some
did not record actions or timescales and only the minority provided evidence of


reflective practice. However, workers have very good access to both formal and
informal consultations with a range of expert practitioners, including those
working with child sexual exploitation and domestic abuse.
innovative and regular practice weeks, which comprise extensive case audits
and practice observations undertaken by senior managers. Full participation by
professionals from a range of services provides invaluable insight into the actual
quality of practice. An extensive overview is delivered of the impact of social
work intervention on childrens lives. Inquisitive and detailed analysis of the key
findings leads to tangible in-borough recommendations to support continuously
improved performance. Detailed feedback is provided immediately to social
workers. Young people and family members are able to comment on their
experiences and the effectiveness of the help and support they have been
offered. Areas for improvement are quickly identified and change is swiftly and
positively effected.
brought increased stability to the workforce over the last 12 months. Effective
use of programmes such as Step up to social work and Frontline and the offer
of protected caseloads and career development through training, have resulted
in large numbers of newly qualified social workers. This has led to a reduction
in staff vacancies and turnover, but a relatively newly established workforce in
some teams including contact and assessment and family support and child
protection, where some 40% of social workers are in their first year of practice.
Action has been taken to improve support and capacity to deliver services for
children, with additional posts created to maintain low caseloads.
highly coherent model of commissioning, including joint commissioning.
Significant additional resources have been drawn down to support services in a
very wide variety of ways, using collaborative commissioning techniques. The
demographics of the tri-borough partnership mean that commissioners can
draw on trust funds, philanthropic giving and social enterprises to a greater
extent than in other areas. Tri-borough commissioners are therefore
exceptionally skilled at brokering additional resources and using these to add
considerable value to existing services. Tri-borough commissioners are also
highly active in shaping resources to meet identified need. They have very
efficiently decommissioned and re-commissioned some services, such as semiindependent living for care leavers.
needs are not well identified or addressed in the current priorities and strategy.
This represents a missed opportunity by the local authority to fully engage
broader partners and commissioners in helping to meet the needs of vulnerable
children and young people in Hammersmith and Fulham.


formal complaints are relatively low in number across the tri-borough
partnership. Social workers, activity officers and participation workers across
the tri-borough partnership build meaningful relationships with children and
families, and work hard to resolve any dissatisfaction at an early stage, before
it escalates into a more formal investigation. Robust advocacy arrangements
ensure that children and young people are well supported and helped to
articulate their complaint. Complaints literature for children and young people
has been reviewed and refreshed to ensure that the complaints process is
better promoted and more easily understood. Thorough analysis of complaints
and compliments effectively informs the learning and improvement framework,
in recognition that learning from complaints is an important element of service
development. Individual annual complaints reports for each borough
appropriately reflect differing learning outcomes across the tri-borough
partnership. Detailed training is successfully delivered to all managers and staff
on effective handling of complaints. Children and young people are regularly
consulted on six themes linked to the children looked after strategy, so that
they can inform service improvement and delivery.
partnership means that social workers attend court having undertaken all
necessary assessments to support robust and well-resourced care packages.
Rigorous placement finding is very well supported by a comprehensive
sufficiency strategy, with clear links to the joint strategic needs assessment
prepared by Public Health. Evidence to support care plans is consistently robust
and includes appropriate and thorough consideration of family members. This
significantly minimises delay in children looked after achieving the best possible
plan for permanence. Positive relationships with Cafcass enable meaningful
dialogue and challenge where differences arise and, as a result, all issues
identified are effectively and quickly resolved. Joint quarterly reviews of cases
of children looked after in proceedings by senior managers give them the
opportunity for challenge and learning to improve services.
influencing the discussions and decisions at the corporate parenting board. Care
leavers report that the CiCC has greater effectiveness than in previous years.
Examples of impact in changing or developing services include the development
of an app to improve participation for young people (MOMO) and being
involved in consultation for the new semi-independent accommodation
framework. The corporate parenting board has a knowledgeable and committed
approach with appropriate levels of scrutiny and positive engagement with
young people, who have effectively raised their awareness of important issues.
Areas identified for further development include developing apprenticeships,
work experience and mentoring.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
Overall, amalgamation under a single LSCB creates significant benefits for young
people and for all partner agencies. These include rationalisation of time, the secure
involvement of senior representatives from partner agencies, many of which span
several boroughs, pooling resources to tackle issues in common and alignment with
tri-borough childrens services. The tri-borough achieves the right balance between
shared and local functions, and this ensures that children are safeguarded
effectively.
Robust links are in place between the LSCB and other statutory bodies and this
allows the board to make sure that childrens safeguarding stays high on everyones
agenda.
Extensive engagement by partner agencies has been secured and the work of the
LSCB is therefore well resourced through partners financial contributions. The
boards business support team would benefit from a work plan to sit alongside the
boards business plan and drive through the priorities for children.
Through systematic analysis of audits under Section 11 of the Children Act 2004, the
LSCB has assured itself that safeguarding is a priority for all partner agencies. The
boards quality assurance sub-group effectively monitors multi-agency safeguarding
performance across the tri-borough partnership. Detailed analysis of data is routinely
undertaken by the sub-group and reported to the board by exception, although the
board would benefit from a review of this process to assure themselves of its
effectiveness. Actions arising from reviewing data lie with individual partner agencies
and no system is in place to monitor whether actions identified are carried through.
The board has systematically undertaken rigorous multi-agency themed audits.
These audits provide appropriate recommendations for change, but further checks
have not taken place to establish whether practice has actually changed or improved.
Effective monitoring by the child sexual exploitation and missing sub-group enables
the board to have a robust understanding of missing children and their behaviour
across the tri-borough partnership.
An established case review sub-committee ensures that lessons learned from reviews
are disseminated promptly across the tri-borough partnership. The sub-committee
has clear action plans in place for each individual case review but does not have an
overall action plan to cover their ongoing work.
A clear and detailed learning and improvement framework incorporates the learning


from serious case reviews, themed audits and performance monitoring by the board.
The learning and development sub-group of the LSCB undertakes its role across the
tri-borough partnership and ensures that sufficient safeguarding training is provided
across all partner agencies. However, no formal analysis of the impact of training
takes place, either across the tri-borough partnership or at borough level.
A wide range of activity to tackle the board's priorities and any lessons from SCRs is
appropriately included in the LSCB annual report. An attendance log shows that
some members have infrequent attendance, but no challenge is evident. A
comprehensive safeguarding plan covers all of the boards priorities.

Recommendations
priorities.
out in the individual boroughs.
and analyse their impact on improving practice.
from individual case reviews.
at the board.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
and almost all of the statutory functions of the LSCB and its sub-groups are
delivered across the tri-borough partnership. Each borough appropriately
maintains a local LSCB partnership group, and this ensures that local
safeguarding issues are suitably considered and reported on to the LSCB.
elected members and chief executive officers in each of the respective bodies
have been effectively developed by the board and are clearly documented. The
independent chair links frequently with the Director of Childrens Services (DCS)
for the tri-borough partnership, while remaining appropriately independent. Key
LSCB representatives, such as the DCS, are able to ensure that safeguarding
children issues are considered across strategic boards, and that elected
members are engaged in the local LSCB partnership groups. The independent
Chair meets with the chief executives of each borough at least annually.
However, this minimal involvement does not provide them with detailed


oversight of safeguarding within boroughs. The independent chair operates
across the tri-borough partnership, and this limits the time available for
maintaining links with key elected members and strategic partnership groups,
such as the health and well-being boards.
promotes safeguarding issues across the partnership and community, and
provides appropriate challenge. As a result, extensive engagement by partners
has been secured across the full range of safeguarding work. Partners are
encouraged and enabled by the chair to raise issues and challenges
constructively. This is well evidenced in the minutes of the board and its subgroups.
appropriately provides financial contributions, and these fund the business
support team for the board. The team is actively involved in enabling
community and service user involvement in the boards work. The LSCB was
able to demonstrate the involvement of young people in developing publicity
material, but acknowledges that the engagement of young people in helping to
develop its work could be further enhanced. Over the past year, there have
been several changes of the business manager post-holder, and recently a new
manager has been seconded to the post. While this has not negatively
impacted on the support provided to the board, a business plan to coordinate
the activities of the business support team and the work arising from LSCB and
its sub-groups is not evidently in place.
agencies. A biannual cycle of audits under Section 11 of the Children Act 2004
is currently being renewed. The board has developed and piloted a bespoke,
online self-assessment tool that is currently going live. Previous returns have
been systematically analysed and reported to the board. Schools, in particular,
are actively engaged and represented in the work of the board, as is the full
range of health partners, police and representative voluntary sector
organisations.
safeguarding performance across the tri-borough partnership. It draws on both
qualitative and quantitative data, and is supported by the tri-borough
performance team in compiling data into a detailed, high-quality performance
report. Partner agencies now contribute to the dataset, which was initially
extensively based on local authority childrens services data. However, the LSCB
has not systematically reviewed this extensive dataset to ensure that this is
refined, aligned to its priorities and manageable (Recommendation).
safeguarding functions. Detailed analysis of the data is routinely undertaken by
the sub-group and reported to the board, drawing out themes and trends.
Partners provide commentary on the data supplied to clarify and add context to


it. The groups report to the LSCB is by exception, identifying issues that the
board may want to interrogate further. Responsibility for actions arising from
the scrutiny of data lies with individual agencies, but no system is in place to
monitor whether actions identified are carried through (Recommendation).
programme of multi-agency themed audits. These are appropriately selected in
response to key issues arising from quality assurance, data analysis, or to
inform short-life working groups. These facilitate learning and identify key areas
for improvement in services. For example, a focused audit of young people at
risk of sexual exploitation identified effective practice through the involvement
of systemic family therapists. While the multi-agency audits provide
recommendations for change, further auditing of the themed issues has not
been undertaken to enable the LSCB to know whether practice has actually
changed or improved as a result (Recommendation).
monitors information on children who go missing, and this enables the board to
have a robust understanding of missing children and their behaviour across the
tri-borough partnership. The missing person coordinator provides weekly
information on missing children, and ensures that this information is updated by
operational workers. The coordinator maintains lists of both the top 10 missing
young people across the tri-borough partnership, and the top 10 within each
borough. This data is suitably analysed through a quarterly meeting, where
reductions or escalations in missing episodes are discussed. Through this close
analysis and weekly monitoring, the sub-group is aware that only a small
number of young people are involved in the majority of missing episodes. This
enables those young people to be closely monitored and targeted work to be
undertaken with them to minimise risk. Through careful monitoring, the LSCB
has a clear picture of the profile of child sexual exploitation and offending
across the boroughs. Data mapping has helped to build a picture of hotspots.
All this information, as well as information on new cases, is fed into the multiagency sexual exploitation meeting and the LSCB. This ensures that the LSCB
has a clear understanding of child sexual exploitation, its profile, offenders,
victims, and the quality and effectiveness of services, as well as the hotspots
and places of concern.
has a balanced representation from all agencies, including representation of
voluntary services and the police. It has appropriately recommended timely
commissioning of serious case reviews (SCRs) to the LSCB, and these have
been conducted with a suitable focus on the lived experience of the child. The
majority of reviews undertaken in recent years were completed within realistic
timescales, and where there have been delays due to external constraints, for
instance due to criminal proceedings, the sub-committee ensures that emerging
lessons learned are shared prior to completion, to swiftly improve practice.


and that these are disseminated promptly across the tri-borough partnership,
regardless of their borough of origin. A detailed and succinct summary of
lessons learned is circulated on a quarterly basis to all agencies and staff to
promote awareness, with a representative of each agency tasked to ensure its
distribution. The learning and development business manager is part of the
case review sub-committee and this helps to ensure that priority is given to
training needs identified as a result of SCRs, and that adjustments to training
materials are made and cascaded to all multi-agency partners. The lead
designated officer for the tri-borough partnership uses her extensive networks
with other boroughs well, so that statutory safeguarding training reflects
current practice.
of, a serious case review are still reviewed, with a number of significant lessons
learned. The board carefully reviews the criteria for SCRs and, where
necessary, will commission one even where formal thresholds are not met,
where it is considered that lessons can be learned. The impact of SCRs is
evaluated through case file auditing to check for the positive application of
lessons learned.
frontline workers, including tools to identify and assess early neglect, the
quality of intervention in domestic violence, and issues around the mobility of
abusive families. A wide range of methods are used to highlight and follow up
identified themes and issues with all partners, including a useful website,
additional community work and regular meetings with school improvement
advisers. The sub-committee has good, close relationships with the three
partnership boards to share themes and provide advice to improve practice.
The sub-committee has clear action plans in place for each individual case
review, but does not have an overall action plan to cover their ongoing work
(Recommendation).
effectively across the tri-borough partnership. It is well attended and chaired.
Members are well informed and demonstrate a clear understanding of trends in
local child deaths and the reasons for these. The number of incidents across
the tri-borough partnership is relatively low, with 23 reviews last year. As a
result, there is no disaggregation of data by borough, although work is
commencing with other CDOPs across north-west London to gain a fuller
picture. Research undertaken into sudden unexplained death led to training for
professionals, and awareness-raising around issues such as co-sleeping. A clear
understanding of issues relevant to the area, such as deaths in private
hospitals, abroad and in older children, has all led to further work to drill down
and understand the issues and helped to prevent further deaths. For example,
work around vulnerabilities linked to death by stabbing. Social Care Institute of
Excellence methodology has been used to undertake learning reviews in some


cases, with lessons appropriately disseminated, and this has been shown to be
having a positive impact on practice.
LSCB. The most recent reports main theme was related to perinatal and
neonatal incidents, and to life threatening illnesses. A review of the neonatal
deaths was undertaken, and concluded that good care was provided. The
report appropriately provides a breakdown by age and ethnicity, and some
analysis of the issues.
implemented and recently reviewed by the LSCB. This has incorporated the
learning from serious case reviews, themed audits and performance monitoring
by the board. The learning and development sub-group of the LSCB undertakes
its role across the tri-borough partnership and it ensures that sufficient
mandatory safeguarding training is provided across all partners, both on a
multi-agency basis and within individual partners training programmes. All key
voluntary and statutory partners are represented on the sub-group, and they
are actively engaged in delivering, as well as developing, training. The group
has maintained core safeguarding training, while developing or updating
training modules in response to current, high-profile safeguarding issues. For
example, a practice sharing conference on Prevent for schools has been
developed and is being followed up by similar events on child sexual
exploitation and neglect. The training has led to increased referrals from
schools, and early years settings are also contacting Prevent teams for
training. Partners, particularly the voluntary sector, receive regular information
and access to safeguarding training.
need to further develop its work and continually raise awareness of the LSCB.
The sub-group has identified the need to undertake a more systematic
evaluation of the impact of the extensive safeguarding training provided
through the LSCB. Currently, the sub-group primarily bases its evaluation of
training on self-reporting attendee questionnaires immediately following
training sessions. Plans to develop this will require attendees to complete
questionnaires three months after the training, to evaluate what difference the
training has made, but these are at an early stage. At the time of this review,
there was too great a reliance on anecdotal information, and no formal analysis
of the impact of training either across the tri-borough partnership or at borough
level.
classroom or conference-type environments. For some partners, releasing staff
to attend this type of input is a challenge, and the sub-group has developed
some more flexible sessions, for instance to enable police officers to attend.
However, the provision of a wide range of e-learning modules, to improve
access to training, has been delayed by internal technology challenges.


are systematically reported to, and considered by, the board. It has been
proactive in supporting and developing a number of safeguarding services. For
example, the LSCB has supported a pilot project to tackle female genital
mutilation, an identified gap in services. As a result, 68 women have been
supported in the last year through early help, and others through child in need
or child protection plans. The board has been instrumental in the development
of the harmful practices project, which also reports into the existing violence
against women group. This tri-borough project tackles harmful practices such
as forced marriage, honour-related violence and faith-based abuse.
following analysis of the high prevalence of neglect as a category for child
protection plans. The multi-agency group extensively reviewed research, SCRs
and direct work tools. It then completed a case file audit and established the
most effective method of working with families to fit with existing structures,
working practices and local need. A further aim of the group is to raise
awareness among practitioners. The toolkit subsequently developed highlights
the lived experience of the neglected child and is currently being trialled for
effectiveness by early help practitioners and social workers. Early indicators
have shown that it creates a focus on the child rather than the family, and that
parents have embraced this way of working. An awareness-raising conference
is currently being planned for May 2016 in partnership with the NSPCC. This will
form the start of a campaign that aims to ensure that awareness of neglect
reaches all services within the voluntary and statutory sectors. Effectiveness will
be measured through various means, such as a re-audit of case files, increased
consultation on neglect issues, both within partner organisations and with social
care, and also a reduction of children on a child protection plan under neglect,
in the longer term.
to tackle the board's priorities, and lessons from SCRs are appropriately
included. However, the report does not provide a rigorous and transparent
assessment of safeguarding across the tri-borough partnership. Each priority
has a 'what difference has it made' section, although the section is more
process or action based, rather than evidencing outcomes for children. The
report attempts to understand the population across the tri-borough
partnership and the differences between them, although there is little analysis
of this. No safeguarding data are presented in the report, and it does not detail
any challenges and demonstrate the impact of these. An attendance log shows
that some members have infrequent attendance, but there is no challenge to
this outlined in the report (Recommendation).
priorities. All actions have a lead organisation or sub-group attached, although
there are no timescales for completion of those actions. The description of the
evidence of impact is, in places, more outcome-focused than the business plan,
although this could be further improved.


Hammersmith and Fulham partnership board effectively identifies local issues
and barriers to partnership working, and shares information on safeguarding
concerns.
partners can describe strong examples of the difference the group makes to
childrens and families lives. For example, concerns around threats of sexual
exploitation to young people in alternative school provision.
issues, and this helps to support learning and to remove barriers to effective
safeguarding. For example, the recent challenge to health partners to follow up
pregnant homeless refugees.
are using the individual boroughs well to trial potential new ways of working.
For instance, introducing questionnaires to assess the impact of training on
practice. The partnership board recognises that an area for development is to
bring the voice of the child more into information sharing and decision-making
processes.

Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.


The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted,
an additional inspector and a local authority seconded inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector on site: Pietro Battista
Report author: Sean Tarpey
Deputy lead inspector: Paula Thomson-Jones
Team inspectors: Sean Tarpey, Louise Warren, Kathryn Townsley, Brendan
Parkinson, Susan Williams, Steve Stanley
Shadow inspector: Claire Hummerstone
Senior data analyst: Patrick Thomson
Quality assurance managers: Nick McMullen, Carolyn Adcock


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 1231
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2016


