Hampshire County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 18 February 2014  12 March 2014
The overall judgement is good
The local authority leads effective services that meet the requirements for good.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

Good


Good


Outstanding


Good


Outstanding

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is
good
The LSCB coordinates the activity of statutory partners and has mechanisms in
place to monitor the effectiveness of local arrangements.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the local safeguarding children board


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority is good because

Services for vulnerable children and families are given the highest priority by
elected members. Senior officers provide outstanding leadership and have
ensured that services are of consistently high quality. This has been sustained
over a number of years. There is no complacency. Senior leaders show a strong
commitment to continued improvement, and there is evidence of learning from
a range of sources. The experience of taking over the leadership of another
local authority has been beneficial for Hampshire, with learning used to inform
service development. As a result, children and young people receive good
support when they need it. Overall, services are making a demonstrable
difference in reducing risks and improving the life chances of some of the most
vulnerable children in Hampshire.


Senior managers in childrens services respond quickly to meet changing needs
and demands for service. In doing so, they are informed by learning from a
wide range of sources including research, serious case reviews (SCRs), learning
reviews and complaints.


Partners work together well to plan early help services, with effective
commissioning and some use of joint funding ensuring the best use of available
resources. These services are well targeted and coordinated to meet the
specific needs of the communities of Hampshire.


The local Troubled Families programme is particularly well targeted and
responsive to the needs of families, with good take-up by those families in most
need. Although this is a long term programme, the early signs are that it is
making a real difference for many families, leading to improved outcomes for
children.


There are examples of pioneering work and good practice across the range of
service provision for vulnerable families, looked after children and care leavers.
A range of initiatives is making discernible difference to the life chances of
vulnerable children. For example, the local authority is a Special Educational
Needs Pathfinder, promoting good practice to engage children with additional
needs. A Young Interpreters scheme helps vulnerable children and young
people to have a voice in the support they receive.


The local authority and partner agencies share information about children and
families well when necessary. The different categories of abuse and thresholds
for access to service are known and understood across the partnership. When
children are referred to childrens social care, they almost always receive a
prompt response that ensures they get the services they need as soon as
possible.



The large majority of social work assessments and plans are good quality. They
include a clear analysis of risk and protective factors, explore thoroughly key
issues such as the impact of neglect, and consider all aspects of the childs life
including their ethnicity.


In cases seen by inspectors, allegations of abuse and neglect were investigated
thoroughly. Social work action to ensure children who need protection are
effectively safeguarded is decisive and proportionate.


Social workers develop strong relationships with children, young people and
their parents and carers. They see children alone to learn their views, and this
work clearly informs assessments and plans.

children and families where a child has a learning difficulty or disability.
Progress has been impressive and there has been a significant improvement in
the way social workers learn and understand the wishes and feelings of these
children. This has resulted in improved social work intervention to ensure that
these children are safe and well supported.
are well attended and sensitively chaired. They are effective in ensuring that
risks posed to children are fully understood and reduced so that children can
remain safely within their families wherever possible.
timely, decisive and appropriate. A dedicated Intensive Support Service works
with families where a child is at risk of coming into care, to prevent this from
happening unnecessarily. Decisions that children should be reunited with their
families are well-informed and fully considered. Plans drawn up to achieve a
return home are almost always managed well and include the provision of the
necessary support.
professional concerns and what needs to improve for their children to be safe
from harm. Where necessary, care proceedings are initiated quickly to ensure
that children are not subject to neglect and other damaging home conditions
for too long. This work is supported by good quality legal advice to ensure
actions to safeguard children have the best chance of success.
The search for suitable alternative families starts at the earliest possible stage.
The contribution made by the adoption service is outstanding. The number of
children placed for adoption has grown significantly over the last two years,
with performance that exceeds that of other local authorities.
educational needs of looked after children so that they can engage well in
learning. These childrens school attendance is much improved since 2010.


Levels of educational attainment at Key Stages 1 and 2 are in line with the
children very seriously. Elected members are ambitious for children and young
people in their care. They have ensured that their vision for high quality
services is underpinned by appropriate financial resources. This provides a
sound basis for good service planning and provision.
care ambassadors. They provide an innovative and effective means of gathering
the views of looked after children and care leavers, and ensuring that they
influence the shape of services so that they get the help they need.
workers draw up clear and timely plans to help them make the transition. A
high percentage of care leavers are in employment, education or training. A
Staying Put scheme has enabled a growing number of care leavers to remain
with their carers beyond the age of 18 and this is bringing demonstrable
improvements to their life chances.
What does the local authority need to improve?
Areas for improvement
to having their circumstances assessed and their needs met.
manageable and regularly reviewed, so that the quality of service experienced
by children and families is not compromised.
balanced case load in their first year of service, to promote their professional
development and maintain the quality of services.
out all their required duties effectively, including making contact with children
between reviews so they can take full account of childrens wishes and feelings
when planning for their futures.
stage of their education over time, particularly in Key Stage 4.
that the emotional health needs of children and young people are not
compromised because they live outside the county.


entitlements.
in key decision-making forums can be developed, so that their views are fully
taken into account in the shaping of services.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the LSCB was carried out under section 15A of the Children Act 2004.
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the LSCB under its power to combine reports in accordance with section
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted and two contracted inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Gary Lamb HMI
Team inspectors: Janet Fraser HMI, Peter McEntee HMI, Stephanie Murray HMI,
Matthew Brazier HMI, Bill Wallace HMI, Carmen Rodney HMI, Emmy Tomsett HMI,
Nick Stacey and Deane Jennings.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 280,150 children and young people under the age of 18
years live in Hampshire. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 12% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 11% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 9% (the national average is 15%)
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 8% of
all children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are Mixed (3%) and Asian or Asian British (3%).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 5% (the national average is 18%).
 in secondary schools is 4% (the national average is 14%).
 In 2013, 9.7% of Hampshires children and young people come from black
and minority ethnic (BME) and Traveller heritages, with 4.7% recorded as
having English as an Additional Language (EAL). Hampshire encompasses a
large geographical area which is split into eleven district and borough
council areas, each with its own distinct character. There is a Nepalese
community in Rushmoor (Aldershot and Farnborough) and a Polish
community in Basingstoke. There are Gypsy Roma and Traveller
communities in many districts of Hampshire, particularly the New Forest and
East Hampshire. More than 125 different languages are spoken in
Hampshire schools.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 6,502 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an
increase from 6,312 at March 2012.
 At 31 March 2013, 909 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is an increase from 795 at 31 March 2012.
 At 31 March 2013, 18 children lived in a privately arranged foster
placement. This is the same number as at 31 March 2012.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local invalidated data where this was available.


Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 1,131 children are being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 40 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 1,103
(39 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2012. Of this number:
whom 47.7% % live out of the authority area
authority area
area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 62 adoptions
returned to be looked after
on to independent living.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates 11 childrens homes. Ten were judged to be
good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Hampshires safeguarding arrangements was in
August 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of Hampshires services for looked after children
was in August 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since August 2005.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since April 2013.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
are good.

Children and their families have access to a wide range of good and still
improving early help services. Partners have carefully considered how
thresholds for access to services, a single assessment process and the provision
of early help can be further improved. As part of the Eastleigh Early Help Hub
pilot, they have introduced a much clearer thresholds framework, a clear
pathway for help and support and better assessment tools. Intuitive and wellcoordinated processes are resulting in swifter provision of help to families,
including those who have been stepped down from childrens social care.
Partner agencies have signed up to the new process and there is a clear plan
for the extension of this model to all areas in Hampshire by October 2014.


Arrangements for partnership working are good. The local authority and its
partners ensure timely and proportionate information sharing between
childrens social care, health, police and adult service professionals. Issues of
parental consent are well understood and part of routine practice. Appropriate
referrals are made by professionals, and family circumstances and history are
well summarised and analysed. This leads to swift and safe decisions about
next steps in the large majority of cases. Social workers make clear
recommendations regarding threshold decisions. In a very large majority of
cases these are subject to timely, analytical and coherent management
oversight and decision-making.


The way in which new referrals to childrens social care are handled is robust. A
two stage entry process includes a Childrens Reception Team and a new MultiAgency Safeguarding Hub which only became fully operational during the
inspection. This has further strengthened the effective arrangements that
already existed and means that children and their families get help at the right
time and right level in almost all cases.


The out of hours service is well staffed with adult services and childrens
services social workers. It has sufficient capacity to respond to all children who
need protection out of office hours. The large majority of out of hours cases
seen were responded to well, with appropriate direct intervention with families,
liaison with police, clear and timely decision-making and prompt communication
with daytime teams. As a result, children's immediate welfare is assured.

young people who need help and protection. They see children alone and use
creative ways to ensure that their voices are heard, so that they understand
what is happening to them and are fully engaged with their plans. Parents
report that they value the caring and no nonsense approach of social workers,
saying that they are in no doubt about what they need to do to change and
why. Social workers speak openly, warmly and authoritatively about the families


they are working with and they are proud of childrens achievements. They use
interpreters confidently and routinely so that parents and children whose first
language is not English can participate fully in assessments, plans and other
work aimed at helping them.
an immediate response from the Childrens Reception Team and MASH.
Presenting concerns and family history are quickly assimilated and next steps
are agreed by a manager. The large majority of child protection enquiries are of
a good standard or better. Children are seen alone by social workers, multiagency checks are undertaken thoroughly and there is clear analysis of risks
and strengths, leading to safe and proportionate actions. Although child
protection activity in Hampshire is rising, with the number of children subject to
a Section 47 investigation up from 70 per 10,000 (March 2013) to 82 per
The thresholds for access to child protection services are well understood and
consistently applied by childrens social care.
high quality, both in the information shared and the decisions made. However,
most records of strategy discussions that take place over the telephone are too
brief and lack detail, so it is not always clear how decisions were reached. The
very recent launch of the MASH has led to a significant increase in the
proportion of strategy discussions that are face-to-face, but it is too early to see
the full impact of these changes.
potential risk and ensure that the appropriate next steps are taken, including
referral to multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARAC) and direct offers
of help. The police risk analysis is shared with childrens social care, and the
assessment and offer of help that follow are proportionate and informed by a
good understanding of family history. This provides a clear view of the risks
posed and enables effective interventions to protect children. There are many
examples of creative work with parents to help them understand the impact of
domestic abuse on young children. Specialist services such as drug and alcohol
programmes help parents to make safe choices to keep their children safe from
harm.
requiring a low level service, there were delays before child in need
assessments were undertaken. Although no child was left at risk of significant
harm, needs within these families remained unmet for too long. Supervision
files demonstrate that first line managers are aware of this problem and are
taking action to address it.
do not always demonstrate that sufficient time is given for reflection.
Management oversight and decision-making within casework are robust, and


the vast majority of recommendations are analysed and ratified by at least one
manager. Decisions are made by social workers and managers at an
appropriate level. For example, the work undertaken by children and families
support workers, which is of a consistently high standard, is matched to their
skills and experience and is stringently overseen by qualified social workers and
managers. However, a small number of social workers in Referral and
Assessment teams have caseloads that are too high, and this is reducing the
quality of support provided to families. Although the majority of newly qualified
social workers have protected caseloads, and all have work allocated that is
appropriate to their level of experience, inspectors saw four who had caseloads
that were too high. This was acknowledged by the local authority and
corrective action taken.
good or better, with careful account taken of family history, clear analysis of
risk and need, and comprehensive consideration of all aspects of childrens lives
including their ethnicity and family belief systems. Social workers routinely
explore family homes and observe children in order to understand their
experiences. In a small minority of cases, assessments and interventions are
informed by research findings. The new single assessment has been welcomed
by social workers and is a well thought-out approach. However, practitioners
undertaking these assessments are not always clear about how long each one
should take, and this has led to timescales in a small minority of cases being
unduly influenced by workloads rather than the needs and risk factors within
individual families.
sensitively and effectively chaired, with key information being shared and
weighed to reach appropriate decisions. However, the quality of child in need
and child protection plans is not consistently good. A significant minority of
these plans lack clarity about risks and desired outcomes. Managers are aware
of this and have increased their audit activity, which is helping to support
improvement. Core groups are regular and well attended. They are competently
chaired, appropriately recorded, and are effective in tracking the progress of
child protection plans. Risk to children from adult behaviour is particularly well
addressed in these meetings, leading to clear messages to parents about what
needs to change and to the right offer of help.
subject to child protection conferences and plans. Last year only three children
and young people subject to a child protection conference benefited from this
support. This is acknowledged by the local authority and firm plans are in place
to address this through strengthened commissioning arrangements from April
have sought to increase the focus on risk within families where a child has a
disability. The work of the Disabled Childrens sub-group of HSCB and recent


conferences on this theme have been effective in improving practice, leading to
an appropriate sharp increase in the number of children with disabilities who
are made subject to child protection plans. Social workers and managers have a
good understanding of the impact of adult behaviour and difficulties on children
with disabilities and their siblings. Risk- and strength-based assessments and
plans are leading to tangible improvements in childrens lives. The direct work
undertaken with children with disabilities is particularly impressive. Social
workers go to great lengths to ensure that children are helped to communicate
their feelings and to make sense of their lives through the effective use of, for
example, tailor-made picture books, Makaton and Picture Exchange
Communication Systems (PECs).
reduce risks to children who go missing from home and those who are at risk of
sexual exploitation or trafficking. Where concerns are identified, young people
are supported through the use of effective child in need or child protection
plans. Partner agencies acknowledge that the previous return interview process
was not sufficiently robust, and that the experiences of individual children who
go missing have not been consistently analysed or understood. Steps have very
recently been taken to improve this. Early signs are positive, with social workers
beginning to use the new return interview checklist to explore and address
young peoples behaviour and vulnerabilities. The Sexual Exploitation Risk
Assessment tool is valued by professionals and is being used effectively to
support the identification of risk and to plan responses to meet the individual
needs of children. The LSCB monitors this area of work closely and uses
aggregate data to track trends and shape services.

The help provided to families where there is parental substance misuse,
domestic abuse or mental ill-health is well targeted. Family assessments include
a clear analysis of adult needs as well as those of the children, and lead to
children being helped and safeguarded effectively. There is a Joint Working
Protocol that is frequently referred to by adults and childrens practitioners and
their managers, and that supports effective joint practice across a range of
agencies.

provision, working on a wide range of projects to improve the life chances of
children from diverse minority ethnic groups. The key strength of this service
lies in its ability to lead creatively and win the trust of schools, community
groups and families. This work has had a significant impact on improving
attendance for certain groups of pupils notably those of Gypsy, Roma and
Traveller heritage. The service is highly effective in meeting the requirements of
the Equality Act (2010) in relation to race and ethnicity. It has increased social
workers awareness on a range of matters such as cultural identity and support
for unaccompanied asylum seeking young people. The Young Interpreters
scheme is another excellent example of practice that supports and develops
children and young peoples confidence and leadership skills within schools.


a key priority for improvement. Clear criteria are used to identify the main
factors affecting low attendance, and appropriate support is identified before
concerns are escalated through legal action. In Basingstoke, a multi-agency
pilot project is taking a whatever it takes approach to creating sustained
change. This has resulted in a decline in persistent absence among pupils with
previously poor rates of attendance. Good arrangements are in place to monitor
the attendance of vulnerable children, including those placed out of the county
and others who are home educated.
education. Effective use of data to track childrens progress begins in early
years. At this stage, schools begin to identify very early children at risk of delay
in developing good basic literacy skills. These children are given the support
they need at an early stage. Robust analysis of information on childrens
progress ensures that all groups have equal access to support. Since 2009, the
attainment gap has shown a year by year improvement.
effective at meeting the needs of local families. Although this is a long term
programme, early intervention is showing signs of effectiveness in creating
change. For example, joint work with Job Centre Plus has contributed to 55 of
now engaged with the programme and there has already been a positive
outcome in 397 families.
the role of the Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO) is well understood
and thresholds for referral are well applied. Investigations are coordinated well
to ensure children are protected. In the cases seen by inspectors, the LADO
was a valuable source of expertise and advice to partner agencies, including
private and independent schools.
monitoring visits which are sensitive to their ethnicity and disabilities. Their
safety is carefully considered and their health and wellbeing is promoted. The
local authority has taken extensive action, for example with schools, to raise
awareness about this issue, but this has not led to a rise in notifications.
Numbers remain stable at 18.
The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence are good
evidence-based, and the right children are in care. Decisions are underpinned
by effective and accessible legal advice and strong management oversight, as
clearly evidenced by the regular, focused and well-attended legal planning
meetings. The average length of time it takes to conclude care proceedings has


reduced significantly, and is now close to the national target. Some cases are
concluded well within the 26 week target. Social workers are supported well to
produce consistently good quality assessments that are accepted by the courts.
Assessments of wider family members as possible carers are undertaken
promptly, and historical information is taken into account appropriately to
minimise delay for children. The revised Public Law Outline is used effectively,
providing clarity to parents about expectations and the possible consequences
should those expectations not be met.
children on the edge of care to prevent them entering care unnecessarily.
There are also many examples of the ISS successfully providing support to
looked after children to prevent placement breakdowns. Children and their
parents and carers benefit from coherent, evidence-based support provided by
suitably trained support workers. The local authoritys own evaluation of the
service demonstrates that in the large majority of cases, the goals agreed with
the family when the ISS first became involved are achieved. Decisions that
children should be reunited with their families are properly considered and
backed by clear and focused support plans that are implemented well.
workers. Professionals and carers know children well. The views, wishes and
feelings of children are strongly evident in care planning and in case recording.
This helps children to thrive where they live. Nearly all looked after children
spoken to by inspectors were happy with the care that they receive. Records of
visits to children are effectively summarised in a style which children, young
people and families understand.
to provide a nurturing environment for them and to meet their emotional
needs. For example, the use in Hampshires childrens homes of a clear and
consistent research-based model of practice, Pillars of Parenting, has
contributed to some very positive outcomes for children who might otherwise
not be able to remain where they are. This model enables the suitably trained
staff to provide emotionally sensitive care to children, and demonstrates strong
multi-agency working, for example with psychologists, to develop and
implement programmes of support for individual children.
childrens homes, while redeveloping others, provides evidence of its
commitment to residential care as a positive choice for those young people
whose needs are better met in childrens homes.
from care and subject to associated risks. Social workers and the police work
well together to assess and manage risks posed to children when they go
missing. Inspectors saw some examples of well-recorded interviews with
children who have returned from going missing. However, the local authoritys


monitoring shows that the use of these interviews is not consistently applied,
and that those undertaken are not all of sufficient quality. This limits the local
authoritys ability to understand the reasons and circumstances behind missing
episodes and to make suitable plans to keep children safe. The use of a new
form, designed to record issues raised by return interviews more effectively,
has been implemented, but it is too early to assess its impact.

In the majority of cases seen by inspectors, childrens health needs have been
addressed well and are improving. Immunisations and health assessments are
undertaken regularly and at a rate in line with comparable local authorities,
although a significant minority of children have not received a recent dental
check.


The Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) gives high priority to
meeting the needs of looked after children. Dedicated specialist CAMHS
professionals for looked after children provide good, timely support to staff and
carers, and assessments undertaken by CAMHS are timely and of good quality.
When necessary, agencies work together well to make sure appropriate
packages of health care are in place to meet complex needs. This is
exemplified by the support given to some young people for their drug and
alcohol abuse and mental health difficulties, which has helped to stabilise their
lives and reduce their level of offending.

national average and are improving in Key Stages 1 and 2. The best results in
four years were achieved in 2013 in both key stages, when most pupils made
good progress. In comparison with previous years, the proportion of young
people achieving five or more GCSE grades A*-C, including English and
mathematics, was low in 2013. This was due in part to a large majority of the
cohort having special educational needs, with a minority having a statement of
special educational needs. Current tracking data on progress indicates that
GCSE results for children in this years cohort should be better.
enabled all looked after children in one school to achieve at least five good
GCSEs.
including managed moves support the small number of children who have
received a fixed term exclusion from school. No looked after child was
permanently excluded during 20122013. Attendance is much improved since
national average of 5.3%. The local authority still has more to do, however, to
reduce the persistent absence of a small minority of pupils.
for improvement. A cohesive virtual school team works closely with schools.


They ensure that Pupil Premium funding is used to good effect to address both
the pastoral and educational needs of looked after children so that they can
engage well in learning. In-depth research and consultation, resulting in an
excellent toolkit, have been used to develop a new personal education plan
(PEP). Schools have embraced the more analytical approach it brings to the use
of PEPs. There is a sharp focus on holding schools to account through
performance management. The local authority has a formal protocol in place to
ensure that most looked after children attend schools that are good or better.
recreational activities. For example, the leisure pass for looked after children
enables concessionary access to council leisure services, and is also available to
carers and their birth children. The Dance Academy is an innovative crosspartnership project that has achieved some outstanding outcomes for many
young people with complex needs, for example reduced offending,
reintegration into mainstream school, improved placement stability,
employment and artistic achievement at a national level.
permanent homes for looked after children and strong evidence that financial
considerations do not compromise long-term planning to achieve this. Familyfinding commences at the earliest possible stage and is suitably urgent and farreaching. The matching of children with permanent carers is thoughtful and
measured, ensuring that they have the best possible opportunities to settle with
families and to be happy. The use of Special Guardianship Orders (SGO) in
Hampshire is low but rising. In 201011 it was 6.5%, compared with the
national average of 9%. The local authority has recognised this and has
renewed its emphasis on exploring this placement choice. As a result, numbers
have increased by 2% to 30 children at December 2013, based on performance
at December 2012. Plans enable children to live with their brothers and sisters
whenever it is in their best interests. Since April 2013 the very large majority
(87%) of siblings have been placed together. A high priority is placed on
undertaking life-story work at the earliest possible stage, so that children can
be helped to know and make sense of their histories and identities.
keep in touch with parents and other relatives wherever possible. Risks
associated with contact are carefully and sensitively managed. Contact with
family members that helps children to understand and have a positive view of
their ethnic and cultural identity is actively promoted.
out of the county are appropriate. Looked after children living outside the
county are visited regularly and their progress is closely monitored. Children
spoken to by inspectors, including some living a considerable distance from the
county, said that they feel safe where they live and that they get the help they
need. The local authority has identified, however, that there remain some
difficulties in ensuring that CAMHS services are in place when children move to


other areas. This has caused delay and disruption to some childrens treatment
plans. Firm plans are in place to address this by April 2014.
Hampshires foster carers reflects the ethnicity of its looked after children.
There has been success in recruiting new carers, but in-house fostering
capacity is not increasing in line with the looked after children population. To
ensure that recruitment keeps pace with requirements to provide suitable
placement choice for all looked after children is a challenge for the local
authority.
their skills in meeting the needs of looked after children. They variously
described the support they receive from their family placement social workers
(FPSWs) as fantastic, excellent, and amazing. Foster carers receive regular,
helpful visits from FPSWs and challenging reviews are undertaken of their
professional development as carers. They report similarly positive views about
the support children receive from childrens social workers. Carers have very
good access to relevant training, which is targeted at meeting their own
individual needs and those of the children for whom they are caring. Foster
carers report that they feel fully included as part of the professional team
responsible for looked after children, and that their own children are effectively
engaged in the fostering process.
remain with their foster carers after the age of 18. This is a strong feature of
the local authoritys response to secure the futures of looked after children.
Currently 52 young people are benefitting from this scheme after their 18th
birthday. The number of children experiencing too many placement moves
remains stubbornly high. The local authority has thoroughly analysed the
reasons for this and steps have been taken to minimise disruption for children.
The impact of these initiatives is not yet fully evident, though inspectors
encountered several examples where the care and support provided by the
local authority had improved individual childrens stability and overall outcomes.
being looked after to act as care ambassadors, and to represent and support
Hampshires looked after children. The ambassadors are an impressive group of
highly-motivated young people. With effective support, they lead the virtual
model of the children in care council. This is part of a sensible and effective
approach to the challenge the local authority faces when seeking to capture the
views of a high number of looked after children living across a large county and
beyond. Regular activity days for looked after children have provided good
opportunities for them to report their views to professionals and to meet other
children in care.
recruitment. They have regular and productive access to senior managers,


although links are less well-established with elected members. Looked after
children are regularly seen by elected members, for example, through
members visits to childrens homes and attendance at the Children and
Families Advisory Panel. The potential of this innovative role would be realised
more fully if these young people had routine formal opportunities to meet with
elected members, and so to influence service planning. The local authoritys
pledge to looked after children and care leavers has been developed with the
effective involvement of young people and, as a result, is an accurate
representation of the issues that are important to them. Progress in meeting
the pledge has been effectively monitored and actions put in place to make any
necessary improvements. However not all looked after children are fully aware
of all their entitlements or how to access them. Access to independent
advocacy and use of independent visitors is limited, as acknowledged by the
local authority. The new SPARK website for looked after children and care
leavers provides a sound platform to improve the local authoritys
communication and engagement with looked after children, although its impact
is not yet evident.
(IROs) are challenging in their monitoring of care plans and place a strong
emphasis on driving forward plans for children to avoid delay wherever
possible. Review recommendations are specific and relevant to meet the
changing needs of individual children. The quality of IROs work is closely and
effectively monitored by the lead IROs and the Independent Review Service
(IRS) manager. However, despite some recent investment by the local authority
in recruiting additional IROs, their caseloads are too high. This means they are
unable to spend enough time speaking to children between review meetings to
ensure that their emerging views are fully considered when planning for their
futures.
their use of the robust dispute resolution process, enable senior managers to
have a better understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of the overall
service and to take necessary actions for improvement. The annual IRS report
to senior managers focuses appropriately on the needs of children as well as
IRO activity, but this is not easily accessible to children and families, or the
general public.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is outstanding
opportunity. Adoption planning is given the highest priority by the local
authority and this has resulted in a year on year increase in the number of
children being placed for adoption over the last three years. The number of
children adopted increased from 37 in 201112 to 62 in 201213. This figure
has already been exceeded this year and the local authoritys own data shows
that 72 children have been placed for adoption in 201314. This work is
underpinned by a robust adoption policy and a rigorous approach to adoption


training for social workers, including those in frontline referral and assessment
teams. The needs of children with complex problems are recognised, and the
deployment of a dedicated adoption social worker ensures that children with
complex needs are placed for adoption where this is the plan.
adoptive families over the last two years. It pursues all available options to
match children through the use of consortia, adopter exchange days, Children
Who Wait and the national Adoption Register. This work is supported by a
dedicated team of adoption social workers who bring a sharp focus to
recruitment. The team has been highly successful, and a well-targeted
recruitment campaign has generated a significant increase in the number of
adoption enquires year on year from 234 (201213) to 446 (December 2013).
Fifty new adoptive households were recruited in 201213 with numbers for
place to consolidate this performance in the future through a rolling programme
of adoption recruitment.
authority has continued to invest in its own service to ensure performance is
sustained. For example, it has appointed an additional 4.5 social workers to
recruit and assess adopters to support the existing work of the adoption team
and build capacity for the future.
adoption plan are robust. The progress made by individual children waiting for
adoption is closely monitored and placement options are continuously explored.
This has resulted in the very large majority of children with a plan for adoption
being successfully placed. Eleven of the 20 children who have been waiting for
adoption the longest have been successfully matched this year. Only eight
children have been waiting for a family over a year, and these are continually
monitored by managers to ensure that they are prioritised and placements
actively sought. Where it becomes apparent that adoption is not achievable in a
timescale that meets the childs needs, the local authority takes decisive action
to secure alternative means of achieving a permanent home.
the authoritys own recent data (December 2013) shows that adoption
performance exceeds that of comparable local authorities. For example, the
average time between a child entering care and moving in with adopters is 558
days compared with 653 days for comparable authorities. The average time
between the Placement Order being made and an adoptive home being agreed
is 175 days compared with 201 days in comparable authorities. Despite the
increase in demand for adoptive homes, the percentage of children who wait
less than 21 months to live with adoptive parents is 58%, which is better than
comparable authorities (51%).


contributing to very effective matching and a low breakdown rate. The quality
of child permanence reports is of a consistently high standard. These
assessments use research very well to understand childrens experiences and
needs, for example, addressing issues such as the long term impact of domestic
violence on children and the impact of placing and separating sibling groups.
There are a number of examples where the service has worked with specialist
adoption agencies to secure the best placement for siblings.
adopters. It is readily available and highly effective, with 108 families currently
benefiting from it. It is wide ranging and includes support groups, direct work
with children and young people, specific training on therapeutic parenting
strategies and activity days and events for adopted children. Adopters and
prospective adopters report that they value it greatly. One adopter described
support as fantastic and effective at times of crisis. It is making a
demonstrable difference in childrens lives by supporting and maintaining their
adoptive families, and placement breakdown rates are low. Support to children
who are adopted is good. Young people can access activity days and Youth
Options residential activities which are helping to meet their needs.
The views of adopters and prospective adopters are used to influence the
shape of services. This is effectively supported by the Adoption Participation
Group for prospective adopters and adoptive parents. Their views have
informed changes and led to improvements such as better information sessions,
support on education issues and the introduction of a specialist training course
on the impact of early trauma.
The graded judgment for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
good
pathway plans template, which now reflects how care leavers want their
meetings conducted and recorded. Most pathway plans are of good quality and
drawn up at the right time for the young person. Their content is primarily
driven by care leavers, supported by their social workers or personal advisers.
This practice reflects young peoples growing independence and still allows for
the identification and mitigation of specific risks such as sexual exploitation,
offending and substance misuse. However, care leavers say they are not always
clear what continuing support they are entitled to, for example in relation to
accommodation, financial help and contact with their personal adviser.
track care leavers progress effectively. Line managers regularly review case
summaries and case notes, and trigger reviews of pathway plans when there is
a significant change in circumstances. Review notes are of good quality and are


written from the perspective of care leavers. This generates a sense of
ownership by them.
effectively promoted through their pathway plan. This enables continuing health
care and, for those with particular or complex needs, supports transitions to
adult health or social care services. Care leavers are encouraged and supported
to live a healthy lifestyle and to attend routine dental checks, optician
appointments and to undertake regular health assessments. Care leavers know
and understand their health histories and how to access their health records
when they leave care.
work with young people. The majority of care leavers benefit greatly from this
support, which is further enhanced by the stability of the personal adviser
workforce, enabling young people to build strong meaningful relationships with
their assigned worker.
independent living skills such as managing their finances. Young people who
spoke with inspectors said they have developed the social skills required to
make choices, they can budget and can prepare healthy meals.
employment, education or training (EET). At 63.8%, the proportion of care
leavers in EET is good when measured against comparable local authorities and
the national average. The local authority maintains a strong focus on increasing
the life chances of care leavers. This commitment is seen in the Internship Plus
programme which provides care leavers with a range of work opportunities and
experiences. During 2013, 53 care leavers completed this programme, with half
extending the experience to employment or full-time education. Feedback
about it from young people is very positive, with one young person describing it
as life changing. This good level of investment in the future of care leavers is
being developed and incorporated into the local authoritys apprenticeship
programme. Of the planned 1,000 places by 2016 for all young people, 150
placements will be allocated to care leavers.
they live and know who to speak to if they are concerned about their own
safety. They also say that firm plans are in place for their future, they know
they can stay where they live beyond their 18th birthday if that is in their best
interests, and they live in places that meet their needs well.
breakfast accommodation. These are young people who have either refused
other more suitable accommodation, or have to wait a short while for an
identified suitable placement to become available, or have exhausted other
provision. The local authority minimises the adverse effects of this type of


accommodation through thorough case-by-case risk assessment, additional
support and managerial oversight, but bed and breakfast is not suitable
accommodation and does not provide a stable base from which to take part in
employment, education or training. A revised accommodation strategy has been
developed to tackle this problem, and new accommodation with intensive
support for difficult to place care leavers is due to open imminently.


Leadership, management and governance are outstanding
performance in childrens services. There is a well-established, experienced
senior leadership team that is passionate about providing consistently high
quality services. They are making a demonstrable difference to improving the
life chances of children and young people. The Chief Executive, Director of
Childrens Services and other senior leaders are committed, well informed and
strong proponents of the rights of vulnerable children and young people. They
describe a vision, shared by elected members across the political spectrum, of
strong and continually improving services. They understand very well the needs
of Hampshires population and have repeatedly taken the right steps to meet
them by consolidating good performance and ensuring continued improvement.
judged outstanding. Services for vulnerable children, young people and their
families are given the highest priority by the local authority and this work is
backed by the necessary financial resources as the local authority strives for
excellence in the services it provides for vulnerable children and their families.
This is supported by a clear strategy delivered by a stable senior leadership
team that has been in place for over five years, knows the local authority very
well and has repeatedly taken the right steps to consolidate good performance
and continue improvement.
effective approaches to improving services, practice and outcomes for children
and young people. The local authority is frequently at the forefront of practice.
They are currently a Special Educational Needs Pathfinder and although it is too
early to evaluate impact yet, extensive consultation with parents and carers and
good partnership work has helped to formulate new systems and approaches
which are being trialled to provide a sound basis for future work. Inspectors
saw examples of developments that have been recognised nationally as
exemplars of good practice by the DfE. These include the joint working protocol
on parents who have problems with mental health, substance misuse, learning
disability and emotional or psychological distress. Other examples of exemplary
services achieving excellent outcomes for children include EMTAS, the Young
Interpreters scheme and the Dance Academy.
LSCB Independent Chair are strong, with regular meetings in place. The Chief
Executive meets regularly with the LSCB Independent Chair and has sought
assurance from her that lessons from SCRs and learning reviews are being
properly learnt and disseminated in Hampshire.
in an inadequate local authority at the request of that authority and the DfE.


This was only taken on following a comprehensive assessment of risk arising
from the proposal. It has not compromised performance in Hampshire. Indeed,
inspectors saw evidence of learning from the experience being used to reevaluate aspects of childrens services in Hampshire. These include front line
responses to contacts and referrals and the provision of professional
development opportunities for middle and first line managers.
services for children and young people. Elected members on this committee
have good insight and knowledge of their communities and the issues faced by
childrens services. The Health and Well Being Board is well established, with
the right agencies represented at the right level. It has good links with the
LSCB. The Lead Member for Children is the chair of the Health and Well Being
Board and a participating observer of the LSCB. This contributes to a high
degree of coherence between the different bodies involved in planning for
children in Hampshire.
from the Joint Strategic Needs Analysis (JSNA). High priority is given to children
in vulnerable groups, including those who are disabled, have mental health
problems, suffer from neglect or who are looked after. Targets set out in the
C&YPP are being progressed effectively and reported to the Childrens Trust
Board, which ensures commissioned children and family services are well
targeted and coordinated across the partnership. Strategic plans are effectively
linked. For example, the development of the early help offer and promotion of
the needs of disabled children are key priorities in both the LSCB business plan
and the C&YPP. The impact of this work has been significant in improving
outcomes for children, for example through the targeting of early help where it
is needed most.
planning is robust and targeted at the most vulnerable children and young
people. The resulting partnership work has led to some very positive outcomes
for children. For example, targeted work on reducing teenage pregnancies has
led to a 41% reduction in teenage conception rates since the baseline in 1998.
The reconfiguration of CAMHS has improved the timeliness of assessment and
treatment and addressed the previous inequality of services across the local
authority area. Effective partnership work and use of the Public Law Outline
have led to rapid improvements in timescales for the completion of care
proceedings.
planning of service development. Senior and middle managers progress plans
incrementally and in a measured way. Examples of this are trials of the MASH
in the autumn and the staged launch of the early help hubs during 2014. Very
good partnership arrangements with the police and health agencies are in
place. This has led to highly effective planning and the use of pooled budgets,
for example to support transitions for disabled children. This work is effectively


managed through the Joint Childrens Health Commissioning Board which is
located within the Childrens Trust board arrangements. Parents and young
people are very well engaged and make an invaluable contribution to the
commissioning and development of services, for example through membership
of Local Grant Allocation panels.
innovation have led to the local authority maintaining an exceptionally stable
workforce of good, qualified, experienced social workers and children and
family support workers. There is a very low rate of vacant posts and where
vacancies arise, locum social workers are employed so that staffing levels are
maintained. This provides a sound basis for work with families. Strong
partnerships are in place to develop a range of pathways to social work to
ensure a sufficient, qualified workforce is in place in the future. This includes
support for unqualified staff to obtain a social work qualification and
participation in the Step up to Social Work scheme, which has been
commended by the Health and Care Professional Council (HCPC) for its work in
this field.
promoting service development from examples of good practice identified in
other authorities across the country. The local authority is active in supporting
challenge and service development through its involvement in sector-led
improvement work such as peer review, and in national initiatives such as the
Family Justice and Adoption reforms. Such work has contributed to service
improvements in key areas, such as reduced timescales for court proceedings
and strong progress made in the adoption service, with a year on year increase
in the number of children placed for adoption and better performance than
comparable local authorities
of Hampshire. They respond quickly to changing demands for services. There
are many examples where decisive action has been taken to bring further
improvement to services that are already good. Where inspectors found
shortcomings in practice, or quality has slipped, the local authority was already
aware of the issues and had plans in place to address them. For example, in
the size of caseloads for some newly qualified social workers, delays in some
children in need being seen after referral, and a small number of young people
placed in inappropriate accommodation.
and reporting arrangements, coordinated through the County Children and
Family Management team (CFMT). There is very rigorous routine scrutiny of
detailed performance management information. This enables swift and decisive
action to be taken to ensure that quality is maintained and improved, providing
a very sound basis for management decision-making. Case file audit
arrangements are comprehensive and robust. This ensures that work is closely


overseen by managers at different levels, and leads to robust action to improve
social work practice.
improve services and practice. This includes critical issues identified by the
LSCB and opportunities to learn from serious incidents. For example, each of
the four serious incident notifications made in the last year has led to the
instigation of a SCR so that lessons can be learnt. Social workers are
consistently able to give examples of a range of methods used to share lessons
learnt from SCRs and learning reviews and to describe how it has influenced
their practice. Learning from complaints has been incorporated into training for
managers. Information gathered from the annual staff survey has been used
effectively to identify areas for development such as awareness of the whistleblowing policy and employee support scheme, with subsequent surveys
showing improvement.
actively promoting high aspirations for children in the local authoritys care. The
achievements of looked after children and care leavers are celebrated at an
annual awards ceremony. Lead members and senior officers describe children
in the local authoritys care as part of the Hampshire family and this area of
work is supported by significant investment, which has underpinned the
development of the Intern Plus scheme, new residential service provision, and
the Staying Put initiative. These schemes have had a discernible impact on
young peoples confidence, personal development and life chances.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the local safeguarding
children board
The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Areas for improvement
ensure that all staff have access to good quality training, and that this leads to
sustained improvements across all safeguarding and early help services.
balanced scorecard and used by the LSCB to monitor practice and service
delivery of multi-agency safeguarding arrangements across the partnership.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the Local Safeguarding Children Board
effective. The LSCB Independent Chair regularly meets with the Director of
Childrens Services, Chief Executive of the authority and Lead Member to
ensure that the local authority is fulfilling its safeguarding responsibilities. There
are strong links between the LSCB and the Health and Wellbeing Board and
Children's Trust. These ensure that there is a strong and sustained focus to
promote effective safeguarding arrangements across the county.
approach to ensuring that all the requirements set out in Working Together to
Safeguard Children (DfE 2013) are met. The LSCB has made very good
progress since her arrival. It receives continuing and active support from local
political leaders who retain a clear, strong focus on safeguarding service
delivery across the partnership. These factors combine to bring continual
improvement in the way the Board coordinates and ensures the effectiveness of
multi-agency responses to meet the needs of children and families. The LSCB
has established clear priorities in the current business plan to improve
safeguarding practice. It regularly reviews progress and takes decisive and
prompt action where necessary in order to meet objectives. These initiatives
have resulted in more robust arrangements to protect children in Hampshire,
such as in the improved practice to safeguard children with a disability.
reviewed thoroughly and updated as required to incorporate statutory
requirements and changes to practice. For example, it has led the review of the
local inter-agency thresholds document in response to the early help agenda,
so partner agencies are clear about their own roles and those of other partners
in early help and the protection of children and families.
of key service strengths and weaknesses across safeguarding services in


Hampshire. It provides a clear focus to shape strategy, policy and practice
across the partnership, including service responses for domestic violence, child
sexual exploitation (CSE), child trafficking and the involvement of children and
families in influencing the shape of services across the area. For example the
Board recognised that social work assessments did not focus sufficiently on
fathers and, as a result, more robust and comprehensive assessments are now
routinely undertaken.
and active contribution to improving the delivery of services for children and
young people. For example, the LSCB has worked closely with the local
authority to strengthen support arrangements to provide schools, including
those in the independent sector, with systematic information and guidance on
safeguarding.
operates effectively across the partnership, with activities including Section 11
audits, case reviews and action plans arising from SCRs. The LSCB maintains a
risk register to record risks to its ability to achieve its objectives. It also uses a
challenge log to document challenges made over partner agencies performance
in critical areas of their business. This enables the effective monitoring of
progress made by partners in overcoming difficulties and improving
performance. For example, the responses to challenges on high social work
caseloads in one area, and a lack of suitable accommodation for children
detained under Section 136 of the Mental Health Act 2005, have been
monitored and improvements recognised.
the performance of frontline early help and social care services. These reports
enable further investigation and challenge. For example, the LSCB has
influenced and endorsed the redesign of the early help offer to families in
Hampshire. The Quality Assurance subgroup and local multi-agency
safeguarding forums assess the continuing impact of implementation at a local
level. A review of services for children with disabilities who are subject of a
child protection plan has resulted in improved decision-making and more
effective management oversight. The LSCB has also implemented a tracking
process to identify any cumulative patterns arising from concerns reported by
schools and other settings across Hampshire.
and evaluate performance on safeguarding indicators across the partnership.
While scrutiny and analysis of the data are in their infancy, there is evidence of
early impact and improved practice in some areas as a result of this work.
However, to date not all key partners have contributed effectively to this
scorecard and, although this will be remedied shortly, scrutiny to date has been
limited.


as well as SCRs from other LSCBs and relevant research, is well established.
The LSCB is instrumental in ensuring that partners understand the impact of
these lessons, and holds them to account for the dissemination and evaluation
of learning. Effective arrangements for the review of child deaths are in place.
The Child Death Overview Panel comprises appropriate professionals, is well
attended and has clear terms of reference for work undertaken. Regular reports
are made to the LSCB. These identify issues of concern and learning from child
deaths, and are used effectively, for example to raise public awareness of the
dangers posed to babies from sharing a bed with parents.
and monitor the implementation of agreed policies and procedures by partner
agencies. This has ensured that this vulnerable group of children is
safeguarded effectively. The LSCB subgroup for missing, exploited and
trafficked children provides an energetic and committed multi-agency
approach that drives local responses to the identification and support of
children identified as missing or at risk of sexual exploitation. Voluntary
organisations are well engaged in this group, and this collaborative approach
ensures that the CSE pathways and protocols are well understood and
implemented across the partnership.
to identify and address the safeguarding training needs of their workforce.
The LSCB is committed to commissioning and funding multi-agency
safeguarding training. This results in comprehensive pathways to training. The
LSCB undertakes a comprehensive programme of audit activity. This has been
recently strengthened by a review of the three multi-agency safeguarding
forums to ensure that there is a consistent thread from senior management
and the LSCB Independent Chair to frontline staff. This has facilitated
clearer communication and resulted in timely and accurate dissemination of
key messages, learning and further scrutiny of performance. While the quality
and impact of audits has been variable in the past, more recent activity has
resulted in sustained and well-targeted improvements across early help and
safeguarding services.


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work based
learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and
other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


