London Borough of Harrow
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection dates: 16 January 2017 to 9 February 2017
Report published: 31 March 2017

Childrens services in Harrow are good

Requires improvement

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Children in Harrow receive services that are well matched to their needs, reduce risk
and improve their outcomes. This is because senior leaders and elected members
provide strong and effective leadership, which has a positive impact on the way that
services are designed, developed and delivered. The director of childrens services,
divisional director and chief executive have a clear understanding of both strengths
and areas for development. They make good use of performance information and
learning from audits to address shortfalls and raise standards, for example in their
ongoing focus on improving the functioning of the multi-agency safeguarding hub
(MASH). They recognise that greater use of feedback from children is needed to
strengthen audits further. The local authoritys overview and scrutiny panel lacks
sufficient focus on children and is not consistently effective.
Social workers see children regularly. They use good direct work to come to know
them well and build relationships of trust with them. This helps to improve the
outcomes that children achieve. Social workers are able to do this because they have
manageable caseloads. A strong focus on, and investment in, recruiting sufficient
social workers makes this possible. This is also having a positive impact on reducing
both a reliance on agency staff and the staff turnover. The professional development
of social workers is supported by a well-planned and resourced training offer.
When children are referred to the local authority with a presenting risk of significant
harm, action is quickly taken to ensure their safety. Thresholds are well understood
and consistently applied. When childrens level of need is lower, the MASH does not
always handle these referrals as quickly as it should. While inspectors did not see
any examples of children suffering harm as a result of this, some children do
experience delay in receiving further assessment and services. Child protection
strategy discussions take place promptly, but do not routinely involve key agencies
beyond the police and local authority. There are a number of well-established and
effective targeted early-help services to support children in Harrow. However, the
number of children with additional needs who could benefit from an assessment and
coordinated early-help response and are receiving one are low. The local authority is
aware of this. The steps that it has taken to restructure and relocate its early-help
services into community hubs, such as youth centres and childrens centres, are well
considered, but are at too early a stage to have had an impact.
Services for children and young people who go missing and those at risk of sexual
exploitation are good and improving. Help and protection is effective and well
coordinated for these children and young people. There is an effective structure of
both strategic and operational meetings to develop services and track performance,
and to monitor and intervene in the cases of individual children. A specialist team,
includinga child sexual exploitation coordinator, missing persons worker and gang
worker, helps to ensure a focused and joined-up service for children. This work, in
common with that to tackle female genital mutilation and radicalisation, is well
integrated into broader safeguarding work. Disabled children receive a good service
that considers their needs and manages transitions to adult services effectively.


Assessments of childrens circumstances are almost all completed to a timescale that
matches the seriousness and urgency of their needs, and identifies key-risk and
protective factors. However, assessments for children in need and those on child
protection plans are not always updated to reflect childrens current circumstances
and some assessments lack sufficient analysis, for example in consideration of
culture and ethnicity. This makes it more difficult to ensure that plans reflect
childrens current circumstances and can be used to drive and measure progress.
Decisions for children to become looked after are made quickly and in their best
interests. Children only become looked after when it is absolutely necessary. When
legal proceedings are needed to secure their safety, assessments and support to
children and their families are good and the progress swift. When the plan is for
children to return home, most do so successfully. However, a few experience delay
and a lack of clarity in the delivery of services to support their return home.
Children looked after receive a good service from social workers, who have high
aspirations for them. Social workers help young children to understand difficult and
complicated decisions about their lives, and demonstrate a real commitment to
engaging young people who have ongoing high-risk behaviours. Children participate
well in their reviews, and this means that plans and decisions are rooted in their
wishes and feelings. In a few cases, social workers and independent reviewing
officers (IROs) need to be better prepared for reviews and make sure that agreed
actions are always tracked between review meetings. The health needs of children
looked after, including those living outside the borough, are generally well
considered, with very timely initial and review health assessments. However, some
children do not receive therapeutic or emotional health services quickly enough.
When children cannot return to their birth families, new permanent homes are found
as quickly as possible. Social workers pay close attention to getting this right for
older children, disabled children, children from particular ethnic groups, and those
with brothers and sisters. Children needing a range of possible alternative permanent
families benefit from early parallel planning, careful matching with carers or adopters
and good support plans. Adoption work is very strong. Childrens arrangements are
secure, and placement and adoption breakdowns are rare.
A large majority of care leavers receive good support that helps them to achieve well
in their education and career aspirations, and in developing the skills that they need
to live independently. Many achieve well and make a successful transition to
adulthood. However, for a small minority there are delays in providing the support
that they need in key areas, such as their emotional well-being, education,
employment and training.
Children looked after and care leavers have a good understanding of their
entitlements. They also receive helpful and clear information about advocacy and the
independent visitors scheme. Alongside unaccompanied asylum-seeking children,
they benefit from an impressive range of creative and innovative participation and
engagement opportunities and an active Children in Care Council, Beyond limits.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one short-break childrens residential home. It was
judged to be outstanding at its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in May
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
May 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since March 2014.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services and public health services.
 The chief executive has been in post since November 2014.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
December 2016.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 57,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Harrow. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 15% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 9% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 12% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 69% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Indian and other Asian.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 66% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 60% (the national average is 16%).

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


than White British. The top five most recorded community languages spoken in
the borough are English, Gujarati, Tamil, Romanian and Arabic.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 December 2016, 1,753 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 December 2016, 228 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 40 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 195
(34 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 31 March 2016, six children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a small increase from a low number at 31 March 2015.
 In the two years before inspection, three serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted and two serious case reviews have been completed.


No serious case reviews are currently ongoing.

Children looked after in this area
 At 31 December 2016, 200 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 35 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 180 (32 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
authority area
 a very small number live in residential special schools3 which are out of
the authority area
 a very small number live with their parents in the authority area
 In the past 12 months:
 there have been nine adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


living in houses in multiple occupation. In all cases, providers who
specialise in accommodation for young people supply this
accommodation, and appropriate on-site or floating support is provided.


Recommendations

Ensure that all children and families who need an early-help assessment and a
package of support coordinated by a lead professional are able to receive
these.


Ensure that decision making within the multi-agency safeguarding hub is
consistently timely, so that all children who are the subject of a referral
receive assessment and support in a timely manner.


Ensure that assessments and plans are consistently up to date, reflective of
childrens views and clear about what is expected of families.


Ensure that strategy discussions involve the full range of relevant agencies, so
that the full range of relevant information informs the assessment of risk.


Ensure that children looked after receive timely therapeutic support when they
need it.


Improve the quality of plans when children return to their families from care,
so that there is clarity about what services will be provided, who will provide
them, by when and what they are aimed at achieving.


Ensure that professionals consistently implement actions required between
review meetings for children looked after.


Ensure that the good support experienced by the vast majority of care leavers
is extended to all care leavers, so that their needs are better met.


Strengthen the quality of learning from audits through better involvement and
use of feedback from children and their families.


Improve the functioning of the overview and scrutiny panel to ensure that it is
more sharply focused on children and that its work has an impact on
improving both services for children and the outcomes that they achieve.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children and young people in Harrow are good. Most children and
young people have the support that they need when they need it.
 Social workers work hard to make sure that children and young people are safe.
They visit children regularly and come to know them well. This helps them to
know what type of support will be most helpful. There are plenty of different
services that give good support to children and their families to help them to
overcome their difficulties.
 There are some parts of the service that could do better. Managers and council
leaders recognise this and are determined to improve services for children and
families. Overall, they are doing a good job.
 When children are at immediate risk, social workers and other adults, such as
police officers and teachers, work together well. They act quickly to protect
children.
 Good support is provided to help to keep children and young people safe when
they have been at risk of sexual exploitation or going missing, or have become
involved with gangs.
 Sometimes, when children need help but are not at immediate risk, they do not
have the assessments or help that they need quite as quickly as they could. The
council knows this and is working hard to do better.
 Plans about how to make things better for children are not always as clear as
they could be. It is important that everybody understands what has to change
and what they are expected to do.
 Social workers work hard to find the right place for children to live if they cannot
live with their own families. They want children looked after to be happy, to do
well at school and to make successful moves into adulthood. They try hard to do
this and to make sure that childrens experiences of being looked after are
positive.
 Foster carers and adopters are very positive about the support that they receive
to help to make sure that children and young people are settled in their homes.
Social workers pay good attention to things that may help children to settle in,
like the religion of foster carers, the languages they speak and how near they live
to childrens schools.
 Young people leaving care receive a good service. Staff keep in touch with them
and provide support to help them to keep healthy and be happy with where they
live, and in education, training or a job. There is good support for those young
people who choose to go to college or university, and they have practical and
financial support to help them to succeed.
 There is a good range of different types of places to live that are available for
young people who are ready to leave care. They have good help in learning how
to live independently and manage their own lives.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement

Summary
When children in Harrow are at risk of significant harm, the local authority acts
quickly and effectively to address their needs and reduce risk. The multi-agency
safeguarding hub provides an effective single point of contact that transfers child
protection concerns promptly to the first response team (FRT) for assessment and
intervention. Thresholds are well understood and are consistently applied. The vast
majority of strategy discussions are timely, but rarely involve agencies other than
the police and childrens social care. This limited involvement from other key
agencies, such as health, means that decisions are not always informed by the full
range of relevant information available.
Children with lower levels of need do not routinely receive such a prompt
response. Most decisions to transfer childrens cases to the FRT for a child in need
assessment or to early-help services take longer than 24 hours. This means that
some children do not have their needs assessed or receive services as quickly as
they could. Performance management systems in the multi-agency safeguarding
hub do not provide enough information to accurately track the progress of
childrens cases to ensure the timeliness of assessments and service provision.
There are a number of well-established and effective targeted early-help services
to support children in Harrow. However, the number of children with additional
needs who could benefit from an assessment and a coordinated early-help
response from the local authority and partner agencies, and who are receiving
one, are low. At the time of the inspection, a substantial redesign and
reorganisation of these services were in the process of implementation, but were
at too early a stage to have had an impact.
Social workers see children regularly and know them well. Good direct work with
children is used to gain an understanding of their wishes and feelings. This is a
real strength of the service. This good knowledge of childrens wishes and feelings
is not always fully reflected in written assessments. Although assessments identify
risk factors and strengths, some lack sufficient depth and analysis, for example in
the consideration of culture and ethnicity. Some assessments do not accurately
identify all concerns or take enough account of historic factors. Plans, following
assessment, are of variable quality. Poorer examples are not always sufficiently
specific or clear about the outcomes that they aim to achieve, or about what is
expected of families. This makes it more difficult to use plans to drive and measure
progress.
Work to protect children and young people from the risks associated with going
missing, sexual exploitation and related concerns, such as gang affiliation, is good


and improving. Most children and young people receive a service that is well
coordinated between agencies and reduces risk.
Inspection findings

The local authority acts quickly and effectively to protect children when they
are at risk of significant harm. The multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH)
provides an effective single point of contact that transfers child protection
concerns promptly to the first response team (FRT). This team holds strategy
discussions and undertakes child protection enquiries when this is appropriate.
Thresholds of need are well understood and consistently applied. However,
children with lower levels of need do not always receive such a prompt
response. Decisions to transfer childrens cases to the FRT for a child in need
assessment or to early-help service are appropriate, but most take longer than
assessed or receive services as quickly as they could. Delays in progressing
referrals promptly are a long-standing concern identified by the Local
Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) case audits. Progress in improving this
deficit is hampered by the existing performance systems in the MASH, as
these do not give managers full or timely information to track the progress of
childrens cases accurately. (Recommendation)


Out of office hours, the emergency duty team provides an effective social
work service. Timely and well-considered responses by this team ensure that
children are kept safe. Effective on-call and management arrangements
ensure that additional staffing can quickly be put in place to manage times of
increased demand. Good communication with daytime teams ensures that
children are quickly linked to services that match their needs.


Social workers visit children regularly and know them well. This means that
children and their parents can build relationships of trust with social workers.
This enables social workers to have a more accurate understanding of
childrens needs and to focus help appropriately, leading to improved
outcomes for most children. Social workers have a strong focus on children,
whose wishes and feelings are captured well through good direct work,
observation and engagement in the majority of work with families. Children
are sometimes taken out of lessons to facilitate direct work, despite feedback
from children that they do not like it and that it has a negative impact on their
relationships with friends and classmates. While there will be occasions on
which this practice is unfortunately unavoidable, as standard practice it is
unacceptable.


The number of children with additional needs who could benefit from an
assessment and coordinated early-help response from the local authority and
partner agencies and who are receiving this is low. It is of concern that no
partner agencies, such as health organisations or schools, are undertaking the
role of lead professional following those common assessment framework
assessments that have been completed. Although early intervention workers


are quickly allocated to families and do undertake some good work, most
assessments seen by inspectors were poor. Consequently, much early-help
work lacks focus or a clear benchmark against which to measure progress.
This means that help to some children and their families is not as effective as
it could be. (Recommendation)

The local authority has carried out a detailed review of early-help services and
is aware of these areas for development. At the time of the inspection, a
substantial redesign and reorganisation of these services was in the process of
implementation. The steps that the local authority has taken to restructure
and relocate its early-help services into community hubs, such as youth
centres and childrens centres, are well considered, but at too early a stage to
have had a measurable impact.


Although early-help services to children with multiple or more complex
additional needs are not consistently well coordinated, the local authority does
provide a number of well-established and successfully targeted early-help
services. These include a domestic abuse group work programme for victims
and their children, direct work with young people who are involved with
gangs, and a volunteering scheme which increases young peoples skills and
confidence and enables them to mentor other young people. These services
complement a strong childrens centres offer and are leading to improved
outcomes for children.


The threshold between children who could benefit from early-help services
and those who need a statutory social work response is well understood and
applied. This is also the case for the threshold between children who are in
need and those at risk of significant harm who require a child protection
response. However, the rationale for decision making is not always recorded
clearly enough, particularly when strategy discussions lead to a decision not to
proceed with child protection enquiries. Child protection strategy discussions
are timely, but rarely involve agencies other than the police and the local
authority. This limited involvement from other key agencies, such as health,
means that decisions are not always informed by the full range of relevant
information available. (Recommendation)


The quality of assessments is not consistently good. Although assessments
routinely identify risk factors and strengths, many lack sufficient breadth of
consideration and depth of analysis, for example in their consideration of the
important role that culture and religion can play in childrens sense of identity
and belonging. Some do not accurately identify all concerns or take full
account of historic factors. Chronologies are not consistently used to
understand childrens stories and the impact of patterns of risk. Although
there is a new chronology template to support improved practice in this area,
it is too new to have had an impact on all childrens cases. (Recommendation)


While social workers have a strong focus on listening to children and
understanding their wishes and feelings through strong direct work,


observation and engagement, messages from children do not always inform
assessments and plans directly enough. When assessments are commissioned
for children recently referred to the local authority, a sharp focus on timeliness
is ensuring that almost all assessments are completed to a timescale that
matches the seriousness and urgency of their needs. However, assessments
for children in need and those on child protection plans are not always
updated and so, in some cases, do not reflect childrens current
circumstances. This, in turn, means that plans do not always reflect their
current needs. Plans are not always clear and specific enough. The outcomes
that they are aimed at achieving are not always defined clearly enough, nor is
it always clear what is expected of families. Most plans do not include
contingency arrangements. (Recommendation)

Child in need meetings and child protection core groups are almost always
held regularly, but discussions in these meetings do not always focus on
agreed actions. As a consequence, plans are not used as well as they could be
to either drive or measure progress. Good agency attendance at these
meetings and social workers sound knowledge of the families that they are
working with help to limit the impact of these areas of weakness and ensure
that, for most children, the involvement of the local authority in their lives is
leading to improved outcomes.


Child protection conferences are well chaired. Although they are child centred
and sensitive to families, they keep an appropriate focus on risk. Children
have access to support from an advocate to attend these meetings, and
inspectors saw evidence of this service being used to good effect. While the
local authority has a systemic approach to monitoring childrens attendance
and engagement in conferences, it recognises that there are some children
who are not benefiting from being as involved in their conferences as they
could be. Child protection chairs add value, because of their ability to offer
independent advice and improve practice. Multi-agency engagement in child
protection conferences is a strength. When there has been poor attendance
by any particular agency, this has been identified and escalated by chairs,
leading to improved attendance.


Children in need and subject to child protection plans receive effective help
from a range of targeted support services. Multi-agency engagement is strong
and services work well together, particularly when responding to the impact
on children of domestic abuse, drug and alcohol misuse and parental mental il
health. Pre-birth assessments of babies who may go on to be in need or at
risk after they are born are good. This was an area for priority action identified
at the time of Ofsteds last inspection, and continued to be an issue of concern
identified by the Baby F serious case review published in 2015. A
sharpenedfocus on this work and the introduction of a pre-birth assessment
toolkit have supported improved inter-agency communication, particularly with
midwifery, and timelier and clearer assessments for these babies. A well-used
neglect toolkit has had a similar positive impact on improving the
identification of risk when it stems from a chronic pattern of concern.



When children are at risk through living in homes where there is domestic
abuse, drug or alcohol misuse or parental mental ill health, meetings designed
to coordinate support services work well. The multi-agency public protection
arrangements and multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARAC) share
information and coordinate services effectively. Good information sharing and
engagement in the MARAC process by social workers is successfully reducing
the risks to which children are exposed. Discussion between agencies at
MARAC achieves tangible improvements to the lives of children who are
exposed to domestic abuse.


Work to identify and to protect children and young people from the risk of
sexual exploitation is good and improving. Most children and young people
receive a service that is well coordinated between agencies, identifies the
harm that they have suffered or are at risk of suffering and reduces risk. The
multi-agency sexual exploitation panel is effective. A risk assessment tool is
routinely well used to assess risks when they first come to light, but is not yet
consistently used to reassess risk. This means that social workers are not
always absolutely clear about how successful the actions taken have been in
reducing risk. A specialist team, including a child sexual exploitation
coordinator, a missing persons worker and a gangs worker, is important in
ensuring a joined-up approach to these closely related areas of risk, and has
been central to the improvements that have been achieved in the past six
months, particularly with regard to the timeliness of return home interviews.


A children at risk meeting, chaired by the divisional director of children and
young people services, is used effectively to track the circumstances and
progress of those children who are currently missing or who have been
missing in the previous week. Strategy meetings are held appropriately when
risks escalate. Although over two thirds of children and young people receive
a return home interview within 72 hours of being found, this means that
nearly a third are waiting too long to have the opportunity for an interview.
Copies of return home interviews are included in childrens and young peoples
electronic case files, but the information that they contain is not used
consistently enough to inform planning about how to keep them safe or to
reduce the likelihood of them going missing again.


Effective work is undertaken to identify and track children missing education.
An up-to-date list of children missing education is maintained by the children
missing education officer. The children missing education policy and
procedures provide clear guidance to professionals. Information sharing within
the local authority and partners is effective. Staff have a sound overview of
the welfare of children who are electively home educated. Good liaison with
families and information sharing with schools, families and other services has
contributed to a decrease in the number of families who are choosing home
education when it may not be in the individual best interests of their children.


Disabled children receive a good service in Harrow. Experienced social workers
consider the full range of childrens needs, whether these relate to disability or


their broader welfare concerns. Transitions to adult services are well
managed. When there are child protection concerns, these are addressed
promptly and effectively.

Social workers in Harrow know their communities well. They make good use
of interpreters when this is necessary, and have an understanding of the
complex dynamics when there are concerns about abuse or neglect in a
particular cultural context. This is apparent in a clear, effective and welljoined-up approach to the issue of female genital mutilation, in links with
community resources such as an Asian womens resource centre and in
positive work with families who have no recourse to public funds.


Work to tackle the risks to children and young people from radicalisation
through Harrows Prevent partnership is well established. Counterradicalisation work with children and young people is aligned with wider child
protection, child in need and early-help work, so that children benefit from a
broad consideration of their needs and a joined-up approach to meeting them.
Awareness-raising and engagement work has successfully increased the
understanding by professionals and the local community. An integrated
response to children at risk of radicalisation, gang affiliation, going missing
and child sexual exploitation has resulted in a stronger and more effective
approach. Harrows gangs worker operates at both a strategic and operational
level, and his work is valued by young people. The carefully designed gangs
direct work programme ensures that young people have the opportunity to
think about their gang affiliations, to share their worries and fears in a safe
environment, and to work towards making choices that will help to keep them
safer. Young people value the individualised approach provided by the Harrow
gangs worker.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
When children need to be looked after in Harrow, the response is swift and child
centred. Children only become looked after when this is necessary and in their best
interests. Social workers visit children looked after regularly, know them well and
build strong relationships with them. They have high aspirations for them. Children
receive a good service, and timely and effective decisions are made so that they
move to permanent homes as quickly as possible. Social workers demonstrate a
proactive approach and work hard to secure homes for children with brothers and
sisters, older children and disabled children. When legal proceedings are necessary
to secure childrens safety, assessments and support to children and their families
are timely and appropriate. When the plan is for children to return home, most do
so successfully. However, a few children experience delay and a lack of clarity in
the delivery of services to support their return home.
Good participation and engagement by children means that their views are used
well to inform planning and decisions made about their care plans. Reviews are
regular and are held within appropriate timescales. Improvements are needed in
some childrens reviews, including better organisation and preparation by social
workers and independent reviewing officers. Actions are not always progressed
quickly enough between review meetings, causing delays in care planning for a
few children. An effective and committed children looked after health service is
improving health outcomes for children, including significant progress in the
timeliness of initial and review health assessments. However, some children do not
receive appropriate therapeutic and emotional health support services quickly
enough. Children looked after benefit from an impressive range of creative and
innovative participation and engagement opportunities, and an active Children in
Care Council, Beyond limits.
Children needing a range of alternative permanent families benefit from early
parallel planning, careful matching with carers and adopters, and good support
plans. Adoption work is very strong. Childrens arrangements are secure, and
placement and adoption breakdowns are rare. Together or apart assessments are
mostly good, but some variation in the depth of analysis and the clarity with which
childrens voices are recorded means that they do not always add the value that
they could to the decision-making process.
A large majority of care leavers receive good support that helps them to achieve
well in their education and career aspirations, and in developing the skills that they
need to live independently. Many achieve well and make a successful transition to
adulthood. However, for a small minority, there are delays in providing support in
key areas, such as their emotional well-being, education, employment and training.


Inspection findings

When children need to be looked after in Harrow, the response is swift and
child-centred. When legal proceedings are necessary to secure childrens
safety, assessments and support to children and their families are timely and
appropriate. Permanence, including through return to birth families, is
considered at the earliest opportunity. Children are not looked after
unnecessarily.


The Public Law Outline (PLO) process is used well to ensure that there is no
drift or delay in planning for children, either within court proceedings or at the
pre-proceedings stage. Regular management oversight and tracking systems
help to prevent drift for children needing permanence. When delays are
identified, reasons for this are clearly recorded in childrens case files, and
actions are quickly agreed and implemented to address them. Pre-proceedings
letters are of high quality, so families understand exactly what is expected of
them. They are encouraged to seek legal advice and are helped to access
interpreting and translation support services, when needed. When children do
need to be the subject of care proceedings, the local authority ensures that
these are completed quickly to avoid delay and uncertainty for children.


The majority of children who return home do so successfully, with low
numbers of children experiencing a subsequent looked-after episode.
Appropriate decisions are made when children do need to become looked
after for a second time or when their circumstances change. For some
children returning home, there is a delay in the provision of the appropriate
support services needed to reduce continued disruption to childrens lives.
Plans in place to support children who have returned home need to be
implemented more quickly. Support for children on the edge of care is not
consistently well targeted, coordinated or monitored. The local authority is
aware of this deficit, but the plans to improve services through a reunification
local offer are at too early a stage to have had an impact on improving
practice. (Recommendation)


The Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service and social work
teams, including the emergency duty service and independent reviewing
officers (IROs), link together at an early stage to share information and
consider viable permanence options for children. Strong professional
relationships and the sharing of key information about risks to children
support effective communication between partners and early identification of
childrens needs. This continues for children whose journey to permanence is
through the PLO process. Low numbers of emergency and urgent care
applications are indicative of good planning for children and early anticipation
of their needs.


There is a strong commitment and expectation in Harrow that children live
with their extended family and with their brothers and sisters when it is safe


and appropriate for them to do so. This is demonstrated by the 15% who left
care due to special guardianship orders (SGOs) made during 201516,
ensuring that children achieve early permanence while continuing to live with
their families. There is a wide range of service provision and extensive support
available to families undergoing SGO assessments. This includes effective use
of family group conferences in identifying viable options for where children will
live. Direct work with children prepares them well for permanent moves to
special guardians, long-term foster carers or adopters.

Social workers develop strong, open relationships with children and their
families, and have a good understanding of childrens individual needs.
Cultural heritage is well considered. Social workers know children well and talk
about them positively, including those who find engagement difficult and
experience challenges in managing their behaviour. Visits to see children are
regular, and children are mostly seen alone. Inspectors saw evidence that
social workers help young children to understand difficult and complicated
decisions about their lives and demonstrate a real commitment to engaging
older young people who have ongoing high-risk behaviours. Children told
inspectors: my social worker is very helpful, she tells me whats going on
and my social worker helped me to stay with my gran.


Assessments to decide applicants suitability for fostering roles are almost
always comprehensive, with careful analysis of issues relating to their life
experiences, ethnicity, faith and values. For a small number of carers,
discussion at fostering panel could be more searching about how their
personal values may affect them in their fostering role. Supervising social
workers visit foster carers regularly and record detailed discussions. Areas for
development are explored alongside warm and positive feedback about the
difference that carers have made for children. During these visits, fostering
social workers explore missing from home incidents and check whether all
important meetings and assessments have happened, such as personal
education plans (PEPs) and health reviews. This supports childrens progress.
Foster carers annual reviews are timely, clear and help them to reflect on
their practice and develop their skills.


Foster carers told inspectors that, overall, they appreciate the quality of the
training and support that they receive, including the advice and involvement
of a play therapist. They say that they are well supported by the managers in
the fostering service. One foster carer said, They definitely make you feel
valued and another They recognise that we have a challenging job and stand
shoulder to shoulder with us, treating us like fellow professionals. Some
expressed frustration about too many changes in fostering and childrens
social workers, saying that this is unsettling for them and for the children in
their care. They reported that they cannot always get through to social
workers on the phone.


Children are generally well matched with foster carers, including in relation to
cultural and ethnic factors. This is true for both short- and long-term foster


care arrangements. When this is not possible, consideration is given to the
emotional impact and risks to children of moving to an alternative home.
Decisions are made in childrens best interests. Workers are proactive in their
approaches to foster carers and, as a result, children with care plans for longterm fostering secure permanence quickly, reducing disruption and enabling
them to maintain close relationships with carers.

An appropriate range of recruitment activity for foster carers takes place,
including high-quality features in local publications with diverse and inclusive
images. Despite this, the local authority has not met its own targets for the
recruitment of foster carers. Eleven new carers have been approved since
April 2016, but this is still seven short of the ambitious target set by the local
authority. The local authority commissions placements from a range of
independent providers to ensure that, despite this shortfall, it has a sufficient
range of placements for children and young people. Short-term placement
stability is in line with similar authorities, while long-term stability, although
improving, continues to fluctuate and remains a challenge for the local
authority. A small number of children continue to experience a high number of
moves. For these children, the local authority has taken appropriate steps to
find alternative homes that can best meet their highly complex needs. This
particular sufficiency challenge is being addressed through a range of
provision, both in-house and commissioned through an independent
framework agreement across the West London Alliance. A recent rise in the
number of children living in foster homes is positive, but has not led to any
reduction in the local authoritys use of residential childrens homes for
teenagers with complex needs.


Strategy meetings held to plan responses to children and young people who
go missing from care, and those who are at risk of sexual exploitation, are
timely and are supported by good information sharing from partner agencies.
This is helping to keep children and young people safe. The great majority of
children receive timely return home interviews. While intelligence gathered is
used to inform some childrens risk assessments and decisions about where it
is safe for them to live, the cumulative impact of repeat incidents is not always
well understood or analysed to help to keep children safe. Workers and carers
do make consistent attempts to engage with young people so that support
plans can be progressed.


All children looked after attend registered provision, with a small number in
alternative provision or missing education. While the majority of children and
young people attend school regularly, a high proportion of children looked
after have been persistently absent from school. Although this number has
reduced recently, action to return children to education swiftly is not always
effective, and a small minority of children continue to remain out of education
for too long.


Managers have accurately identified the key improvements needed to better
support the attainment and progress of children looked after. As a result, the


virtual school is taking steps to improve outcomes for children, and these are
beginning to make a difference to them. The virtual school monitors the
attendance and progress of children regularly. This enhances the oversight of
those who experience disruption to their learning and those at risk of not
achieving, including those children who are placed out of the area. This results
in targeted actions that better support those children who are at risk of not
succeeding. Often the virtual school team acts as an effective advocate for
children and young people, and is persistent in offering support to them when
they experience problems at school or at home.

The virtual school team has made good progress in improving the proportion
of children with up-to-date PEPs, and staff have a good understanding of
when further improvements are needed. Staff are working hard with schools
and social workers to improve the quality of PEPs. However, too many PEPs
are not fully completed. When this is the case, important information is
missing, such as childrens views and details of how the pupil premium grant
is being used to address the specific needs of individual children.


Children looked after achieve at around the national rate for children looked
after at key stages 1 and 2. Historically, attainment at key stage 4 has been
comparatively poor, but, as a result of better targeting of practical support to
pupils in key stage 4 last year, the attainment of these pupils improved to the
national rate for children looked after. Data shows that this year, as a result of
improved support, a greater proportion of pupils are on track to achieve well
at key stage 4. However, the gap between the attainment of children looked
after and their peers remains wide. The good support provided to young
people by schools, the virtual school and partners ensures that a high
proportion of young people, many of whom have few qualifications, remain in
education, employment and training when they complete Year 11 through to
Year 13.


Childrens health needs receive significant oversight and monitoring from the
children looked after health service and, as a result, their health outcomes
continue to improve. Strong relationships between the service, social work
teams and partners, complemented by effective tracking systems, help with
effective communication and information sharing. As a consequence,
childrens health needs are identified quickly, and timescales for initial and
review health assessments are improving rapidly. Childrens involvement in
and feedback of their experience are pivotal to this recent success and have
helped to inform improvements to the service. A sharp focus on improving the
completion rate of strengths and difficulties questionnaires by children looked
after has seen the rate rise from only 41% during 201516 to 75% at the end
of December 2016. This is positive, although further work is required to meet
the 81% average figure for similar local authorities.


The health needs of children placed out of the local authority area are actively
monitored. The children looked after health nurse challenges any delays
effectively to ensure that children receive a timely service. A small number of


children were seen by inspectors to experience delays in receiving timely
therapeutic support. Children needing specialist support from the child and
adolescent mental health services often have to wait for help. This is also
reported by childrens foster carers. (Recommendation)

Children benefit from an impressive range of creative and innovative
participation and engagement opportunities. All children receive information
about advocacy, the independent visitors scheme and their entitlements from
the childrens pledge. Workers show a continuous commitment to attending
engagement activities that help to gain childrens views and wishes. Workers
have high aspirations for children and support them to try new experiences to
develop their social, emotional and educational skills. Engagement activity
includes unaccompanied asylum-seeking children and those who may not
want to be actively involved in Harrows very active Children in Care Council,
Beyond limits. A number of annual activities are arranged specifically to
encourage the participation of children living outside of the local authority.
The local authority does well in engaging local businesses and sports clubs to
provide both work and wider social opportunities for children looked after. For
example, the local authority involved Queens Park Rangers football club in a
recent football development activity for children looked after.


Children benefit from regular, timely reviews, and have an opportunity to
meet with their IRO prior to meetings. If children do not attend, their views
and wishes are represented in a variety of formats and are used to inform
appropriate decisions. When instability or significant changes occur in
childrens lives, reviews are brought forward to make appropriate changes to
their care plans. The IRO service is generally effective in identifying and
challenging delays to ensure that children receive the right help. However,
foster carers did share some frustrations with inspectors about a lack of
consistency. These include some actions not being followed up between
reviews, leading to delays in support for children, and that IROs and childrens
social workers are, on occasion, insufficiently prepared for meetings
(Recommendation).


Sixteen- and 17-year-olds who are homeless or in danger of homelessness are
quickly and accurately assessed to decide whether they should become looked
after by the local authority or if it is more appropriate to provide support in
other ways. These young people are provided with support and
accommodation that meets their needs. Bed and breakfast accommodation is
not used, and careful attention is paid to their vulnerabilities.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

In Harrow, all children are considered for adoption when they are unable to
live within their birth family. Careful matching and good post-adoption support


have resulted in no children experiencing an adoption breakdown in recent
years.

A combination of a drop in the number of placement orders being granted and
decisions being moved away from adoption has led to a reduction in the
number of children leaving care to be adopted, in Harrow. This has fallen from
March 2017. There are currently four children in adoptive families. Harrow has
a lower rate of children looked after than similar areas, and fewer children in
care aged under 10 years. Decisions which have been changed away from
adoption are typically due to the availability of wider family members to care
permanently for children. The number of children leaving care for special
guardianship arrangements went up to 15% in 201516, with a similar rise
seen in recent in-year figures. Evidence shows that this resulted in good
outcomes for children, and disruptions to special guardianship arrangements
are rare in Harrow. Therefore, the current rates of adoption appear
appropriate in the context of the wider children looked after population.


Childrens journeys to adoption are very timely for almost all children, with
performance against national thresholds being well above the average in
England. Local in-year data shows a very slight slowing down of performance,
but it is still very timely for children. Managers know individual children well
and can account for delays in a small number of complex cases.


Childrens progress is closely monitored to avoid any unnecessary delay.
Regular permanence planning meetings and legal planning meetings are
attended by the adoption manager. A tracking manager is partly based with
front-door social work teams to ensure that all social workers think
permanence at the earliest opportunity. As a result, early parallel planning is
well embedded and is particularly effective in securing adoption for very
young children, allowing secure attachments to be made. Early family finding
ahead of a placement order being granted means that some children can, at
the appropriate point, move quickly to prospective adopters. However, this is
slowed down for a few children by avoidable external causes, such as delays
in police checks. In a very small number of cases, childrens adoption could
have been secured even sooner.


Childrens permanence records are of a good standard. Social workers prepare
life-story books for children. These give extensive information about their birth
family and journey to their new family. Later-life letters are well written, giving
young people a sensitive but straightforward account of their life story.
However, social workers currently make limited use of learning from research.
The profile of children being adopted, although small in number, has become
more ethnically diverse than in previous years and there have been recent
adoptions of children with disabilities and groups of brothers and sisters.
Together or apart assessments are mostly of a high standard. Variations in
the depth of analysis and the clarity with which childrens voices are recorded


mean that a minority do not add the full value that they could to the decisionmaking process.

Decisions made by the agency decision maker (ADM) are timely and detail a
clear rationale for plans for adoption. The combined fostering and adoption
panel is constituted of highly experienced and committed individuals who
reflect the range and diversity of Harrows community. Regular feedback to
social workers has contributed to improvement in the quality of reports
coming to panel. Feedback from adopters who have attended the panel is
positive. Adopters value the face-to-face meeting with the panels medical
adviser, because it helps them to understand the current and future health
needs of their child. However, links between the ADM and the panel chair
have been limited, to date, and managers have already recognised this as an
area for improvement.


Harrows partnership arrangement with a voluntary adoption agency (VAA)
gives access to a broad range of approved adopters across the country, as
well as the national adoption register and local consortia. A diverse range of
adopters have been matched to children, including single parents and samesex couples. Children are carefully matched and many benefit from being
adopted by families that reflect their own culture and ethnicity. Prospective
adopter records completed by the VAA are very detailed, and reflect a
thorough assessment process and clear analysis of the parenting capacity of
the applicants.


Adopters are positive about their experiences of the assessment process, and
preparation days have helped them to relate to their childs experience and
the experience of the birth family. They receive detailed information about
their child and value the support from social workers. As one said, Nothing is
too much trouble.


There has been just one foster for adoption placement, to date, in Harrow.
However, foster for adoption and concurrent care are discussed with all
prospective adopters during assessment and are promoted during preparation.
A number of concurrent placements have meant that very young children
have a minimal number of placement moves and attach at an early stage to
their prospective adopters. Children are well prepared for moving in with their
adoptive families. Foster carers are highly skilled in preparing children for
adoption, and have completed specialist training.


Adoption support plans are sensitive and detailed. Contact arrangements are
carefully considered for children moving to adoption, and a letterbox contact
coordinator works within the adoption team. When it has been important for
children to maintain some direct contact with key people, careful matching has
secured adopters who understand and will support this contact.


Post-adoption support for families is a strength in Harrow. An experienced
adoption team, including a play therapist, provides easy-to-access help when


it is needed. There are strong links with the virtual school, and this results in
targeted support for children at risk of exclusion. Therapeutic support is
frequently funded through the adoption support fund, with 13 children
receiving grants since April 2016, and all applications to date have been
successful. In addition, a commissioned service provides bespoke therapeutic
work with birth families, adopters and their children. Many Harrow adopters
use a variety of support groups provided by the partner VAA, such as groups
for same-sex adopters. This means that families benefit from open-ended
support through the VAA. As one adopter put it, knowing you can come back
in one, two or 20 years is key to choosing to adopt with Harrow.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good


Care leavers in Harrow receive good support which helps many to achieve
good outcomes. These include making good progress in further and higher
education, and living in safe and secure accommodation. They develop their
skills to live independently well. However, the good support that the majority
of those leaving care receive is not experienced by all. For a small minority,
there are delays in receiving the support and help that they need in key areas
of their lives, such as support for their education, training and employment,
their mental health and in accessing sexual health services.
(Recommendation)


Social workers and social work assistants form positive and productive
relationships with care leavers. They encourage them to aim high and achieve
their goals. This leads to the good outcomes that the majority achieve. Staff
and managers know care leavers well. They understand their needs and
circumstances, and see them regularly. This includes those who are at risk of
sexual exploitation, are parents themselves or are in custody. In the majority
of cases, when care leavers needs become more acute or their circumstances
change, staff increase their contact and take effective action to mitigate the
risks that they face, such as the breakdown of their tenancy.


When care leavers lose touch with the leaving care team, staff almost always
take all reasonable steps to engage with them, including via text, phone,
through family and known friends, and by unannounced visits. Care leavers
told inspectors that they trust staff, whom they can readily turn to when they
need help. One comment, hes like family, was typical of the high regard in
which staff from the leaving care team are held.


Staff plan well to meet care leavers needs, with many good examples of them
receiving effective practical help that supports both their immediate and
longer-term needs. Nearly all care leavers have an up-to-date pathway plan.


Typically, plans are clear, focus well on the needs of care leavers and capture
their views effectively.

Managers and staff have high aspirations for all care leavers, including those
who arrive in the United Kingdom as unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
This is reflected in the very good support that they receive with regard to their
accommodation, health, education and career aspirations. Many young people
who have sought asylum have high aspirations for themselves, such as to
become architects, lawyers, chefs or entrepreneurs. With very well-tailored
individual support, many are making excellent progress towards these goals.
The help that they receive enables them to settle well and engage with the
wider community.


Managers ensure that there is an appropriate range of accommodation
available to care leavers. There are a small number of care leavers who
remain with their foster carers when they reach 18 years of age or live in
supported lodgings. Most live in semi-independent accommodation. Staff and
managers never use bed and breakfast accommodation as an option for care
leavers, even in an emergency.


Care leavers receive good support from the leaving care team and housing
providers to develop the skills that they need to live independently. All those
who move into independent accommodation take a two-day course in
preparation. Managers and staff make accurate assessments of care leavers
readiness to live independently and provide support accordingly. Such support
ranges from such everyday matters, such as advice on managing a budget, up
to help in saving for and securing a mortgage. As a result, over the past year
all but one care leaver have successfully maintained their tenancy.


Care leavers receive good guidance from their social worker, social work
assistant and the specialist careers adviser to help them to achieve well in
their education. There are a good number of care leavers at university, many
of whom are making excellent progress. While at university, care leavers
receive additional funding that helps them successfully to complete their
studies, for example through payment for accommodation during holiday
periods.


The number of care leavers who are in education, training or employment is
good. Published data for 19- to 21-year-olds shows that a higher proportion of
care leavers are in education, training and employment than in similar local
authorities and in England overall. More recent local data shows that
approximately three quarters of all those supported by the leaving care team
have an education, training or employment place, including a small number
who are undertaking apprenticeships.


Staff provide good, practical assistance to maintain good health. Most care
leavers register with their local doctor and dentist, and attend medical
appointments that meet their specific health needs. Staff accompany


sometimes quite nervous care leavers to their appointments. Care leavers told
inspectors how much they value the practical assistance that they receive.
Additional health screening for tuberculosis for asylum-seeking young people
meets their health needs well. Managers have recently introduced a health
passport that brings together care leavers health histories so that they are
better placed to manage their own health as they gain greater independence.


Staff promote care leavers entitlements effectively through, for example, a
regular and very well-attended forum for care leavers and a widely circulated
charter that outlines the local authoritys commitment to them. As a result,
care leavers know whom to turn to should they wish to complain about any
aspect of the support that they are receiving. The leaving care team responds
effectively when care leavers raise concerns about the help that they are
receiving.

Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
A strong and energetic senior management team with a sense of direction, robust
governance arrangements and clear lines of accountability is having a positive
impact on the way in which services are designed, developed and delivered. This is
helping children to achieve good outcomes.
The local authority knows itself well. Senior leaders have a clear understanding of
strengths and areas for development, and are making intelligent use of qualitative
and quantitative data to address shortfalls and raise standards. Learning from
audits is acted on and the quality of practice is improving. With greater use of
feedback from children and families, the impact of audits would be further
strengthened.
A strong focus on and investment in social worker recruitment are having a
positive impact on reducing both a reliance on agency staff and staff turnover. A
low level of exit interviews limits the gathering of information in order to develop
the recruitment and retention strategy further, and is an area of development in an
otherwise thorough approach. Workforce development is a significant priority in
Harrow, and social workers professional development is supported by a wellplanned and resourced offer of training. Investment in staffing has ensured that
social workers have manageable caseloads, and this means that they are able to
visit children regularly to come to know them and their families well and build
relationships of trust. This supports the achievement of improved outcomes for
children.
The local authority, through its corporate parenting panel, demonstrates a clear
commitment to improving the life chances of children looked after. The sufficiency
strategy is clear and coherent, with relevant priorities linked to present and future
need. Appropriate commissioning arrangements are in place to ensure that there is
a range of placements to meet the needs of children looked after.
Services for children who go missing and those at risk of sexual exploitation are
good and improving. Most receive effective and well-coordinated help and
protection. There is an effective structure of both strategic and operational
meetings to develop services and track performance, and to monitor and intervene
in the cases of individual children. The timeliness of return home interviews has
improved significantly, but remains a priority, given that almost a third take over


The local authoritys overview and scrutiny panel is not consistently effective.
There is no stand-alone childrens scrutiny committee and, while some important
issues affecting childrens outcomes have been discussed at the scrutiny
committee, there is still insufficient focus or challenge on matters affecting
children.
Inspection findings

The director of childrens services and the divisional director for children and
young peoples services provide highly visible and strong leadership, with a
clear focus on improving the quality of services for local children. Effective
communication between senior officers and elected members, combined with
clear governance arrangements, ensures that there is a sharp focus on
improving outcomes for children. Regular face-to-face meetings between the
chief executive, the director of childrens services, the lead member and the
chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) facilitate a shared
understanding of the key challenges for childrens social care. Senior leaders
understand the scale of the challenges that they and their staff face, and are
realistic about strengths and areas for development, such as the need to
implement planned improvements to early-help services and to further
improve the timeliness and quality of the multi-agency safeguarding hub
(MASH).


The role of director of childrens services also has a strategic statutory
responsibility for adult social care services, childrens social care and public
health. Although this is a wide span of control, a clear line of sight to frontline
practice is maintained. An appropriate statement of assurance has been
undertaken to ensure that there is sufficient capacity to fulfil these roles.


There is a strong commitment to performance management at all levels of the
organisation. Meetings involving elected members, including the leader, senior
managers and the LSCB chair, ensure that a determined focus is kept on
performance. The business analysis function collects a wide range of relevant
up-to-date performance data, helping to create a culture in which
performance is seen as everybodys business. This data enables all managers
to drill down to individual, team and service performance, and provides a
direct line of sight to what is happening at the frontline. Performance
monitoring reports are routinely scrutinised, and information is used well to
understand causes and identify possible solutions to any areas of poor
performance. This grip on performance has enabled a focus on achieving and
sustaining improvements in the timeliness of initial health assessments for
children looked after and for single assessments, and continues to drive the
development of the MASH.


The local authority makes good use of external reviews from relevant
specialist bodies, such as the Local Government Association. This is reflective
of a culture of openness to learning and improvement at all levels throughout


the organisation. A number of such reviews have been commissioned to help
to evaluate the effectiveness of current provision. External audits of child
sexual exploitation provision have helped to identify gaps, with the
recommendations clearly acted upon. An external audit in December 2016
looked at placement provision for children looked after, and has made a
number of recommendations to help Harrow to focus further on the
sufficiency of placements.

Audits are used well to quality assure social work practice and gain an insight
into how effectively services are improving the outcomes that children
achieve. A clear audit programme, including senior leaders undertaking audits,
is in place. Lessons learned from audits are used well to identify and address
areas for improvement, including routine individual and team feedback. As
part of this programme, observations of social work practice are undertaken to
enhance the understanding of the service that children and families receive.
The local authority recognises that more needs to be done to involve children
and families, including seeking their views as part of the audit programme.
However, this remains underdeveloped. (Recommendation)


Significant improvements have been made in the provision of services to
children missing from home and care, and those at risk of sexual and gang
exploitation. Most receive well-coordinated help and protection. Improvements
in intelligence sharing, mapping of trends and disruption activity, along with
more effective use of the multi-agency sexual exploitation meetings, have
helped to keep Harrow children better protected. In particular, effective multiagency mapping, coupled with proactive use of legislation, has been decisive
in keeping some children safe. There is an effective structure of both strategic
and operational meetings in place to develop services and track performance,
and to monitor and intervene in the cases of individual children. The
development of a specialist co-located team, including a child sexual
exploitation coordinator, missing persons worker and gang worker, has
ensured a more focused and joined-up service for children.


While inspectors saw an improving picture, there is still further work to be
done in ensuring the consistent use of the child sexual exploitation risk
assessment tool. This is about ensuring that it is always used to assess risk,
and is more particularly about ensuring that it is also used to assess how risk
has reduced or increased over time and in response to the help provided.
While the timeliness of return home interviews has improved significantly as a
result of effective performance and contact management, almost a third of
children and young people are still having to wait more than 72 hours to be
seen.


A joined-up approach to recruitment, retention and development is having a
positive impact in terms of making Harrow a more attractive place to work.
Senior leaders have understood the importance of having a sufficient, skilled
and stable workforce in order to drive improvement. They have invested both
financially and in management time and focus to achieve this. Substantial


efforts are being made to recruit staff, such as the recruitment of qualified
and appropriately experienced overseas workers and investing in the Step up
and Frontline programmes. These are showing signs of fruition, with both the
dependency on agency staff and the level of staff turnover reducing. A low
level of exit interviews hampers the gathering of important information to
further develop the social worker recruitment and retention strategy. The local
authoritys commitment to childrens social work in Harrow is seen in the
funding of extra social work provision in response to increasing demand in
order to keep social work caseloads at a manageable level. This enables social
workers to visit children regularly. (Recommendation)

The vast majority of social workers spoken to by inspectors were very positive
about working for Harrow, and particularly mentioned visible and supportive
leadership and management. The pod system of small groups of social
workers, each supported by a skilled pod manager, is a strength which social
workers almost universally report as supportive and which assists them in
delivering a service to vulnerable children and families. Use of a systemic
approach to practice is well embedded and adds value, enabling reflection and
a holistic approach to the work with families. Most social workers are
tenacious in their efforts to engage with children and families, and they speak
with genuine warmth and knowledge about the children whom they are
helping.


Managers pay careful attention to non-casework supervision areas, particularly
training and development and workload management. In a small minority of
cases, although both supervision and management oversight are regular,
social workers do not receive clear enough direction to support fully effective
practice with children. The vast majority of social workers have an up-to-date
annual appraisal which clearly identifies their achievements and areas for
development in the future. Social workers have access to a wide range of
training and development opportunities, and are actively encouraged to
participate.


The local authoritys overview and scrutiny panel is not consistently effective.
There is no stand-alone childrens scrutiny committee and, while some
important issues affecting childrens outcomes have been discussed at the
scrutiny committee, there is still insufficient focus and challenge on matters
affecting children. For example, there has been little consideration of the
effectiveness of services for children at risk of sexual exploitation. Recognition
of the limitations of scrutiny prompted Harrow, in late 2016, to commission an
external review focusing on how scrutiny can be better exercised. This review
is ongoing, so is too recent to have had an impact. (Recommendation)


Elected members of the corporate parenting panel demonstrate a clear
commitment to improving the life chances of children looked after. They have
oversight of detailed performance information and analysis, with a range of
professionals presenting reports. This helps them to clarify, challenge and
question activity. Mandatory training enhances their understanding. The


corporate parenting strategy is detailed, and it sets clear priorities and the
areas for improvement. There is an appropriate focus on monitoring action
completion, but the lack of sufficient outcome information limits the ability to
fully understand if completed actions have improved outcomes for children.

The Health and Wellbeing Board, chaired by the leader of the council, takes a
whole life journey approach to identifying priorities, and this includes a
number relevant to the lives of children and young people. This high-level
vision is translated into a clear and well-focused commissioning plan by the
multi-agency childrens commissioning group. Through this group, the local
authority, including public health, works closely and effectively with the clinical
commissioning group and schools to ensure that there is an appropriate range
of commissioned services to meet childrens needs. Children and young people
are being successfully involved in the design of service specifications and the
commissioning process. Active contract management ensures an ongoing
focus on the quality of services and, through this, the outcomes achieved by
children. Children and young people are well involved in this process, leading
to more sharply targeted services, including the development of sexual health
services and the recent Future in mind recommissioning of emotional wellbeing services for children and young people. Effective use of data and
contract management is leading to the recommissioning of services, which are
producing better outcomes. The cancellation of a previous contract to provide
return home interviews led to the creation of a new in-house service, with
subsequent improvements in timeliness of completion.


The sufficiency strategy 201517 is clear and coherent, with relevant priorities
linked to present and future need. Appropriate commissioning arrangements
are in place to ensure that there is a range of placements to meet the needs
of children looked after. Steps are being taken to address gaps, such as the
use of positive contracts through the West London Alliance, including
innovative recommissioning of the framework for the provision of independent
foster placements. The local authority has seen an increasing number of
young people placed in private sector residential accommodation in the past
year. The quality of such provision is overseen by the access to resources
panel, which is chaired by the divisional director, and the use of such
accommodation is continually reviewed to ensure that it is meeting need. For
some young people, the decision to place outside of Harrow in such
accommodation has been on the basis of well-evidenced assessments to
address particular issues of risk.


The local authority responds to complaints in a well-organised and open way,
with an increasing number being resolved at an early stage. When it identifies
wider practice concerns, it takes steps to address and improve practice.
Overall, numbers of complaints are reducing, and those that are made are
being resolved increasingly quickly. However, the local authoritys own audits
from April to September 2016 show that in over half of childrens case files
audited there was no evidence of parents, carers or children being given
information relating to access to records, complaints or advocacy. This means


that the local authority cannot be certain that it is actively seeking feedback
from children and their families or making sure that they are aware of their
entitlements.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
The Local Safeguarding Children Board in Harrow fulfils all of its statutory
functions, as defined in Working together to safeguard children 2015, and has
made considerable progress in work to safeguard vulnerable children. Following
the appointment of an experienced and knowledgeable chair, it remains well
positioned to enhance the effectiveness and coordination of local safeguarding
arrangements further. Key partner agencies are represented, and the board
benefits from two highly effective lay members who offer exceptional levels of
knowledgeable support and challenge.
The board demonstrates open and candid challenge between board members, and
this has been effective in some areas, such as improving safeguarding practice
within the multi-agency safeguarding hub. However, the board is insufficiently
informed about the quality of all frontline services and practice. As a result of
limited performance information supplied by some partner agencies, the boards
data set does not fully reflect the range of services responsible for safeguarding
children in Harrow, and analysis is limited. This inhibits the boards ability to
monitor and understand the overall effectiveness of services and to challenge
agencies when they fall short.
The board has coordinated effective multi-agency arrangements for responding to
young people at risk of child sexual exploitation at both operational and strategic
levels. Some of this area of work is still in development, but overall the
arrangements to tackle child sexual exploitation are robust. Some children and
young people have benefited from schools providing awareness-raising sessions
regarding female genital mutilation, including one primary school.
The boards annual report provides helpful information on a wide range of issues.
For example, there is a commentary on the Home Office review in Harrow of gangs
and youth violence. This noted the effective operational partnership work, but
identified the need for an overarching strategy, now led by the Safer Harrow
Partnership.
The influence and participation of children and young people in aiding
understanding and informing board priorities and providing ongoing feedback are
in their infancy. The board is not yet systematically evaluating the effectiveness of
the newly formed early-help services.
The board has a comprehensive range of training events and e-learning courses
that have increased the number of practitioners who have received training. The
training events include lessons learned from serious case reviews, including a


nationally recognised and highly regarded cartoon account of a young persons
experience of living in a neglectful home environment.

Recommendations

Work with the Local Safeguarding Children Boards (LSCB)s constituent
agencies to ensure that the board receives a sufficient breadth and quality of
performance information to support rigorous monitoring, analysis and
challenge of the full range of safeguarding work with children in Harrow.


Strengthen the boards scrutiny of the quality and impact of early-help
services.


Review the capacity and functioning of the boards sub-groups to ensure that
they are all as effective as the best.


Engage children and young people more effectively in contributing to and
developing the boards work and priorities.


Continue work with schools to significantly improve their engagement with the
section 11 audit process.


Update the LSCB threshold document so that it is fully compliant with
statutory guidance, and is as effective a document as it can be to support
decision making by those working with children and their families.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

Governance arrangements are well established. The newly appointed
independent chair of the board intends to retain the existing pattern of regular
meetings with the chief executive, director of childrens services, leader of the
council and lead member, as well as senior managers from partner agencies.
The detailed minutes of these meetings evidence that key priorities and issues
of concern for children are shared at the most senior level. The chair of the
board attends the Health and Wellbeing Board, at which the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (LSCBs) annual report is considered. The chair
provides appropriate challenge to partners, ensuring that childrens issues are
prioritised. The board maintains a challenge log as a record of actions taken
on a number of issues. In 2016, there were 15 challenges made. However, as
the impact of these challenges is not recorded, it is difficult to assess the
effectiveness of the boards challenge to agencies.


Key areas of the boards work are appropriately aligned with other relevant
boards and multi-agency bodies. Work to prevent child sexual exploitation is


aligned with the Safer Harrow Partnership, and the board works in conjunction
with the Harrow Safeguarding Adults Board to promote a think family
approach in relation to vulnerable adults. This ensures that the board has a
pivotal role in coordinating work across the partnership to raise awareness of
important issues. One example is work following a Home Office peer review
initiative to end gang and youth violence, which resulted in a Harrow-specific
preventative strategy on gangs, knife crime and violence.

The newly appointed chair has current, relevant experience. He is also the
chair of another LSCB and contributes to work on pan-London LSCB workstreams. Further involvement in and work for a domestic abuse charity and as
safeguarding adviser to the diocese of London give him an extensive
understanding of board business and priorities. The board is financially sound,
but is due to have a reduction in funding in the next budgetary year. The
board plans to manage this by reducing the use of external auditors, and has
confidence that there is the capacity in the partner organisations to complete
more audits in-house. The boards auditing activity has been crucial in
identifying practice weaknesses, for example within the multi-agency
safeguarding hub (MASH) and in relation to section 47 processes. The board
has the agreement of all partners that, in the event of any unforeseen
expenses, such as serious case reviews (SCRs), all partners will share the cost.


The board has appropriate multi-agency membership and is attended by
sufficiently senior officers from a wide variety of relevant agencies. Board
members are committed to improving the life chances of children. The two lay
members involved at board level contribute very effectively, including one
acting as a vice-chair for one of the sub-groups and for the board itself. The
relationship between the board and the lead member is strong and effective,
despite the lead member being newly appointed.


In the past two years, the board has moved forward significantly in its
commitment to driving up the standard of safeguarding services provided by
partner agencies. The board has had success in raising practice standards, but
the extent of this has been hampered by a lack of available performance
information from partner agencies and a consequent lack of analysis. This
means that the board does not have a full or accurate picture of the
differences that agencies are making for children, or of gaps and shortfalls in
service delivery. For example, the waiting times for child and adolescent
mental health services often are not provided as part of the data set for the
board, and the opportunity is missed for this to be an area of challenge to
health partners. Weakness in data provision therefore reduces the boards
influence on the planning and commissioning of services, as it cannot
systematically monitor or evaluate quality. (Recommendation)


Data and performance information sharing works better within the board
when partners are able to share concerns, develop a shared understanding
and take action to improve service provision. For example, the identification of
a lack of proactive antenatal and midwifery engagement with vulnerable


pregnant women led to practice changes which now ensure earlier targeted
engagement with these mothers. This promotes better support and more
effective relationship building with the most vulnerable at the earliest possible
stage. The board has worked effectively to influence the staffing provision in
the MASH and the location of the police interview suite, in order to support
and improve the assessments of all children.

Early-help provision has been subject to a series of scrutiny exercises by the
board, but as yet has not highlighted effectively the factors that have held
back progress. The board has focused on linking the respective priorities of
partner agencies, but this has not provided the necessary challenge and focus.
The engagement of agencies in the common assessment framework process is
weak, with no professionals from any agency other than the local authority
currently undertaking the lead professional role with families. The LSCB has
not sufficiently challenged partner agencies, such as health and schools, about
this shortfall. (Recommendation)


The threshold document has been subject to two revisions in the past year
following learning from the boards section 47 and MASH audits. It requires
further modification, as it lacks sufficient clarity about key service pathways,
such as those for children at risk of sexual exploitation, and does not provide
guidance about the thresholds for voluntary accommodation or care
proceedings, under sections 20 and 31 of the Children Act 1989, as required
by statutory guidance. It also contains some language that is unclear or
confusing for professionals using the document as a guide to decision making.
(Recommendation)


The board has been effective in promoting awareness of child sexual
exploitation among young people, having supported the delivery of Chelseas
Choice across Harrow to 16 schools. The board has overseen and been
influential in ensuring an appropriate local response to the Prevent duty and
female genital mutilation. This includes ensuring the provision of training and
awareness raising, and supporting some innovative projects such as the
Pants video. This initiative is an example of good practice.


The LSCB undertakes annual section 11 audits of partners effectiveness in
carrying out their safeguarding responsibilities. These have been jointly
completed with a neighbouring authority, enabling efficiencies. All statutory
partners complete this audit, but less than 50% of schools do so. There is
evidence that more schools are now engaging positively with the board
following the setting up of a safeguarding in education termly seminar group,
led by the board business manager. The seminar group has addressed such
issues as bullying, female genital mutilation and the role of the MASH. To
date, 55 out of a possible 60 schools and colleges are reported as attending
this group, and teaching staff spoke positively regarding the initiative.


The board recognises that its current structure of six sub-groups requires
revision. Not all sub-groups have sufficient capacity or the active engagement


of all partners, so cannot fully achieve their planned work. The minutes of
some sub-groups do not provide a concise record of activity. This has been
recognised. When sub-groups have been working effectively, such as the
quality assurance sub-group, there are measurable improvements in practice.
The multi-agency audits undertaken are focused on relevant issues of
concern, and lead to clear action plans and evidence of improvement, for
example the recent audit of services for disabled children. Positively, the
practice of this sub-group is that audit activity continues until measurable
improvements have been seen in practice. A good example is the audits
carried out of the section 47 process, which led to tangible improvements in
the quality and impact of practice with children at risk of significant harm.
(Recommendation)

The child death overview panel (CDOP) is effective in analysing local
information on child deaths, identifying patterns and trends. None of the small
number of deaths during the past year were linked to safeguarding issues or
concerns about professional practice, so were not referred to the board. There
are plans in place to improve the CDOP annual report by linking findings to
the wider population in order to improve the quality of the information
provided. The CDOP has developed and rolled out good awareness-raising
programmes linked to the use of baby slings, safer sleeping, smoking
cessation and the availability of support for bereaved parents. Harrow has
high rates of breastfeeding, and the CDOP challenged the council successfully
when there was a proposed plan to cut funding to a successful peer
breastfeeding programme.


Processes for making decisions about and undertaking SCRs or management
reviews are clearly set out in the terms of reference of the SCR sub-group and
are well established. This group also monitors and challenges the progress of
SCR action plans. The board has been undertaking work relating to three SCRs
in the past year, as well as multi-agency learning reviews of childrens cases
that do not meet the criteria for an SCR. A programme of training sessions
ensures that lessons learned are cascaded out by all agencies quickly via ebulletins, training events, sub-group members and the childrens services
management team. This sub-group holds agencies to account effectively in
implementing recommendations.


The quality assurance sub-group is responsible for a wide range of tasks,
including analysis of data sets and coordinating the six-monthly multi-agency
case audits. These case audits are an effective mechanism for increasing
understanding of the quality of frontline practice and identifying areas for
improvement. This has enabled the board to identify a number of priorities
and put action plans in place to further strengthen practice.


The child sexual exploitation sub-group has a wide work programme following
the areas identified for improvement by the second child sexual exploitation
review in spring 2016. There are some key improvements which the subgroup is progressing, such as awareness-raising activity with staff in sexual


health clinics. Areas for development include evidence of challenge. For
example, there is lack of analysis of return home interviews. The return home
interviews are frequently a verbatim account of the young persons words,
instead of an analysis of the push and pull factors or the cumulative risk of
multiple missing episodes.

Social workers and foster carers who spoke to inspectors value the multiagency training provided by the board. Training activity has increased
significantly, with 1,702 sessions delivered in 201516 against 1,194 in 2014
trained to cascade face-to-face courses within partnership agencies, has been
effective. This means that all partner agencies are supported to share good
practice within their workforce. Some training sessions for local GPs have been
specifically designed and led by the general practitioner who sits on the board.
All training is evaluated, but the low feedback response on individuals practice
three months after training hampers the evaluation in its effectiveness.
Training is responsive to changing need, as it combines learning from the
LSCBs own audits and SCRs, as well as nationally published SCRs and
research findings, into current training programmes. A small community
organisation is commissioned to deliver training to a large number of
voluntary and faith organisations. This is ensuring that safeguarding issues are
far better understood. An increasing number of the organisations that have
attended these sessions have nominated a designated safeguarding lead for
their organisation.


The board has an accessible and informative website with links to relevant
good-quality information about a range of safeguarding issues. A focus group
of children looked after was involved in its development and one young
person was directly involved in the design. It includes helpful information on
SCRs. The LSCB produced an outstandingly good cartoon, in the words of a
child living in a family of neglectful and abusive parents. This is used routinely
in induction and other training. It has a useful site for young people that
includes information on the NSPCC Pants campaign, female genital
mutilation, bullying, child sexual exploitation and what to do if you are
worried. The website also holds the pan-London LSCB policies and
procedures, which the board has adopted.


Young people have recently been involved in presenting a session at the
boards annual conference, and in a series of positive and effective sessions
undertaken with other young people seeking their views on safety in Harrow.
However, children and young people are not routinely or sufficiently engaged
in the quality assurance and priority-setting work of the board
(Recommendation)


The LSCB annual report 201516 is a comprehensive document. It is detailed
as a record of performance, but it is not sufficiently rigorous in its analysis. It
has helpful summary key findings and some suggestions on what needs to be
focused on in the future. The business plan is linked to the annual report, but


it lacks a sharpness and a framework to measure impact. The business plan
priorities are too broad and lack specificity, so cannot be readily achievable or
measurable. As a result of this, the business plan is not a sufficiently effective
tool for the board to understand whether it is making a positive difference for
children and young people. Overall, there is a lack of alignment between the
business plan, the challenge log and action plans. These all need to be kept
up to date so that board members always have a clear understanding of the
boards position, and can measure impact and ensure sufficient challenge.
(Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and one
Social Care Regulatory Inspector from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Dominic Stevens
Deputy lead inspector: Andy Whippey
Team inspectors: Alison Smale, Julie Knight, Brenda McInerney, Jon Bowman,
Stephanie Murray, Linda Bond, Joy Howick
Senior data analyst: Patrick Thomson
Quality assurance manager: Sean Tarpey


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsgov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2017


