Hartlepool Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and Care Leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 19 November 2013  11 December 2013
The overall judgement is good.
The Local Authority leads effective services that meet the requirements for good.
It is Ofsteds expectation that as a minimum all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

Good


Good


Good


Good


Good

The judgement for the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board (LSCB) is requires improvement
The LSCB is not yet demonstrating the characteristics of good.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents

Section 1: the Local Authority


Summary of key findings


What does the Local Authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this Local Authority area


Inspection judgements about the Local Authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the Local Authority
Summary of key findings
This Local Authority is good because
 Children, young people and their families can easily access good early help in
their local community when difficulties begin to emerge. This helps children
and young peoples circumstances improve. When children and young people
need help and protection, professional staff who know them already work well
together to ensure they are kept safe and well.
 When staff who work for different services in Hartlepool, such as schools and
childrens centres, are worried about a child, they can easily refer them to
childrens social care for an assessment of their needs. Timely and responsive
assessments consider all aspects of a childs situation in the large majority of
cases and lead to good planned work that manages and reduces risks.
 Children and young people are regularly asked whether things are improving
or getting worse. Those who need a social worker report good relationships
with them, and feel listened to and understood. Children in need of help and
protection receive regular visits from their social workers who spend a good
amount of time with them working effectively.
 Agencies work hard to tackle domestic abuse. Where domestic abuse does
occur, agencies visit families quickly, and offer good quality help, which
reduces risks for the children, young people and adults involved.
 When young people aged 16 or 17 find themselves at risk of homelessness,
there are good arrangements to provide them with support, including suitable
accommodation if this is required.
 Children and young people only become looked after by the council if it is in
their best interests to do so. The Council is good at ensuring that enough
skilled foster carers and adopters are found. In the case of recruiting sufficient
foster carers they demonstrate very good performance. Children who are
looked after and then leave care, often have the same social worker for many
years. They told inspectors that this helps them as their social worker knows
their history, what they are like, and what help they need. Children and young
people looked after contribute routinely to their looked after reviews.
However, further work is needed to ensure more attend and participate in
person.
 When children and young people need the courts to make decisions about
where and who they should live with, including when they need a care order,
the council ensures this happens very quickly. This is achieved by working well
with the courts, lawyers, and the Children and Family Court Advisory Service
(Cafcass). As a result, magistrates and judges can make the right decisions for
the child or young person, enabling them to move as quickly as possible to
their new permanent home.


 Children for whom the best plan is to be adopted, are found good adoptive
families quickly and not left to drift in temporary homes. Children are not
separated from their brothers or sisters, unless this is the best thing for each
of them. A specialist and dedicated worker completes good quality
assessments prior to making decisions as to whether brothers and sisters are
separated. Birth parents are supported to make a good contribution to their
children settling in with adoptive parents. Adoptive families are given excellent
support to help them settle down together.
 Looked after children achieve well. Collective good work by the virtual
headteacher and schools is helping to drive improvement successfully. In
care. Pupils attending primary schools are making particularly good progress
from their often very low starting points. Children and young people are fully
involved in the development of their personal education plans so have agreed
to, and know, what their individual goals are.
 Young people leaving care have a good choice of accommodation and are well
prepared for their move into independence. Some of them were very involved
in the design of independent supported accommodation specifically for care
leavers, and this meets their needs well. Those who want to stay with their
foster carers after the age of 18 can do so if they so wish. The Council has
earmarked four apprenticeships for care leavers, and the number is about to
increase by a further two places.
 Children and young people with disabilities, and their families, benefit from a
single social work team which supports them from the age of 0-25. This is a
very good way of working as it means they dont have to change workers
when they become 18. The Throughcare Team work hard to build positive and
long lasting relationships with young people leaving care, who value these
relationships.
 Looked after children and care leavers have good champions in the Children
in Care Council (CiCC). They are listened to and have influenced several
things that matter to looked after children and care leavers. A good example
of this is their successful lobbying for an increase in the leaving care grant.
 Senior managers in the Council and elected councillors work well together so
that at a time when budgets are being reduced and are under a lot of
pressure, services for vulnerable children, young people and their families are
being protected as far as possible.


What does the Local Authority need to improve?
Areas for improvement
 Social workers need to ensure that the rich knowledge of the children they
work with is reflected in case records.
 Social workers must be supported by managers in supervision to think the
unthinkable at all times so that the experiences and views of both children
and parents are equally understood and considered in decisions about risks
and next steps.
 Social workers should, in every case, assess the risks and use complete
chronologies more effectively to consider and take account of the family
history, including recent events.
 Childrens participation in the arrangements to protect them should be well
supported, and monitored by managers.
 Managers need to ensure that the views of children, young people and their
families are used more regularly to influence service developments and
improve existing services.
 Accelerate progress in implementing the management improvement plan to
further raise practice standards and more effectively quality assure key
aspects of social work practice.
 Child protection conference chairs and Independent Reviewing Officers (IROs)
must improve their practice in questioning the quality and content of
assessments and plans for children. They must challenge social workers to
clearly set out (in key documents) what a child thinks about their situation,
and what they would like to see happen to improve things. The recording of
childrens wishes should be clearly documented.
 Implement the child sexual exploitation strategy and screening tool so that
early identification of those at risk is effective, routine and systematic.
 Promote police attendance at child protection strategy meetings routinely, so
that in every case the most recent information can be shared, understood and
used to plan the most effective protective actions.
 Ensure the Throughcare Team develop more effective ways of understanding
and describing the impact of their work. The use and regular review of clear
targets in pathway action plans should show the difference the actions have
made. They should also ensure that care leavers are routinely provided with
information about their legal entitlements.
 Further increase the proportion of young people moving into education,
employment, training or university.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the Local Authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the Local Authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of Local Authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Lynn Radley
Team inspectors: Sheena Doyle, Tracey Metcalfe, Ali Mekki, Margaret Farrow, Rob
Hackeson, Dominic Stevens, John Gregg.


Information about this Local Authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 20,370 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Hartlepool. This is 22.1% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 31% of the Local Authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 26.7% (the national average is 18.1%)
 in secondary schools is 22.9% (the national average is 15.1%)
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 4.2% of
all children living in the area.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
is Asian (1.9%).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 3.6% (the national average is 18%).
 in secondary schools is 2.7% (the national average is 13.6%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 October 2013, 1165 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an
increase from 1033 at 31 October 2012.
 At 31 October 2013, 129 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is an increase from 103 at 31 October 2012.
 At 31 October 2013, 1 child lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is unchanged from 31 October 2012.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 October 2013, 205 children are being looked after by the Local
Authority (a rate of 96 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 189
(87 per 10,000 children) at 31 October 2012.
 Of this number 60 (or 29%) live outside the Local Authority area
Authority area


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Authority area
area
 In the last 12 months there have been:
subsequently returned to be looked after
independent living
 No young people who have ceased to be looked after live in houses
of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The Local Authority operates one childrens home. It was judged to be good
in its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Hartlepools safeguarding arrangements was in
June 2010. The Local Authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of Hartlepools services for looked after children was
in June 2010. The Local Authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of Hartlepools adoption service was in January
The previous inspection of Hartlepools fostering service was in August
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since 21 October 2013.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Childrens Board has been vacant since
October 2013 with the previous chair having been in post since May 2011.
The position is currently being recruited to.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Inspection judgements about the Local Authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection is
good
 Agencies in the area work well together to provide effective early help to
children and their families. The common assessment framework (CAF) is used
well to assess the needs of children, young people and their families and
agree which services should be offered before their problems become serious
enough to require help from childrens social care. CAF completion rates
continue to increase and so more families are benefiting from earlier
coordinated help.
 Parents and families are positive about the help they receive. They can
describe the difference it is making to their own skills and confidence, and
how it is improving their relationships with their children.
 Locality based multi-agency teams provide effective and prompt support to
children and their families. These teams are a key part of good quality early
help and intervention services. This approach is helping to reduce risks to
families who are experiencing difficulties, for example, domestic violence with
the co-location of a specialist voluntary organisation Harbour with police and
health staff. A good range of services are provided, such as counselling and
work with perpetrators of violence. This is encouraging more families to come
forward for help.
 Partner agencies are positive about the First Contact and Support Hub, where
they receive prompt advice from a qualified social worker or team manager if
they have concerns about a child. Where concerns escalate and early
intervention help is no longer sufficiently effective, children are appropriately
referred to social care. Thresholds for statutory services are well understood,
so referrals received by the initial response social work team (IRT) are
appropriate and lead to an assessment of the childs circumstances by a social
worker.
 Social workers effectively use a range of recognised assessment tools to
identify risks and needs of individual children in the vast majority of cases.
Regular reviews of cases ensure implementation of thresholds is robust and
evidences good management oversight. The Graded Care Profile assessment
tool, which measures levels of neglect, is being used in some cases. However,
it is not yet used routinely enough to have a definitive impact.
 Effective decision making and management oversight ensures cases that need
further statutory work, or less support through community based services, are
transferred promptly. Appropriate priority is given to the individual needs of
children and their families.
 Support provided by family service teams aligns directly to assessed needs, is
not time-limited and provides a wrap around intensive support to families
where children are subject to plans. This demonstrates good practice.


 In a very few cases there is an over-reliance on the parents version of events,
such as reporting a reduction in their drug use or minimising the impact of
neglect. Social workers, in every case, need to comprehensively consider and
take account of the full impact of parental behaviour. The Local Authority is
aware of this and work has already started. Well-focussed arrangements are
in place to achieve early improvements. For example, where deficits are
identified, robust management action is taken to deal with responsible staff,
and cases are reviewed and reallocated. Action to protect the child is
prioritised and taken immediately.
 Children and young people who need help and protection are seen and
assessed promptly by qualified social workers. Assessments are completed in
a timely way and the vast majority demonstrate good analysis of children and
families circumstances and needs.
 Chronologies are not used effectively in all cases, but are present and up to
date on most childrens files. Some chronologies contain too much detail
making it harder to assess and understand what is happening for children and
the risks associated with their circumstances. Case recording of activity,
communications, visits and decision making is generally good and up to date,
and includes the rationale for decisions made. Children are seen and seen
alone by social workers, where they are of sufficient age and this is
appropriate.
 Childrens views are not always explicitly recorded in child in need plans.
However, the plans are used appropriately for children who need targeted
services but who do not require a child protection plan. The plans facilitate
good multi-agency support for the child and their family. In most cases, plans
appropriately focus on improving outcomes and reducing risk for children.
Regular review of plans avoids drift and ensures progress is maintained.
 Where a child is at risk of significant harm, the response from childrens social
care services in the vast majority of cases is effective, timely and well
managed. Appropriate immediate action is taken to protect children and
young people. Routine and effective strategy discussions are held with the
police prior to a child protection investigation. Following initial enquires, the
help and protection that children receive is well-coordinated and proportionate
to risks, needs and circumstances and led by qualified social workers.
 Strategy meetings are effective and recorded comprehensively in almost all
cases. They are used well to share information between agencies. The police
provide written information in all cases, but do not routinely attend. If they do
not attend, the most recent information may not be available. In one case,
detailed information about the bail conditions for a young person recently
released from secure accommodation was not communicated clearly. This
meant that the social worker was unclear how to plan effectively to reduce
risks.
 An effective out of hours social work services is jointly commissioned by
Hartlepool and neighbouring authorities. Good communication between the


out of hours and day time services ensures families receive a seamless service
with all emergency activity followed up promptly.
 Initial child protection conferences are held swiftly following child protection
enquiries but do not routinely include the children or young people who are
being considered. Although social workers demonstrate a deep knowledge of
children they work with, and the quality of discussion and reports is good, the
actual voice of a child could offer power and immediacy to professional
deliberations. Childrens views are sought and represented verbally by social
workers. Conference chairs do not routinely challenge the lack of a distinct
childs voice being recorded in assessments or the lack of using advocacy.
 All children who need a child protection plan, have one. Case conferences
develop good outline plans that are progressed by subsequent core groups.
The vast majority of review child protection conferences are held within
timescales and managers robustly scrutinise the small number which are not.
 Most child protection plans are effective tools for setting out and monitoring
how risks are being managed and reduced. However, a small number of plans
are too generalised and are not sufficiently specific about the exact steps to
be taken to reduce a particular risk. Managers have completed substantial
work to raise standards in this area of practice.
 Child protection plans are regularly reviewed and updated, setting out where
risk and protective factors have increased or decreased. However, child
protection conference and review chairs do not routinely challenge social
workers to improve the quality of plans where it is required. Children who are
subject to plans experience improved outcomes and close monitoring of their
progress. This ensures alternative actions are taken when necessary. Core
groups meet regularly and are well-attended by professionals and family
members.
 Unborn children are well protected, with prompt referrals to childrens social
care where historical and/or current concerns indicate the need for an
assessment. Good quality pre-birth assessments include putative fathers, and
lead to timely plans. New born infants, who cannot be cared for safely by their
parents, are moved swiftly to alternative carers. Concurrent rehabilitation and
alternative plans add to timely decision-making about their future. This
ensures they spend minimum time with alternative carers before achieving
permanence.
 Children and young people told inspectors they feel safe and listened to. They
like their social workers and have good relationships with them. Parents also
described positive relationships with social workers. They were clear about the
social workers role, particularly in child protection, described good levels of
engagement and felt they were treated fairly and given every opportunity to
improve. Equally, social workers clearly articulated the wishes, feelings and
needs of the children and young people they work with, and how this good
quality engagement was informing assessments and plans. More needs to be
done to ensure the richness of this knowledge is clearly evident in all case
records.


 To increase the participation of children and young people in meetings that
concern them, the Local Authority has commissioned an independent
advocacy agency. This will provide support from January 2014. Currently,
parents and families are routinely asked for their views about the services
they have received from childrens social care and how they experience child
protection conferences. Reports prepared by social workers and other
professionals for child protection conferences are appropriately shared with
families beforehand.
 Good quality work is undertaken in high risk domestic abuse situations within
the Multi-Agency Risk Assessment Conference arrangements (MARAC).
Referrals to MARAC are appropriate and timely. The majority of victims
referred to the Independent Domestic Violence Advisor (IDVA) accept help.
Effective, good quality services for children and their families are well
established. Families are visited on the day of the referral in most cases.
 Arrangements for identifying and tracking children and young people missing
from home, care and education are good with robust monitoring of the
completion of follow up interviews. All children missing from education, either
as a result of medical need, being home-educated, or excluded, are closely
tracked and offered appropriate services. All home-educated children are
visited at least annually. This ensures they are safe and appropriately
educated. Attendance rates for children looked after are above average and
exclusion rates below that of the whole school population in Hartlepool. There
has been a two thirds reduction in the number of children attending
alternative provision in the past two years. Rigorous monitoring ensures they
receive their full entitlement to a good quality education. Good partnerships
with schools ensures that pregnant and young mothers are able to sustain
education in their chosen schools.
 The recently constituted Vulnerable, Exploited, Missing and Trafficked group
(VEMT) considers issues both strategically and operationally to identify and
support children at risk. This positive development implemented by the
Hartlepool Safeguarding Children Board replaces a single issue Missing group.
The lack of sustained leadership of the Board means it is not yet having the
impact necessary on frontline services. Systematic and/or discrete work in the
identification of, and interventions with young people at risk of/or being
sexually exploited, is at an early stage. For example, a screening tool to
assess whether young people may be at risk of child sexual exploitation is not
yet in place in frontline teams.
 No significant or organised exploitative activity has been identified in
Hartlepool at present. Where a potential or actual risk of sexual exploitation is
identified, cases are dealt with individually and risk is well managed using
child protection processes. Clear links and joint working, between the
Hartlepool VEMT group and the Tees-wide VEMT group, is a strength. It
results in improved information-sharing across Local Authority boundaries.
Good tracking and monitoring of perpetrators in individual cases has led to
disruption of perpetrators in Hartlepool as a direct result of the work of VEMT.


 Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO) arrangements are well embedded
and robust. Good working relationships with schools, police and the councils
human resources department ensures each case is effectively dealt with. This
is supported by routine reporting to the Hartlepool Safeguarding Children
Board (HSCB) and appropriate action being taken where necessary.
 When 16 and 17 year olds present as potentially homeless, their needs are
assessed promptly and they are offered services including suitable
accommodation. The use of Section 20 accommodation is considered in each
case and is implemented when necessary.
 A good, community wide private fostering awareness raising strategy is in
place. One child is currently privately fostered, following a timely and
appropriate assessment of their needs and situation. Case records
demonstrate staff are suitably alert to a range of situations where private
fostering may be an issue.
 Good practice and attention is paid to children and families individual
characteristics and differences. For example, services for travelling children led
to improved outcomes; services for a Polish child in need considered his
cultural and other needs well; and parents with learning disabilities were well
supported by advocates during child protection processes.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence are good
 Decisions about children becoming looked after are appropriate, proportionate
to the needs and risks identified, and consistently applied. Management
oversight of cases is good with decisions made or ratified by the care planning
panel. The edge of care service provides good support to families and is
safely supporting children and young people who would otherwise have to be
looked after.
 The numbers looked after in Hartlepool are high compared with similar
councils and have continued to rise this year. Whilst the council are
successfully reducing the numbers of children becoming looked after or
requiring care, the numbers of those leaving care is smaller. In particular, this
relates to young people becoming looked after as adolescents who the council
successfully stabilise in settled foster care and support them well through to
independence. The councils medium to long term strategy for reducing total
numbers is to increase their efforts in early intervention combined with robust
and timely permanence planning.
 Looked after children have their own discrete teams and are managed
separately from those for children in need of help and protection. This allows
social workers, managers and associated services to focus exclusively on the
needs of those looked after and in need of permanence.
 Good collaboration with Children and Family Courts Advisory Service (Cafcass)
and the courts, for example, through the Local Family Justice Board, is
reducing delay in court proceedings. This has resulted in an above average
performance on the time taken to complete care proceedings. The Hartlepool
average is 34 weeks compared to a national average of 46 weeks. Effective
use of the Public Law Outline ensures that alternative options are thoroughly
explored before proceedings. Good arrangements are in place through regular
supervision, child protection reviews and performance clinics which ensure the
vast majority of cases progress without delay.
 Looked after children see their social workers frequently. Case records and
review documentation evidence confirms that visits to children exceed
minimum statutory requirements, and that social workers know them well.
Good direct work by social workers and foster carers helps children to express
their wishes and feelings and contribute to decisions about their future. In
cases tracked, bullying was not a cause for concern. Professionals are alert to
the risk of bullying among vulnerable young people.
 Arrangements to meet childrens health needs are good. The looked after
children (LAC) nurse, based with the throughcare team, is available to talk to
children and care leavers, who visit the office or use the drop-in facility, and
refers them to specialist health services as necessary. Young people said they
value this service. A very high proportion of children have their annual health
assessments and dental checks completed on time, and immunisations are up-


to-date. Strengths and difficulties questionnaires (SDQs) are completed for all
children. This helps to assess their emotional well-being. Those aged 14-16
can use self-reporting SDQs to contribute to their assessments and plans.
 Dedicated staff in the multi-disciplinary placement support and therapeutic
team provide a broad range of interventions to help children with their
emotional well-being. There are many examples of these contributing to good
outcomes such as building resilience, improved progress socially and
academically, and contributing to stable placements. Placement stability is
consistently good with performance well above the England average on both
short-term and long-term measures. Overall, children live in the right place for
them and young people spoken to say they are happy and satisfied with
where they stay. Matching children with carers is effective. For some young
people, several options are considered before they move into a foster care
placement or residential home.
 Good and improving work by the virtual school team is helping to drive
improvement in the attainment and progress of children looked after
successfully. All Year 6 looked after pupils who left key Stage 2 in summer
starting points. This is a greater rate of progress than that of all pupils
nationally. Test results in 2013 in English and mathematics were well above
similar pupils nationally. The gap between their results and the average for all
pupils nationally has reduced well since 2012. All children looked after made
good progress particularly considering their often very low skills and abilities
on entry into care.
 Improvement in the proportion of Year 11 looked after children gaining five
good GCSEs including English and mathematics has been impressive.
Provisional information indicates 42.9 per cent gained these qualifications
which is a 28 per cent improvement on the previous year. Current Year 11
students are on track to continue this improvement.
 The virtual school team track pupils progress half termly. This information
informs termly Personal Education Plan (PEP) reviews. This is above statutory
requirements and is good practice. Additional support, including one to one
support, is provided to help pupils catch up. The majority of PEPs reviewed
were good and some were exemplary. In the best cases, pupils progress was
mapped meticulously throughout their time in care. Examples of pupils work
and an array of photographs showcased their achievements over time. In
these, it is clear that young people have contributed to their reviews well.
 Rigorous challenge to schools about the progress pupils make, the quality of
PEPs and the schools use of the pupil premium, is contributing to good
improvement in their achievements, and to the quality and usefulness of PEPs.
 Careful consideration of the best place for young people to be educated is
taken before they are found carers. This has helped to ensure the number of
young people who change schools is low and they are only moved when it is
in their best interests to do so.


 Good collaborative work with the virtual school, behaviour and attendance
team, education welfare officers and schools, is helping to ensure good
attendance rates for children looked after. Behaviour and attendance rates are
above average for similar groups and for all pupils in Hartlepool. Urgent action
is taken when children are missing from school and the high attendance rates
pay testament to the positive impact of such work.
 Very few looked after children are excluded from school on a temporary basis.
There have been no permanent exclusions since 2006. Only two pupils attend
alternative provision and these are monitored closely by the virtual school.
There are robust arrangements to ensure children educated in schools outside
Hartlepool are able to access good quality education. All pupils are placed in
provision judged to be at least good as a result of their most recent Ofsted
inspection. The virtual school team check their attainment and progress
regularly, in the same way as pupils educated within Hartlepool schools.
 Education staff visit children educated in residential school provision at least
twice yearly. They check that the pupils are safe and achieving well; taking
action if there is any risk. The quality of advice and support from both
education and social care staff, as well as the high quality PEP, was praised by
a headteacher who spoke to inspectors.
 The council has a good track record of finding families and matching them to
children's assessed needs. Almost all looked after children live in or near to
Hartlepool, and almost all live in families. The councils fostering service is
highly effective in recruiting, training and supporting foster carers and
continues to increase the number of carers. In most cases it is able to provide
well matched and well supported placements for children who become looked
after including keeping them with their brothers and sisters. Contact with
family members is child-centred and well facilitated.
 Hartlepool place very few children at a distance from their own area. Cases
are comprehensively considered by senior managers prior to the making of
such placements. Management oversight of the process is good. All cases are
considered and reviewed by a multi-agency commissioned placements panel.
Young people and their parents said the placements they are in are the right
ones. Parents and family members are well supported to keep in regular
contact with their children and one mother was particularly proud of the
educational progress her son had made.
 Providers report good levels of communication, regular visits and support from
Hartlepool staff. Good commissioning and clear contracts require those who
provide placements for young people outside of Hartlepool to meet their
health and education needs swiftly and promote contact. Providers must send
monthly progress reports to both the childs social worker and their
independent reviewing officer (IRO).
 Good action is taken to find permanent placements for children and young
people. The family finder has already had a significant impact on the quality of
matching since starting work in May 2013. Matches are agreed at the family


placement panel which sets a high standard for the quality of reports
presented.
 All children looked after have an up to date care plan which is reviewed
regularly. Plans are improving, they are generally of good quality and are
subject to routine management oversight. Some plans would benefit from
more detailed recording of exactly how outcomes will be achieved. Despite
this, looked after children progress well, enjoying good levels of stability. They
do not suffer delays in finding permanence or making progress in education.
Prior to the inspection, Council case file audits identified this as an area for
further work. Monthly performance clinics enable managers to track progress
and take any further remedial action.
 Childrens views are well represented in their looked after reviews.
Independent Reviewing Officers (IROs) routinely see children before the
meeting to gather their thoughts and feelings. When appropriate, children and
young people choose whether they wish to attend their review meeting.
However, the council acknowledge that it needs to look at ways of
encouraging and enabling more children and young people to contribute
directly. Professionals and carers do ensure childrens views are taken into
account in review meetings. However, it is clear that their presence and own
words would add value and immediacy.
 IROs have manageable caseloads and monitor childrens progress at the
midpoint between reviews through discussions with their social worker. They
challenge and use the dispute resolution protocol. However, the extent and
effectiveness of challenge is not currently collated or reported. Overall, the
quality assurance function of the IRO service is underdeveloped. The
recording of childrens reviews and decisions made varies in quality. There are
some delays in formally writing up reviews, but this does not impact on the
progress children make within the care system. Agencies and carers work
from recommendations made at review meetings and actions are progressed
in a timely way. Looked after children in Hartlepool benefit from positive
outcomes and early placement in stable alternative permanent families. The
IRO service development plan demonstrates the progress made to raise
practice standards, although much of this work is at an early stage.
 Case recording for looked after children is up to date and some is very good.
However, in some cases, the quality is variable and does not reflect the
sensitive, child focussed and skilled direct work which social workers describe
in great detail when spoken to. Significant events in some chronologies are
not easily recognised amongst less relevant material, making it difficult to
understand the childs journey. Managers are aware that producing a succinct
chronology is an onerous task within the electronic recording system.
However, where chronologies are required for a specific purpose, such as
those to inform court proceedings or case reviews, they are of good quality.
They provide an effective account of a childs situation and history. Again,


when spoken to, social workers and IROs know very detailed information on
the course and nature of an individual childs journey.
 The Children in Care Council (CiCC) is represented on the corporate parent
forum and meets regularly with senior officers and councillors. Recent
achievements include producing a revised version of the Pledge and advising
IROs about how to help young people who become looked after understand
what they do. This has led to the information about the IROs being included
in the welcome pack, a resource for children telling them about their rights
and entitlements. While members of the CiCC are enthusiastic and
knowledgeable, the numbers involved are relatively small and it is actively
working to increase its membership to provide wider representation.
 The 0-25 year service for children with disabilities enables young people to
keep their social worker beyond the age when they move from receiving
children's services. This significantly smooths transition arrangements for
young people and their families regarding their accommodation, training,
employment, health and social care needs. It ensures that planning starts at a
much younger age, leading to bespoke packages of care where required.
Looked after reviews for children with disabilities are held jointly with care
coordination meetings. This improves planning and reduces the number of
meetings children and families have to attend.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is good
 Adoption performance in Hartlepool is good. Performance on the adoption
scorecard is better than the England average for all indicators. Children live
with their adopters quickly. Time between a child coming into care and
moving to its adoptive family where appropriate is much shorter than most
other authorities. `
 Adoption placements are considered for all children where this is in their best
interests. However, there is a shortage of adopters locally who can
accommodate large sibling groups and children with significant additional
needs, which is in line with the national picture. The decision to separate
siblings is subject to diligent attention and good management oversight. A
specialist and dedicated worker undertakes assessments of sibling groups
which inform decision making within formal care planning meetings. This
includes help with planning how they can be placed together successfully
where this is in their best interests.
 The Authority has been successful in recruiting and retaining foster carers and
adopters. The assessment and approval process for adopters is thorough and
timely. Adopters and carers are supported to a high standard following
approval. This means that children are rarely placed with adopters from other
agencies. Where children cannot be accommodated by the local authority
adopters, alternative placements are promptly identified via the local
consortium and the Adoption Register.


 The Authority has implemented the two-stage assessment and approval
process for adopters. A number of applicants have completed the first stage
and the service is on course to substantially increase the rate at which new
adopters are recruited and approved. An effective programme of training to
support fostering to adopt is in place, and currently two families are involved.
The Authority is also working collaboratively with neighbouring Authorities to
develop concurrent placements although this work is at an early stage.
 All adoption panel members are sufficiently well trained and the panel works
in a timely and effective manner. The joint adoption and fostering panel
meets fortnightly and has an experienced chair who is committed to
maintaining good standards of practice. The panel has enough experienced
new members to ensure childrens plans continue to be considered in a timely
and robust way. Cases are considered by the agency decision maker promptly
and legal and medical advice is obtained without delay.
 Social workers from the family placement team are involved in care planning
for all children who may need a permanent placement. The authority has a
family finder who assists in timely planning for children who need adoption
and in matching them with adopters or permanent carers who can meet their
needs. Whilst the population of Hartlepool is not particularly diverse,
managers are aware that they need to make consistent efforts, in conjunction
with consortium and regional partners, to ensure as diverse a pool of potential
adopters as is possible. The council use external agencies to help identify or
recruit carers for individual children with specific cultural needs where this is
required and there are no policy or financial barriers to doing so.
 Adoption support services are excellent. Services are available early in the
care planning process for children who are being assessed, for adopters, and
for birth families. Most of the support, including specialist help, is provided
from a team of staff within the service. It includes two play therapists, a
specialist social worker and two part time psychologists. Between them, they
have significant expertise in child development and childrens mental health
and provide very high quality support for children and their families.
Disruption rates are low, with only one in the last two years, which was
reviewed thoroughly to maximise learning.
 Birth parents receive a service which is sensitive, constructive and focused on
their contribution to their childrens long term stability. Children and their new
families secure maximum benefit from these services, which are
individualised, driven strongly by the child and families needs, and make a
significant contribution to securing placements.
The graded judgment for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
good
 The Councils strategy to ensure young people have the same social worker
from a permanent decision for a child to be looked after in the through care
team whenever possible means that they enjoy successful and enduring


relationships with their social worker that increasingly continues into their
early 20s. The case files and discussions with young people and staff evidence
a significant range of direct work and support. Workers have a good
understanding of care leavers needs and aspirations alongside what support
they need to help them move into adulthood successfully.
 The through care team rightly pride themselves on knowing and
understanding the young people they support well, and have good
relationships with them which have developed over time. Young people value
these relationships and appreciate the continuity and stability having one long
term worker provides. Managers agree that they are less successful in
measuring the impact of their work, which is an area where they need to
make improvements. Action is already being taken to address this issue.
 Young people say they feel safe where they live. The care leavers are well
supported in identifying, managing and reducing risks to their own safety. At
the time of the inspection, no eligible or relevant care leavers were in custody.
The through care team works closely with the youth offending service to take
early action to minimise risks of offending behaviour.
 Effective, targeted support with agencies, such as the young peoples
substance misuse service HYPED, and the looked after childrens nurse, is
helping young people be safe from drugs or alcohol misuse. This contributes
to the very low proportion of care leavers needing help to overcome such
risky behaviour.
 The health needs of all care leavers are fully assessed. A good performance in
timeliness and take up is reported regularly to the Corporate Parenting Forum.
All care leavers have access to their health history, but some have declined to
take copies. A very small number of the older care leavers who spoke to
inspectors reported that they did not all get a full health record.
 Dedicated mental health and therapeutic support is available for care leavers
with specialist staff being located at the care leavers base. This means young
people have timely and sensitive support, in a place they feel comfortable in
and where they say they feel safe. Regular drop-ins, held in the same place
by the dedicated nurse, and onsite location of the team of through care
workers, mean there is usually someone on hand in times of need.
 Young people report that they have pathway plans but some were unclear
what the plan was for. Pathway plans seen were generally good with some
variability in how clear outcomes are in relation to measuring the impact of
work with young people. These plans do not do justice to the high quality
work taking place as described by both workers and young people
themselves.
 Good care and support is provided to the small number of care leavers who
are pregnant or have young children. This includes parenting work at the care
leavers base, the looked after nurse drop-ins, and parent and toddler
sessions. This means they are able to access immediate advice and guidance
and good support. These services help them develop positive relationships


with their own children, and provide a space for the children to play and learn
in a safe and welcoming environment.
 The support provided from a recent Care Leaver, who is now employed as a
participation officer, is highly valued by young people and also by foster carers
who often attend training in the care leavers base. The personal experience
of care and leaving care is described as invaluable. A comprehensive range of
support and guidance is provided to help develop care leavers skills such as
budgeting and how to develop safe and positive relationships.
 Young people benefit from significant work by the youth service and the
dedicated careers service worker to help them gain employment, education or
training opportunities. Effective work with young people and post-16 service
providers smooths transitions and ensures prompt and direct action with
providers when there is a risk of breakdown. Such actions, and programmes,
like Care to Work, are helping to build young peoples skills to be ready to
work. The Council has a clearly stated intention to increase the number of
care leavers taking up apprenticeships. To achieve this, it has recently
earmarked four placements specifically for care leavers. Additional personal
funding from the Chief Executive is supporting two more ring-fenced
apprenticeships.
 The proportion of care leavers not in education, employment or training is in
line with the average for care leavers nationally. Despite the local challenges
of very high youth unemployment, the proportion of care leavers in education,
employment or training is in line with the local population and demonstrates
positive progress. Managers are aware that there is still more to do to make
sure high numbers of care leavers enter training or work.
 There has been improvement in the number of young people taking up
university placements. The rate is now in line with that of similar young
people nationally. Once there, young people are well supported, visited
regularly, supported financially and have a range of successful living
arrangements when they return in the holidays. Work is taking place with
Teesside University and secondary schools to raise aspirations to increase the
rate significantly.
 Young people have a good choice of accommodation and are well prepared
for the move into independence. Virtually all are placed in suitable
accommodation which is above the rate found nationally. The staying put
policy has been in place for a number of years and provides a good stepping
stone into independence. Only those who choose to leave at 18 do so, and all
are given support to do so successfully.
 Young people are very well supported if they make mistakes. Two examples
were identified where young people left foster care at their own volition but
did not cope, and were able to return to their former foster carers even
though they were over the age of 18. Young people report valuing the aboveaverage leaving care grant, feel safe where they live and none had any
complaints about the condition of their accommodation. Robust work takes
place with housing partners to secure appropriate accommodation and to


advocate on young peoples behalf when they make mistakes and are at risk
of losing their homes.
 An example of excellent practice, which developed good accommodation and
took account of young peoples views, was the recent work to provide new
supported housing. Care leavers were fully involved throughout the process
from deciding the location, the design, and furnishing of the provision. This
added to their sense of safety and ensured that accommodation for young
people not quite ready for full independence is available.
 Young people have information about the Councils Pledge for Children in Care
and care leavers, but information about legal entitlements has not been
systematically shared. The Children in Care Council is currently working with
officers to update their Pledge to include information about legal entitlements.


Leadership, management and governance are good
 Senior managers are successful in improving outcomes for vulnerable children
demonstrated by their achievements in a range of pivotal areas such as
effective early help, sustaining a stable and skilled workforce, good and
improved performance in placement stability, educational progress for children
looked after and improved timeliness of adoption. Furthermore, their
restructure of front line teams and the application of strong and secure
thresholds to protect children and young people has resulted in a safe and
functional service.
 Managers know their services well and have good improvement plans in place
to develop the service further. The programme of implementation is working
well.
 Senior managers have a track record of robustly addressing deficits in
standards of management and/or practice. Prompt identification and assertive,
remedial actions are pursued including the use of formal disciplinary
arrangements. The Local Authority is a learning organisation. This is
evidenced by its adoption of best practice examples from other local
authorities, collaboration with regional partners to develop good practice
arrangements, and dissemination of learning from serious case reviews and
complaints.
 The Chief Executive, DCS and elected members discharge their statutory
duties and clear lines of accountability and governance are in place.
Arrangements are in place to ensure that members are routinely kept
informed about the performance of childrens social care. They receive regular
reports, attend the corporate parenting group and there are regular formal
and informal meetings with the DCS and senior managers. Reporting is
routine and clear. They are sufficiently detailed to enhance elected members
understanding of practice at the frontline.
 Members are passionate and ambitious for the most vulnerable children in
Hartlepool; take their role as corporate parents seriously; and ensure funding
is protected as far as is possible. Financial management is robust and is a
strength for the council. Medium term plans are well developed, and allow the
DCS to make secure arrangements for service provision and workforce
development.
 The Local Authority and its partners know the characteristics of the population
in Hartlepool well. This detailed analysis ensures that services are directed to
communities where need is greatest. An example of this is the redesign of
childrens centres to target areas of highest deprivation. The Joint Strategic
Needs Analysis contains a detailed analysis of children and young people in
the borough, across the full spectrum of their needs and by where they live.
This ensures the most effective alignment of resources and priorities to need.
 Key senior officers and elected members participate in both the Hartlepool
Safeguarding Children Board (HSCB) and the Health and Wellbeing Board with
childrens issues being given sufficient priority in planning and service delivery.


The Children and Young Peoples Strategic Partnership, a sub-group of the
Health and Wellbeing Board, sets the objectives and targets for children and
young people and ensures these are achieved. There is evidence of good joint
working between the council and other agencies. This includes the clinical
commissioning group, the local hospital trust, Children and Family Court
Advisory Service (Cafcass) and the Family Justice Board. Good and effective
partnership work is also evidenced by the increasingly good progress of legal
proceedings through the courts and swifter progress of positive outcomes for
children. Effective partnership work with the police has undergone temporary
disruption during a major police organisational restructure in 2013. Key
personnel are however now in place allowing council officers to challenge and
renegotiate their working relationships.
 Senior managers use skilled and sensitive leadership to acknowledge the need
for and to progress the recruitment of a new, more rigorous independent chair
of the local safeguarding board. Standards and scrutiny of front line practice
in most cases has been effective and managers have mitigated against the
potential impact of the Boards weaknesses.
 Partnership with the voluntary sector is strong and underpinned by good
commissioning and joint understanding of need in the community. Services
which are currently commissioned are subject to regular evaluation and
review both in terms of their impact and achievement of expected targets.
Services are commissioned in line with strategic priorities in, for example, the
early intervention strategy and the children and young peoples plan.
Individual children with complex needs receive intensive and appropriate
support agreed at the multi-agency commissioned placements panel.
 The Council, as a corporate parent, is very committed to, and effective, in
securing high quality services for children and young people when they
become looked after. Support packages are individualised and tailored to the
specific needs of each child, ensuring that they make the best possible
progress in achieving good outcomes. For example, a specific investment in
expensive dental work for a young person which improved their self-esteem
and confidence, enabling them to progress socially and enter further
education.
 Looked after children and care leavers are given priority access to many
services ensuring their health, education, accommodation and other needs are
met promptly and well. New arrangements, such as those pertaining to the
Health and Wellbeing Board and public health functions, provide the
opportunity to consider improved targeting of services to specific groups of
vulnerable children.
 The final draft of the revised performance management framework for
childrens social care is at the point of sign off. It will effectively synchronise
all performance management and quality assurance arrangements in line with
reporting schedules. Currently, performance management and management
oversight occurs routinely via, for example, measuring performance against a
range of key indicators, specifically commissioned audits of areas of potential


concern and monthly performance clinics. Findings and recommendations
from these activities appropriately inform the services single improvement
plan.
 Management oversight of practice is well established. One example of driven
performance improvement can be seen in the reduction in re-referral rates
since February 2013 to 17%, the national average being 25%. Other
examples include children being moved to permanent homes more swiftly,
and more children who become looked after being tracked through their
journey from the time they first need help. Performance information regarding
the work of the multi-agency Hub is detailed, and enables senior managers to
have a good overview of its functioning of and variations in demand.
 There are an effective range of panels which assist with case decision-making,
such as the care planning panel and the complex case panel. These also
contribute to good management oversight of practice. Most social workers had
detailed knowledge of the children they were working with, and a good
analysis of their family dynamics and functioning. This knowledge in most
cases appropriately informs assessments and planning although in a very
small minority of circumstances this is not the case. The service had identified
these shortfalls through their own audits of practice, further emphasising that
the local authority knows itself well, including its strengths and deficiencies.
This appropriately leads to the quality of professional practice having priority
in the service improvement plan.
 There are some good examples where the views of children, young people
and their families have impacted on service delivery, including young people
attending the Childrens Service Committee and good account being taken of
their views; the work of the Children in Care Council in terms of designing the
Pledge; and parents of children with disabilities being trained to deliver
training on short breaks care. Childrens social care actively seeks the views of
children and their families. This is done through surveys of all those who have
received services, including those who have attended a child protection
conference.
 Overall the social care workforce is stable, sufficiently experienced, qualified
and supported. The recording of supervision varies and does not always
include critical analysis and reflection. The appointment of a new and
extremely experienced DCS, three weeks prior to the inspection, adds the
focus and drive to fulfil the requirements of both strategic and operational
agendas. There are very few vacancies and arrangements in place for above
establishment staff to be employed, who are able to fill vacancies promptly as
they emerge. Newly qualified social workers are well supported with their
professional development. Unqualified members of the childrens workforce
are supported to achieve relevant qualifications. Staff have good access to
training and development, including staff who work for the jointlycommissioned out of hours service. Council-sponsored opportunities are
supplemented by a detailed training programme led by the HSCB. Social
workers demonstrated passionate commitment to their work, to improving
childrens lives, and are proud to work in Hartlepool. They receive good


support from skilled, experienced and accessible managers. Formal
supervision which includes case direction is regular, and they also enjoy good
access to frequent informal case discussion with colleagues and managers.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The effectiveness of the LSCB requires improvement
Areas for improvement
 The Hartlepool Safeguarding Children Board (HSCB) must take steps to
support the identification, assessment and safeguarding of children at risk of
sexual exploitation through implementing the child sexual exploitation
screening methodology and developing a plan for implementation to ensure
that professional staff are able to use this resource.
 The HSCB must accelerate its work with the Tees-wide Vulnerable, Exploited,
Missing and Trafficked group (VEMT) and fully implement the Child Sexual
Exploitation strategy to ensure effective, early identification, assessment and
intervention for children and young people who may be at risk of/or are being
exploited.
 The HSCB should ensure that its work with young inspectors informs the
planning and evaluation of service delivery and that this is extended to include
feedback from children and families who have directly received help and
protective services.
 The HSCB needs to accelerate progress and implementation of its strategic
action plan, with a particular focus on children who experience domestic
violence and who abuse drugs or alcohol, so that it has a positive impact on
outcomes for these vulnerable children and young people.
 The HSCB should develop an effective multi-agency data set and routinely
scrutinise partners performance, challenging and auditing where necessary.
 The HSCB should increase its influence and effectiveness through improved
strategic arrangements with the Health and Wellbeing Board and the Family
Justice Council.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
 Presently the HSCB does not have an independent chair in post and the role is
being covered by the vice chair. Recruitment for a new independent chair is
underway.
 The HSCB has not been well led and as a result has a limited picture of how
well agencies are working together to support children and families, or the
difference they are making to their lives. For example, it does not have an
agreed multi-agency data set to monitor performance, and has only minimal
information from multi-agency audits and peer review of cases to inform
themselves. This means the Boards ability to improve performance by
exercising scrutiny and challenge of partners is limited.
 The most recent Section 11 audit was undertaken effectively and did not
identify significant issues of concern. However, the Board did not follow up


the findings to maximise learning across the partnership or to inform future
practice and improvement.
 The HSCB is not yet able to demonstrate effective leadership or a developed
culture of professional challenge. As yet formal arrangements with the Health
and Wellbeing Board, the Childrens Strategic Partnership and the Family
Justice Board are underdeveloped and so do not influence the priorities and
resources of these high-level strategic partnerships.
 The HSCB has responsibility for implementing the strategies for tackling
domestic violence and neglect which are linked to the needs of children and
their families. However, progress has been too slow to measure impact. For
example, although a neglect sub group is in place and has made some
progress, the Graded Care Profile assessment tool (to measure levels of
neglect) is not fully implemented. Training for staff is however planned for
children of parental drug and alcohol abuse. This limits the boards ability to
drive improved professional practice for those children.
 A new and potentially effective multi agency joint report for child protection
case conferences has been piloted on five cases and has had some early
success in engaging partner agencies to manage core groups and to be
appropriately accountable for the protection of children and young people.
 The HSCBs VEMT group brings together the focus on children who go missing
with those who may be at risk of sexual exploitation. In some aspects such as
tracking and monitoring children who go missing, the VEMT shows evidence of
early positive impact. Missing procedures are working well. Young people are
being tracked, monitored and in most cases receive a return interview. Young
people were consulted about who they wanted to carry out return interviews.
They often chose to have someone who knows them well, such as their key
worker or throughcare worker and this is what happens in practice. However,
the Board is not exercising sufficient challenge or scrutiny in relation to why
children go missing. Neither is it sponsoring or leading any work to reduce the
incidence of missing children. Work relating to children who are at risk of or
being sexually exploited is at a very early stage. The screening tool for
children at risk of sexual exploitation has not yet been launched. It is
therefore not being used by practitioners and so reduces the likelihood of
these children being systematically identified. A Tees-wide strategy to address
issues of child sexual exploitation is in development, but not fully
implemented. No impact can be evidenced as yet.
 The HSCBs development of priorities, action plans and measures of its impact
is not sufficiently informed by the views of children. It has engaged with the
young inspectors group who have given their views about the HSCB meetings
and the priority of tackling neglect. However, there is little evidence that these
views, or those of other children and families who have received services,
influence service planning or design.
 The HSCB fulfils its statutory responsibilities. It has clear governance
arrangements and is regularly attended by a range of appropriate agencies


and lay members. Over the last six months, since the appointment of a new
business manager, it has shown acceleration in activity, for example in the
process of updating its policies and procedures, updating governance
arrangements, and improving the knowledge about private fostering and
information-sharing.
 Tees-wide child protection procedures are very good, used by all agencies and
readily accessible from the board website. They describe a continuum of need,
from children who may benefit from early intervention through to child
protection. They also clarify how to make a referral to childrens services, and
explain the need to seek the consent of parents and older children. Since
November 2013, these procedures have been improved by an updated
threshold document. This helps agencies to understand which is the most
appropriate type of service to meet a childs needs and how to assess that
service.
 The HSCB offers sufficient appropriate training informed by relevant research.
Although measures of the impact of training need is strengthening, it is
underpinned by a good strategy and action plan. Training is complemented by
good quality electronic safeguarding bulletins and rough guides to subjects
such as core group working, assessment and referral.
 The Serious Case Review Implementation Group works effectively and
disseminates learning from serious case reviews held in other authorities as
well as lessons learned from local incidents. Lessons learned inform future
training and service developments. The group liaises well with the child death
overview panel on individual cases and broader public health issues leading to
good actions. For example, the production of a safer sleeping public
information leaflet following lessons learned about the dangers of co-sleeping
from serious incidents and some child deaths.


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work based
learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and
other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


