Hertfordshire County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 14 September 2015  8 October 2015
Report published: 27 November 2015

Childrens services in Hertfordshire are good

Requires improvement

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Hertfordshire County Council is led by competent leaders and managers and is now
delivering a good service overall to children and their families. Leaders have
successfully improved services to children, young people and their families since the
inspections of children looked after services in 2010, and child protection in 2013,
when services were found to be adequate. There are a minority of children who are
receiving outstanding services. Services to children in need of help and protection
require improvement to ensure that all children benefit from timely planning and
intervention. Almost all areas for improvement identified in the previous inspections
in 2010 and 2013 have been addressed in full and, as a result, services to children
and their families have improved. The local authority continues to work diligently to
address the very small number of areas for improvement still being progressed.
Very clear governance arrangements are in place that ensure there is a shared vision
and that statutory functions are delivered. Senior leaders and managers work well
with partnership boards and provide strong leadership. The Chief Executive engages
purposefully with the childrens agenda, as does the Lead Member who has built up a
robust understanding of issues within childrens services during his term in this post.
A skilled and influential Director of Childrens Services (DCS), together with her
determined leadership team, has cross-party political support and effectively
manages a very large childrens services department. The Local Safeguarding
Children Board (LSCB) is performing well and effectively influences services to
children and families. The Health and Wellbeing Board (H&WB) successfully oversees
and drives forward the childrens agenda. Strong links have been established with
the police at all levels of the organisation to enhance partnership working.
Children and families receive timely and coordinated early help services across the
county to meet their emerging needs. If their needs escalate, the vast majority are
promptly allocated to a social worker and receive good assessments that address
need, risk and also consider the child and parents views. For the large majority of
children requiring protection, action is taken promptly and risk is reduced. However,
planning for children in need, including those in need of protection, is an area
requiring improvement to ensure targets are clear and that progress is made.
Systems to monitor the effectiveness of step-up and step-down arrangements
between early help and childrens social care are not currently in place.
The local authority is appropriately identifying those children who are at risk of child
sexual exploitation and, for the vast majority, puts plans in place that reduce risk.
Effective oversight of the most vulnerable children is routinely undertaken by senior
managers and they use local and national research to help inform their planning. The
timeliness and quality of return home interviews for children who go missing from
home and care requires improvement. A few risk management plans are not
sufficiently detailed and information about vulnerable children is not always brought
together in a single place, including data about children missing education.
Children looked after by the local authority receive a good service and, for the vast
majority, their outcomes improve as a result of being looked after. They become


looked after at the right time, have good assessments of their needs and wishes, and
the majority live in stable, high-quality placements with families. The local authority
is having success in achieving more timely permanence planning for children than
they had previously, and they continue to focus on this. Children in primary school
progress well, however GSCE outcomes are currently poor for children looked after.
While children have good access to advocacy services, there is further work required
to ensure more children have access to an independent visitor.
For children with a plan for adoption, they have families secured with a sense of
urgency and both they, and potential adopters, are prepared well to ensure these
matches are successful. Developments are needed to improve the quality and
content of some post adoption support plans.
Care leavers speak highly of the good service they receive and almost all are in touch
with the local authority. Personal advisers provide consistent support and guidance,
and enable care leavers to plan effectively for their futures. Although an increasing
number of care leavers are attending further and higher education, including
universities, this is still relatively low and too few have the opportunity to undertake
apprenticeships.
Particularly noteworthy is the progress the local authority has made in ensuring
planning is better influenced by the views of children, young people and carers  an
area for improvement in their last inspection of child protection services. Users views
are now routinely sought to inform individual intervention and planning, and also at
an organisational level to inform commissioning and strategic planning.
An area of particular strength, previously an area for improvement in the most recent
inspection of services for children looked after, is the service provision for young
people aged 12 plus through the Targeted Youth Support (TYS) service. This team
offers effective specialist intervention and support to adolescents from a team of
highly skilled staff.
Almost all performance management and quality assurance arrangements are strong
within the local authority. The combined use of data, audit, complaints, consultation
and external evaluation ensures senior leaders understand the authority well.
Effective oversight by front line managers does, however, require further
improvement.
Commissioning arrangements have been reviewed and improved during the past
year to build on the existing good practice of joint commissioning. There are now
three commissioning priority groups with detailed action plans in place, which are
securing a more integrated approach to commissioning across the partnership. Very
effective developments in workforce planning have led to a more secure and stable
workforce, most of whom now have manageable caseloads. The use of the social
work and management academies have been a key component of this success.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates six childrens homes. Two were judged to be good or
outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection. Three of the remaining homes
were judged to be requires improvement and one was judged to be inadequate
and is not currently operational.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in March 2013. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for looked after children
was in November 2010. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since 2011.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since 2009.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 261,746 children and young people under the age of 18 live in
Hertfordshire. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 13% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 9% (the national average is 16%)
 in secondary schools is 7% (the national average is 14%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 17% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian and mixed ethnic groups.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 15% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 11% (the national average is 15%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2015, 5,441 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 August 2015, 721 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 1,140 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 August 2015, 16 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is the same as at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, six serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and five serious case reviews have been completed or are ongoing at the
time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 August 2015, 1033 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 39.5 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 1,005 (38 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015.
 Of this number, 330 (or 31.9%) live outside the local authority area
authority area
authority area
 seven live with parents, of whom one lives out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
returned to be looked after
independent living
living in houses of multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Strengthen the quality of planning and management oversight for children in
need and those on a child protection plans to ensure children experience
timely intervention and support. (pages 13, 30 paragraphs 27, 29, 103)


Monitor the effectiveness of step-up and step-down arrangements between
early help and childrens social care, and ensure that appropriate actions are
taken to improve services as a result. (page 10, paragraph 14)


Ensure that risk management plans for children at risk of child sexual
exploitation are sufficiently specific to meet the degree of risk and inform
intervention. (page 13, paragraph 31 )


Improve the timeliness and quality of return home interviews for children who
have been missing from home and care. (page 18, paragraph 50)


Ensure that data relating to all children who go missing, including those
missing from school, are collated and analysed to inform risk management
and service planning, both for individual children and strategically to inform
disruption activities and service planning. (page 13, 30 paragraphs 31, 106)


Increase opportunities for children looked after to be supported by an
independent visitor. (page 17, paragraph 43)


Continue to maintain progress in achieving early permanency planning
through timely legal processes. (page 16, paragraph 41)


Improve the quality of post adoption support plans to include timescales for
actions and support to adopters. (page 23, paragraph 78)


Improve the number of care leavers who are engaged in employment,
education and training by expanding the range of education and training
options available to care leavers; particularly apprenticeships and traineeships.
(page 25, paragraph 85)


Summary for children and young people
 Councillors and senior managers know their services well. They want to improve
childrens lives through providing good quality services to children and their
families. Managers have made very good progress in improving services since the
previous inspections and know what they need to do to make further
improvements, particularly to services for children who need help and protection.
Managers regularly listen to the views of children and young people when
planning services.
 Children and their families receive help when they need it from professionals such
as teachers, childrens centres and health visitors. Parents say they value this
support.
 Some children, young people and families receive very effective help and
protection, but not all yet receive a good enough service. Social workers are
really good at finding out what children need, but do not always take action
quickly enough.
 Social workers are good at identifying when children may be at risk of being
sexually exploited. When children come home after being missing, social workers
do not always talk with them quickly enough to find out whether they are safe.
 Social workers make sure they get to know children well and consider their needs
sensitively. They make regular visits to them and offer valuable help and support.
 Children who are looked after receive a good service. The majority of children
come into care at the right time. They are also supported to move back home
with their families if this is right for them.
 Social workers find the right homes for most children, including adoptive families
where appropriate. Social workers make sure that adopters and foster carers are
very well prepared to care for children. The vast majority of children and young
people thrive in their placements and managers are working hard to increase the
number of foster families within Hertfordshire.
 Most children who are looked after attend good schools. Children in primary
schools make good progress, but the virtual school has got more to do to ensure
that young people looked after do well in their GCSEs.
 There is a strong service for teenagers, which ensures they get the right level of
support by skilled workers.
 Care leavers receive a good service. Nearly all stay in touch with their personal
advisers and receive a high level of support and guidance. Not enough care
leavers are currently in apprenticeships.
 The Children in Care Council is doing some good work to make sure services are
more child and young person friendly. Members of the group also work well with
managers and councillors to support them in their work of being effective and
committed corporate parents. The council are currently undertaking a review of
how they organise their corporate parenting panel and inspectors support this.


The experiences and progress of
Requires
children who need help and protection improvement
Summary
Children, young people and families who receive help and protection are not all
receiving a consistently good service. A small number of cases seen were examples
of outstanding practice. In these, children were quickly supported and protected
and their needs were understood through good assessment that used research and
considered the impact of their previous histories on their current needs.
Early help services are offered through a range of flexible and effective services,
and feedback from parents about the early help they receive was positive.
Currently, the local authority is not robustly monitoring cases that move between
early help and childrens social care. However, in cases seen, children who need
help and protection have an assessment of their needs undertaken without delay.
Thresholds are generally well understood, but a small number of children were
identified during the inspection who were not receiving the right level of service to
meet their needs. The local authority acted swiftly to ensure these children were
not at risk and that their needs were being met.
The majority of assessments for children are strong and contain clear evidence of
the views and wishes of children and their families. Childrens plans, including child
in need and child protection plans, are not yet consistently clear, but most do
coordinate good multi-agency support.
Child protection conferences, reviews and core groups are not always clear about
what needs to change to reduce risk in all cases. Frontline management oversight
is not sufficiently challenging to ensure actions and progress are timely for all
children.
Risk is initially identified well for children who are at risk of child sexual
exploitation, and, while there is some evidence of reducing risk for young people,
this is inconsistent. Some risk management plans lacked sufficient detail to gauge
risk. Return interviews for young people missing from home require improvement
as they were not always timely and did not consistently lead to an understanding
of why individual young people had gone missing.
Arrangements for the management of allegations against adults working or
volunteering with children through the Designated Officers are strong, although
the IT system to record this work is weak.
Good practice was also seen in the emergency duty team and joint child protection
teams. Creative efforts are made to identify and support children who are privately
fostered, however, numbers of children known to be living in these arrangements
remain low.


Inspection findings

Children and young people in Hertfordshire who require help and protection
are listened to and supported by skilled professionals committed to meeting
their needs. The local authority has made a concerted and successful effort to
ensure that childrens views are heard and that their wishes and feelings are
central to the service offered to them. Direct work and engagement with
children is also consistently strong across childrens social care. Children are
visited regularly, and seen alone.


Families are supported well through a wide range of early help provision. Early
help services are strong and are provided primarily through a large number of
childrens centres, early years services, the Targeted Youth Support (TYS)
service and a successful thriving families service3. School professionals also
provide a great deal of early support to families. Parents spoke very positively
about the early help services they receive.


When contact is made with the local authority and the threshold for social
work assessment is not met, referrals are passed through the new multiagency safeguarding hub (MASH). Children and families are then signposted
to receive an early help service, and children who would benefit from an early
help assessment are being identified appropriately. In the six months prior to
the inspection, 1368 children received an early help assessment or targeted
intervention. Although these assessments were often very brief, they did
contain the key information to ensure children and their families received
appropriate services to meet their needs. The introduction of an easy to use
web-based electronic database to record all early help assessments is
supporting multi-agency colleagues to formally record their assessments and
support work with children and their families. This is leading to a more
coordinated early help response to a larger group of children.


The local authority early help strategy includes an increased focus on
evidencing progress and measuring outcomes. Childrens centres, school
partnerships, thriving families and Youth Connexions are currently using a new
outcomes tool, with some early evidence of the services having a positive
impact on improving outcomes for children and their families.


The local authority currently does not have a robust system for monitoring the
effectiveness of step-up or step-down arrangements between early help and
social care, which means they cannot be sure that these arrangements are
sufficiently timely and effective for all children.


When children or young people require a social care service, contact is made
with an established customer service team. Referrals are appropriate and


Local name for the Troubled Families Programme team


demonstrate that other professionals understand thresholds for children to
access the appropriate level of service. Children who require immediate
safeguarding are passed to the joint child protection investigation team for
child protection enquiries to commence. Children who require a social service
other than immediate safeguarding are referred through the MASH;
adolescents, are fast-tracked to the Targeted Youth Support (TYS) teams.

The joint child protection investigation team is made up of social workers and
police officers who respond promptly to allegations of all forms of child abuse.
Good work was seen where strong working relationships with the police were
evident and childrens needs were safeguarded swiftly. Managers in the joint
child protection investigation team are alert to the indicators of risk of female
genital mutilation and investigate directly. Clear information on female genital
mutilation is available on the local authority website to assist identification.


Issues regarding consent are well understood in the customer service team
and they have received recent training relevant to their role. During the
inspection, a social worker was added to the customer service team to ensure
professional advice was available to inform decisions regarding which team to
pass the referral to for threshold decisions. The customer services guidance
document is complex and lengthy; the local authority is appropriately
reviewing this document to ensure it is aligned with the agreed LSCB
threshold document.


The new MASH team is well resourced and includes social care, police,
probation, education and health professionals. These professionals are
working effectively together to reach good decisions for children that are
informed by all relevant information available across the agencies. The high
degree of commitment and good multi-agency input was seen to impact
positively on the assessment of risk for children. A very small number of cases
seen had not been assigned to the most appropriate part of the MASH service
and the local authority audited these and responded quickly to ensure that
needs were appropriately met. Delay was seen in some cases rated as less
urgent in the MASH service.


The emergency duty team is a dedicated service for children and effectively
manages referrals regarding children outside office hours. Practice is timely
and prompt emergency placements are made when required.


The TYS service offers a comprehensive range of services for adolescents and
young adults. It offers an integrated, multi-disciplinary service from early help
through to children looked after, care leavers and youth offending services. All
TYS services seen for children were of a consistently high quality and early
help work showed appropriate interventions for young people to prevent their
circumstances escalating.


Homeless young people aged sixteen and seventeen are initially assessed by
the Herts Young Homeless Team. If it is considered that their needs cannot be


met by the homeless team, young people are referred to TYS where an
assessment is undertaken by a qualified social worker; young people become
looked after when this is appropriate. The local authority also offers a time
limited crash pad service for up to 21 days until supported accommodation is
available. Tenancies are secured promptly and the local authority showed a
clear and timely response to young people in these circumstances.

Transfers between teams were clear and timely and work is allocated
promptly, with children not experiencing any delay in having their needs
assessed. Managers provide clear case direction on cases transferring
between the MASH and Assessment teams.


Child and family assessments are of a high quality, but some do not
sufficiently demonstrate clear management direction regarding next steps.
Some assessments seen were outstanding, due to comprehensive
consideration of history, strong analysis of risk factors, including domestic
abuse, effective use of research and strongly featuring the voice of the child,
with good consideration of impact of current circumstances on the child.
Chronologies are of a consistently high standard and positively inform workers
of childrens histories and experiences. This was an area for improvement in
the previous child protection inspection.


Currently more than half of children supported by a child protection plan have
domestic abuse in their families and half have parents affected by substance
and/or alcohol misuse. In response to these needs, the local authority is
developing new Family Safeguarding Teams, which have been designed
specifically to enable adult and childrens services to improve support to
families in order to help them understand the impact of domestic abuse,
parental substance misuse and adult mental ill health on their childrens
outcomes. The first of these teams to be operational is demonstrating positive
work, with assessments and plans for child protection and child in need being
of a good quality.


The quality of child in need and child protection services are variable, resulting
in some children receiving an outstanding service and some children receiving
a service that requires improvement. The local authority is showing an
improving performance in timeliness for initial child protection conferences
(ICPCs). In 201314 only 30% of ICPCs were held within 15 days and this
improved significantly to 78.3% in 201415; there has been slight fluctuation
in this during the current reporting year, with a drop to 69.8% of children
having an ICPC within 15 days in August 2015. The local authority
demonstrated strong senior management oversight to improving performance
during 201415 and it continues to scrutinise performance closely. A very
small number of cases were being supported as child in need where child
protection enquiries and ICPCs should have taken place. The local authority
responded promptly to address this and no serious detrimental impact was
seen for the children.



Currently, 71.3% of children are subject to a child protection plan due to
neglect, with 22.7% for emotional abuse, 3.1% sexual abuse, 2.8% physical
abuse and 0.1% multiple categories. Through the effective work of the local
authority and LSCB in analysing the use of the neglect category, there has
been an appropriate increase in the use of this category, from 58.9% at 31
March 2014. In one case seen that was of outstanding quality, the
identification of neglect in an environment of domestic abuse appropriately
reflected the wide range of risks to children. Fewer children are on child
protection plans, currently 714 compared to 1,140 at 31 March 2014. This has
been the result of concerted and effective efforts by service managers to
scrutinise requests for ICPCs and to ensure decisions are relevant to the risks
and needs of children.


While most child protection conferences and core groups are effective, a small
minority of conferences do not result in plans that consider the full risk and
protective factors for children or provide clear detail on what needs to change.
For a very small number of children, there is no purposeful plan and core
group meetings do not adequately consider risk. Other cases show good
practice in this area, with timely plans that identify clearly what needs to
change, and the plans are appropriately progressed through the core group.


There are 220 children in Hertfordshire who have been on a child protection
plan for more than 12 months and 40 children who have been on a child
protection plan for more than two years. The local authority recently
undertook an audit to understand this trend. A sample of these children was
evaluated during the inspection and for the majority the local authority has
been proactive, including initiating court proceedings where appropriate.


The quality of planning requires improvement for most children in need and
those in need of protection. Although a minority of plans are of good or
outstanding quality, with detailed and clear targets, together with timescales
and the person responsible for delivering them, the majority lack specificity.
This means that the potential for cases to drift without progress being made is
increased. This was an area for improvement at the last inspection.


The local authority has put in place a policy to ensure that those children who
cease to be subject to a child protection plan due to reduced risk continue to
receive support via a child in need plan for a minimum of twelve weeks. This
was in response to an area for improvement at the last inspection and has
now become established practice. The policy is driving effective practice. An
inspector observed a review child protection conference, where this process
was used effectively to establish clear expectations with the family and other
professionals about what support and oversight would be in place via child in
need services following step-down from child protection.


The local authority operates a multi-agency risk management panel, which
considers young people who go missing and/or are at risk of child sexual
exploitation. It produces and reviews risk management plans. In 201415, 56


cases were referred to the panel and 20 cases were discharged at the first
review, showing some evidence of reduced risk. The local authority is planning
to review the panel to ensure it develops a greater focus on risk reduction and
on increasing disruption of alleged perpetrators. Although intelligence is
shared, data regarding children missing from education and those at risk of
child sexual exploitation are not currently effectively joined with data
regarding children missing from home and care and those at risk of child
sexual exploitation. This means that there may be missed opportunities to
identify trends and hotspots and to disrupt potential perpetrators. Young
people who are at risk of child sexual exploitation are supported well through
the TYS service. Young people who have experienced child sexual exploitation
are able to access independent sexual violence advisers and youth work
support.

Managers have a good awareness of children missing education and
effectively use a database to check that children are not enrolled in a school
out of county. The numbers have reduced from 59 in 201415 to eight at
present, showing good performance in this area. Links with the police are
strong and managers appropriately share information regarding individual
children who are moving abroad or at risk of radicalisation or child sexual
exploitation. Good support and information is also provided to parents of the
advisers support parents by offering detailed written guidance, including how
parents can help their children with their studies. Managers ensure they are
fully aware of the children missing from education.


There is strong engagement and partnership working from the local authority
with the Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA) and the MultiAgency Risk Assessment Conferences (MARAC). Clear understanding of risk
and good quality information is shared between participating agencies. MARAC
have an effective programme of ongoing improvement following a review and
there is now a young MAPPA and young MARAC to effectively consider the
needs of those under 18 years.


The arrangements for the management of allegations against adults working
or volunteering with children is provided through two full-time designated
officers. Practice is strong and a new management information system is due
to be implemented to assist with analysis and overview of the service data.


Considerable creative effort has gone into awareness-raising in relation to
private fostering. Currently, there are 16 active private fostering cases.
Children who are privately fostered are seen alone, and have their needs
assessed appropriately, however, this would be strengthened by fuller
recording and greater management oversight.


Advocacy and participation has had a renewed focus in the local authority, but
there are still too few children and young people accessing the advocacy
service to gain support to attend their child protection conferences. In a


recent audit, the local authority identified that although 84.4% of young
people did not attend their child protection conference, they all had their
wishes and feelings conveyed by their social worker. In a small number of
cases, there is good use of advocacy services. For example, one young person
successfully argued, with the help of her advocate, to remain on a child
protection plan as she felt this would improve her safety.

Some good work was seen when considering the diversity and cultural needs
of children and young people, including use of interpreters and placement
matching through the emergency duty team. However, identity is insufficiently
considered for all children and young people who require help and protection.

The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Decisions about whether children need to become looked after are timely and
appropriate. Strong and bespoke multi-agency edge of care support is in place,
which enables children to remain at home where at all possible. Practice before
and after care proceedings is effective, with rapid recent improvement in the
timeliness of proceedings and early permanency planning. The local authority
appropriately continues to prioritise timeliness of permanency planning.
Social workers know children well, regularly visit them and give sensitive and
thoughtful consideration to their needs. As a result, children and young people
looked after achieve positive outcomes. Arrangements to identify and respond to
risk for children who go missing from care are robust. However, arrangements for
return interviews for children are not always sufficiently effective.
Children looked after are well supported in their education by the virtual school.
Educational progress is variable, with strong performance across key stage one,
and low attainment at key stage four.
The local authority has driven a range of initiatives to increase placement choice
and placement stability, and to secure more local placements for children. This is
having a positive impact and the fostering service is providing a good range of
placements to meet individual childrens needs.
The independent reviewing service regularly reviews care plans, and there is a
culture of informal and formal challenges to care plans. Children looked after make
good use of advocacy services, however the independent visitor service is only
available to a small number of children.
The Children in Care Council is a strong and effective group and children looked
after are involved in a number of relevant activities, including service development.


Adoption is considered and achieved for a wide range of children, with the large
majority being prepared well and placed without unnecessary delay. The
preparation and assessment of adopters is thorough and children are well matched
with their potential adopters. The content of support plans for adopters requires
improvement and there are currently too few fostering to adopt placements.
Care leavers are well supported by skilled personal advisers who keep in touch
with them. Pathway planning is effective. Young people receive information about
all their entitlements. Care leavers would benefit from further expansion of
education, training, apprenticeships and traineeships opportunities, and clearer
support pathways into adult services for vulnerable young people.

Inspection findings

At the time of the inspection, Hertfordshire looked after 1029 children. The
local authority is achieving its strategic priority to provide effective and flexible
edge of care services for children and young people, and at the same time
decrease the number of children looked after across the local authority.
Children and young people are very well supported through effective multiagency edge of care services, provided by the innovative Targeted Youth
Support (TYS) service. Creative and bespoke individual support packages are
in place for young people over 13 years and these enabled the majority of
young people to remain successfully at home. The rate of children becoming
looked after, at 38 per 10,000 in 201415, is lower than statistical neighbours
and England (52 and 60 per 10,000 respectively).


The large majority of children have improved outcomes as a result of being
looked after: emotional vulnerabilities and well-being are addressed,
educational progress is achieved for children who attend school regularly, and
children experience an expansion of leisure activities and improved
relationships with others. Decisions about whether children need to become
looked after are timely and appropriate in almost all cases. Inspectors did see
a small number of cases where children came into care too late and, while risk
was responded to, intervention could have been timelier.


Where the plan was for the child to return home, the majority of children and
young people were subject to multi-agency assessments and supported by
children in need plans. Inspectors found a small minority of cases where
children were returned home without a clear assessment or a support plan,
but most continued to receive effective social work intervention when at
home.


Where legal proceedings are required for children, a structured approach to
the Public Law Outline (PLO) process is in place, with clear guidance for staff
to avoid drift and delay. Management and legal oversight of the PLO is
appropriate and this has led to improved practice, with children being placed
in permanent homes more quickly. Letters to family members, prior to the


authority applying for a court order, are clear and explain expectations and
what needs to change. In most cases, legal permanence for children looked
after was pursued promptly through a range of suitable options. There has
been a rapid improvement in timeliness in care proceedings from 49 weeks in
the government target of 26 weeks. Early permanency planning for children
includes the extensive use of family group conferences to identify extended
family members, and effective parallel planning. An excellent example of early
permanency planning was where the Agency Decision Maker had made
adoption decisions for 19 children who were in care proceedings in order to
plan for swift adoption placements.

There is variability in the timeliness of viability assessments undertaken for
extended family members and permanency planning has not been timely
enough in the majority of cases. This was most often the result of some
historic drift and delay, where permanency plans were slow to evolve. Good
permanency planning was seen in nearly half of cases, with permanency
achieved without delay. Some excellent casework was also seen, with a baby
placed very quickly for adoption. The local authority has recently improved the
tracking of permanency planning to address historical issues of delay and
continue to improve timeliness and coordination within the whole permanency
system.


Children and young people are listened to and their views inform decisions
regarding planning for their care. Social workers know them well and visit
regularly, often beyond statutory requirements, and give sensitive and
thoughtful consideration to their views, needs and circumstances. Children
looked after use the commissioned advocacy service well, with 393 children
and young people accessing the services in 201415. A well-embedded
complaints system has led to improvements in services. For example, in one
case, a placement move was postponed until after a young persons complaint
was resolved. The advocacy service made 17 complaints on behalf of young
people in 201415. The independent visitor scheme is underperforming, with
only 15 young people currently accessing this service. A more ambitious target
was set in July 2015 to achieve 20 independent visitor matches over the next
year.


Children and young people are aware of their rights and entitlements. The
pledge for children looked after, which highlights age-appropriate rights and
responsibilities, is actively promoted by social workers and independent
reviewing officers (IROs) to ensure that the principles of it are woven into
current practice.


Assessments of childrens needs are strong in the large majority of cases and
take account of children and parents views. A dedicated group of social
workers sensitively seek to meet individual childrens needs. In an outstanding
example, a social worker had developed specific skills to be able to
communicate effectively with a disabled child and understand their wishes and


feelings. Children live in placements that have been carefully matched to meet
their needs. A young person, for example, was placed specifically to avoid
further risk of gang involvement. In a very small number of cases, placements
did not fully match a childs ethnic or cultural needs. For example, a black
young person was placed in a residential childrens home in a predominantly
white area.

The quality of written care plans for children varies. A range of plans were
seen, including post support plans, care plans and pathway plans that did not
all fully capture details or have smart targets for monitoring purposes. This
means that children and young people, their carers and other professionals
cannot fully check that actions are completed and progress is being made. Up
to date and comprehensive case recording accurately reflects the work
undertaken with children and young people, and effective direct work is
undertaken to assist children and young people to understand their life
histories.


IROs have manageable caseloads and escalate important issues if the need
arises. IROs review the very large majority of childrens plans (91%) within
statutory timeframes. There is a culture in the organisation of both informal
and formal challenges to care plans with an acknowledgement that there
should be an increase in the use of formal challenge to enable clearer
monitoring of issues in the future. IROs regularly meet children before
reviews, and in between them where possible, to ensure their participation
remains strong.


Within the current cohort of children looked after, the large majority (89%) of
children and young people live in stable and secure placements and only
experience one or two placement moves. The local authority has successfully
driven improvements to placement stability via therapeutic training and
support to foster carers, residential respite beds, and support from the
Adolescent Resource Centre (ARC) and improved matching of children to
carers.


When children go missing from care, their carers report this promptly to the
police, and action is taken to establish their whereabouts. Social workers make
concerted and repeated efforts to get in touch with young people. The local
authority maintains clear tracking processes, using need to know notifications
and recording of risks and relevant information to ensure that the young
people at highest risk are monitored effectively. There is a small cohort of
looked after young people who go missing regularly and are at risk of child
sexual exploitation; practice and intervention has effectively reduced risk for
the majority of these particular young people. There has been a slight
decrease in the total number of missing episodes for young people who are
looked after, with the length of time that they are missing also decreasing
steadily, with most young people missing for less than 24 hours.



Return interview arrangements for children who have been missing from
home or care are not always timely enough, and the local authority is aware
that practice needs to improve further. A minority of children are not asked in
sufficient detail where they have been, or who they have been with, while
they have been missing to inform a full picture of potential risks. Appropriate
use is made of secure accommodation to protect those young people at the
highest levels of risk.


There are appropriate and effective services for children looked after via the
TYS to meet the needs of young people who offend. An effective countywide
commissioned service works with those young people who are at risk of
misusing drugs and alcohol.


Children looked after, including those placed out of county, benefit from
appropriate contact arrangements while living away from their families.
Contact is considered in all matches for permanence seen by inspectors.


The very large majority of children looked after have their health needs
identified and their health improves through the support of a dedicated looked
after children health service. Initial health assessment and health review
performance has improved because of increased capacity and effective
performance monitoring, with 82% of children having an up to date health
assessment. Access to a range of therapeutic and psychiatric support is
available for children and young people and their carers via the ARC. A
dedicated children looked after child and adolescent mental health service
(CAMHS) also provides a fast track service to respond to the emotional
wellbeing and mental health needs of children looked after.


The head of the virtual school provides extensive training and support to
designated teachers and head teachers to support them in their work with
children looked after. She monitors and tracks the educational achievement
and progress of children looked after at all stages thoroughly.


The 2014 educational outcomes for children looked after showed that a very
large majority (89%) of children looked after at Key Stage 1 made good
progress from often low starting points. Almost half, 48%, of children looked
after who took the Key Stage 2 tests in 2014 made more than expected
progress. The achievement and progress of children looked after at Key Stage
including English and mathematics, against the national average for children
looked after at 12%.


Just over a third of young people who have become looked after in the past
virtual school has appropriately focused on engaging them in their learning,
however the impact of these actions is not yet evident in the achievement for
children looked after.



Headteachers make effective use of pupil premium to support children
through their education, offering learning support resources and enrichment
activities. Teachers make good use of personal education plans (PEPs) to
monitor the support and progress of children looked after, although managers
recognise that the target setting in PEPs needs to be refined further to
demonstrate impact on the children in their personal behaviour, confidence,
social and emotional skills and resilience.


Children looked after have the full opportunities to attend school. The number
of pupils with fixed-term exclusions has fluctuated from 47 in 201213 to 55
in 201314 and 45 in 201415. The number of permanent exclusions have a
downward trend, from three in 201213 to one in 201314 and none in 2014


The virtual school has accurate data, and effective tracking mechanisms for
the numbers of children looked after in alternative and part-time education
and those who are missing school. Staff work diligently to place children
looked after in appropriate and good settings, and take swift and appropriate
action to ensure that this happens.


Where children are placed out of county, strong links are made by the virtual
school with other local authorities, which means that appropriate educational
provision is identified. The clinical commissioning groups and health providers
have recently implemented changes to improve the timeliness of health
assessments for those children placed out of the local authority area,
however, no cases were seen where children were not receiving appropriate
health services in their new locality. This included one young person whose
health needs were being well met by specialist health provision.


The use of delegated authority by foster carers to take some day-to-day
decisions on behalf of children and young people is widely in place. Children
and young people are routinely encouraged by foster carers and other
professionals to build friendships and attend a wide range of activities in order
to enhance their life experiences and build self-esteem.


Careful and sensitive matching for children and young people with carers
takes place via the Brokerage service. A very large majority of children live
with their brothers and sisters. There is appropriate placement choice for
emergencies. Children are appropriately referred to independent fostering
agencies or other specialist provision where needed. Evidence was seen of
appropriate and careful long-term matching of children to permanent carers.
There is a need to improve choice and availability of local placements,
particularly for adolescents with challenging behaviour. The local authority is
aware of this and there is a strong strategic drive to recruit more foster carers
in the local area and to improve placement choice. This is producing some
success, with an expected net gain of ten foster carer households at the yearend, based on previous years losses through retirement and termination.


Commissioning work is also being undertaken to improve the capacity of local
independent fostering agencies to meet the needs of Hertfordshire children.

Assessments of foster carers are good and they receive in-depth foster carer
reviews. However, there were some minor lapses in compliance to fostering
regulations in cases seen; for example, foster carer agreements on file were
not found, and not all annual reviews occurred within timescales. Foster carers
are integrated into the fostering service and influence its development. They
reported very good working relationships with all professional staff and are
provided with a high level of support by a range of appropriate support
services. A comprehensive learning and development programme, including elearning and specialist training, is available, although attendance is not always
recorded well.


Children are thoroughly prepared for permanence and carefully matched.
Foster carers described some social workers as brilliant in how well they work
with children. Children are prepared well for transitions, ensuring that they
understand their plans and their views are heard. The quality of the life story
book work seen by inspectors for children who are placed for adoption was
factually thorough, but could be more imaginative and child-focused.


The Children in Care Council is an effective group and has strong engagement
from senior leaders. Young people effectively participate in formal meetings
and they have appropriate engagement in service developments. Young
people from the Children in Care Council have worked hard to ensure that a
young persons perspective is in place for development of services. For
example, they have been influential in improving contact centre venues to be
more child-friendly; they have assisted in consulting with other young people
to redraft the Pledge; and they have developed the new template for pathway
plans for care leavers, making it more user-friendly for young people. In
addition, they provide highly valued training to foster carers and social
workers to further their understanding regarding issues affecting children
looked after. The Children in Care Council also organises a broad range of
events and celebrations for children and young people looked after and care
leavers to enjoy.

The graded judgment for adoption performance is that it is good

Adoption is considered and achieved for a wide range of children; this includes
older children, groups of brothers and sisters and disabled children. Adoption
decisions are thoroughly considered and children are well prepared for
adoption. The number of adopted children has been steadily rising year on
year, with 87 children being adopted in 201314. There has been a slight
reduction in 201415 to 68 children. There are approximately 58 children
waiting for adoption. A tracker group is in place to monitor all children waiting


for adoption, and who have a placement order granted by the court, to ensure
that any potential delays are identified.

Adoption workers routinely attend permanency planning meetings to ensure
that adoption is considered at the earliest opportunity. Permanence options
are also considered at most childrens second looked after review. Of the 67
children adopted over the last 12 months, the large majority (79%, 53
children) were adopted in less than a year, with the quickest time being less
than three months. Active family finding is taking place for the 45 children
currently waiting; all are aged over three years, and 19 have been matched
with their adoptive families or have a potential link. The local authority reports
an improving trajectory for 201215, with the average time between a child
entering care and moving in with their adoptive family being 619 days. In


The adoption service secures adoption placements for children, with family
finding activity commencing at the time a placement order is granted. There is
a wide range of family finding activity, from timely referrals, to the National
Adoption Register, to use of the East of England consortium. Transitions work
is very effective in preparing children for a move to their adoptive family.
Inspectors saw a creative approach to family finding activity days with the
introduction of craft days, where adopters and children interact while
undertaking an activity. Not only is this imaginative but it is producing some
early success with 23 children involved to date, leading to 13 matches. For
some children with complex needs, timescales to find adoptive families are
appropriately put in place alongside other permanence options to maximise
the opportunity of identifying permanent families.


There has been delay for 23 children as a result of birth family appeals to the
court, none of which have been successful. This demonstrates that the local
authority decision-making processes for adoption are thorough. At the time of
this inspection, of the 130 children recently matched, the large majority (92
children) fell outside the government set target of 121 days between receiving
a placement order and being matched with a family by an average of 76 days.
Further analysis of the data suggests that the majority of children who exceed
the target are those that entered care before mid-2013, meaning that for a
small minority of children, it has taken over a year to match them.


The local authority is tenacious in pursuing adoption when it believes that this
is the right permanence option for individual children and does not give up on
finding an adoptive family when this meets the childs assessed permanence
needs. A small number of children who have waited a long time for adoption
are now living with their adoptive family. This has impacted upon the local
authority performance against the government target for matching children
with their adoptive families. The adoption scorecard figure for the three year
average 201114, shows that the average time between the local authority
receiving court authority to place a child and deciding on a match with a


family was 197 days. This was 15 days longer than comparative local
authorities and 45 days longer than the performance threshold of 152 days.

The preparation and assessment of adopters is thorough. Most adopters
spoken with on this inspection feel that the assessment process assists them
in learning about the children waiting and understanding their capacity to
meet their needs. Adopters felt their assessing social workers knew them
inside out and this assists with the early identification of potential matches. A
significant strength within Hertfordshire is the involvement of experienced
adopters in supporting social workers to prepare and support new adopters.
The local authority has also set up a youth panel of adopted young people
who will meet with prospective adopters to encourage adopters to consider
older children for adoption. This is a creative service development that
demonstrates the local authoritys inclusive approach to the voice and
participation of children and young people.


Prospective adopter reports (PARs) are of a good quality and are well
informed by effective tools such as attachment style questionnaires. The
reports are detailed and well analysed, with positive work undertaken to
prepare the children of second time adopters. For example, in one case,
careful attention had been given to seeking the views of the first adopted child
to help him explore how he would feel about, and prepare for, having a new
brother or sister. In 201415, there was only one adoption disruption,
demonstrating the robustness of the local authority matching practices.


The Agency Decision Maker (ADM) decisions are of an outstanding quality,
due to the detailed analysis of documentation and thorough consideration of
permanence options. The number of decisions that changed away from
adoption was 65 at the end of 201314; this reduced to 38 at the end of
changed away from adoption, ADM decisions show that reasons for a change
in decision are thoroughly explored. This means that the local authority is
confident that the plan is the right one for the child.


Hertfordshires adoption panel is chaired by a suitably experienced
independent professional and is appropriately constituted, with regular and
relevant training for panel members. Medical advice is readily available to
prevent delay, with panel minutes demonstrating well considered and relevant
scrutiny of suitability, matching and post adoption support plans.


A comprehensive recruitment strategy is being successfully implemented, with
swift attention to enquiries and initial visits. Sixty-four adoption households
were approved during 201415 and the service is on track to recruit 60 new
adoption households this year. Recruitment materials such as posters and
leaflets are of good quality and various routes are effectively used to attract
new adopters, including an updated web page and creative use of social
media.



Timescales for assessing prospective adopters through the two stage
assessment process are on an improving trajectory. The service has
recognised the need to improve performance further and has engaged with an
Adopt the Future programme, which aims to reduce the number of children
waiting and the length of time they wait. Not all adopters are being assessed
quickly enough through the two stage recruitment and assessment process.
Of the 68 approved adopters in 201415, half completed stage two of the
assessment processes in four months, with the remainder finishing within six
months. While some adopters need longer in the stage two process to
consider and reflect on the assessment, there are too many where their
assessment is not meeting timescales.


Post adoption support is readily available from a specific team who receive
requests for support. Since April 2015 there have been 125 requests for
advice and guidance and 35 requests for an assessment of post adoption
support, all of which have appropriately resulted in a service. Effective direct
support to adopters and children awaiting therapy, supporting life story work
and contact arrangements are undertaken by workers within this team. The
local authority adoption service has appropriate plans in place to further
develop a wider range of therapeutic services for adopted children and is
working with commissioners to explore this issue. Birth parents whose children
are going through the adoption process have good access to support via a
commissioned service. Adoption workers meet with birth parents and there is
a helpful information pack available to them at permanency planning
meetings. There are currently 557 letterbox contact arrangements supported,
with a further 39 in the process of being set up. There are also 53 open
records relating to adopted adults who require birth records counselling.


The needs of children are identified well in post adoption support plans,
although sometimes these lack specific timescales for completion of actions.
For a small number of adopters, their needs are not always identified in full.
For example, a case was seen that lacked detail of how the adopters could be
helped, and when was the right time for them to explain the life story of their
child who has complex needs.


The quality of child permanence reports (CPRs) is variable, from requiring
improvement to good; this has not impacted upon decision making for
children. All examples seen by inspectors set out the childs history, contact
arrangements and the full range of permanence options. A minority of CPRs
provide insufficient attention to heritage issues and lack comprehensive
information in relation to the childs birth family, but this did not impact
negatively on matching for the children.


Fostering to adopt has been slow to be implemented in this local authority,
with only one arrangement currently in place. An example was seen by
inspectors of a very young baby being placed from birth through fostering for
adoption; this is good practice. The limited use of fostering to adopt


placements hinders some babies living with their adoptive families as soon as
possible.

The graded judgment about the experience and progress of care leavers is
that it is good

Care leavers have access to a holistic package of support from the multiskilled Targeted Youth Support (TYS) service and this results in most young
people being prepared well for independence. The service has high aspirations
for their care leavers, they do not give up on them and there are systems in
place for care leavers to return for support when they need it. Young people
are successfully encouraged to remain looked after until they are 18 years old
and they are supported to stay put beyond 18 years when it is appropriate.
In 201415, this meant that 53 of the 58 children who turned 18 remained
with their foster carers.


Highly skilled personal advisers keep in touch with 98% of care leavers.
Persistent efforts are made to keep in touch with the 2% of care leavers that
are not in regular contact. Workers respond effectively to young peoples
changing needs and, for example, direct and refer them to other agencies or
creatively review support packages as relevant. Good risk assessments are
used well to inform decisions and actions where limited or no contact is a
concern. Care leavers value the role of their personal advisers and believe that
their input provides a platform for building trusting professional relationships.


Overall, pathway planning is effective and all care leavers have an individual
plan. Pathway planning appropriately starts with young people when they are
years 4 months. The format of the plans has recently been revised by the
Children in Care Council and this has resulted in a far more interactive tool,
which supports clearer goals and better outcomes. Objectives are clearly set
out, with detailed, accountable actions and contingency plans. Reviews of
plans are thorough and are updated at least twice a year as young peoples
circumstances change. Young people are engaged in their pathway plan
reviews and value the opportunity to look back on their progress. A small
number of plans are less effective as they do not fully detail young peoples
needs or include clear actions.


The number of care leavers who are in education, employment or training
(EET) is improving. Currently, 79% of care leavers are EET, compared to 49%
in 201314, and higher than the England average (62% in 201314). The
virtual school and Connexions Service work tenaciously to reduce the not in
education, employment or training (NEET) numbers. The whereabouts and
destinations of older care leavers and those living out of county are closely
monitored. For example, the local authority is in touch with, and trying to


support, 14 unaccompanied asylum-seeking care leavers who have moved out
of the county and are refusing help. Attendance at university is improving: 4%
of care leavers are attending university; this is still lower than the England
average of 6%. Retention rates for young people successfully staying on their
chosen courses, however, at 98%, are excellent.

The number of apprenticeships for care leavers within the council has slowly
increased from three care leavers in 2013 to 10 in 2015. Additionally, 16 care
leavers have been recruited to apprenticeships within organisations external to
the council since April 2015. Five care leavers are currently completing
traineeships; this is a very successful programme, as the young people have
not previously engaged in conventional training courses. Care leavers are
supported to complete the national citizenship award and the Duke of
Edinburgh award. The 61 young people who have completed these awards
have improved their confidence, resilience and readiness for work. A good
service underpinned by a joint working protocol with the Department for Work
and Pensions (DWP) supports young people on benefits.


Transition planning to adult services for most disabled children is effective.
Joint work with adult services enables all disabled care leavers to have their
needs assessed well before they are 18 years old. Most young people
experience no interruptions or delays to receiving the support services they
need. A small number of young people who have a high level of vulnerability
and require long-term support do not have a clear pathway into adulthood. An
example of this being a young person whose emotional health needs do not
meet the criteria for adult services. The local authority is aware of this and is
working with other services to establish pathways for these young people.


Care leavers have their independent living skills and needs well assessed
through the use of an effective and enabling work book. Housing providers
have received training on how to appropriately use the work book and this has
improved their understanding of the needs of care leavers. Most young
people aged between 16 and 18 years are provided with preparation for
independence training. This is provided by social workers, housing support
workers and personal advisers. This work is supported by a range of
supported and semi-independent housing providers who offer independence
preparation as a core component of their contract specifications. The TYS
teams provide a range of good services such as emotional health and
wellbeing support, substance misuse, sexual health, therapeutic services and
counselling support. All care leavers are provided with a detailed summary of
their health histories, which provides everything they need to take charge of
their own health needs. This holistic support offer is equipping care leavers
well for adulthood.


Ninety-seven per cent of care leavers live in suitable accommodation. A very
small number of care leavers are living in unsuitable accommodation. These
are short-term arrangements, and personal advisers are working with the care
leavers to help them find suitable permanent accommodation. The local


authority has great success in encouraging young people to remain with their
foster carers under staying put arrangements. There is a strategic drive to
increase this number to enable more young people to benefit from these
arrangements. No young people are placed in bed and breakfast
accommodation and only a small number of care leavers over 18 years old live
in houses of multiple occupancy. Where this happens, assessments of their
needs and suitability are completed prior to placement. Almost all care leavers
report that they feel safe in their homes. Swift action is taken to ensure the
safety of the small minority of care leavers who say they dont feel safe.

The majority of care leavers aged 18 years and over live in independent
accommodation provided by the private rented sector or through social
housing nominations. There is an effective commissioning programme in place
to expand the range of supported housing providers, both for young people
aged 16 to 18 years and older care leavers. Providers are commissioned
through a framework arrangement; care leavers are involved in every stage of
the commissioning cycle. Good arrangements result in providers who are
trained to effectively respond to children at risk of sexual exploitation and
those who go missing. Clear service provider agreements are influenced by
care leavers, resulting in positive joint work to support young people into
independence. A positive impact of this is that young people are successful in
securing their own tenancies. An effective multi-agency risk management and
safeguarding panel is in place to ensure the needs of high risk care leavers are
responded to, including planning for care leavers who are in custody. Good
arrangements are in place, effectively coordinated between childrens services
and housing, for assessing the needs of and planning for young people aged
after if reunification is not possible and they are unable to live independently.


Care leavers say that they feel listened to and are well supported. The local
authority provide a clear message to care leavers that if things go wrong, they
will be supported and helped to start again. Foster carers have set up a
mentoring scheme for care leavers, which is well used and valued. Exit
interviews for care leavers have recently been introduced, and their feedback
will be used to develop service provision. However, it is too early to measure
the impact of this new work.


The Children in Care Council and the care leavers group influence service
development through their involvement with corporate parent elected
members and key decision makers. Good examples include the new pathway
plan and the review of the personal adviser caseloads. Effective work by the
Children in Care Council supported by the participation team ensures that
young people are aware of their entitlements. Information is available through
the charter to care leavers and the local authority website. The local authority
is currently developing a care leavers website and smart phone application to
ensure it reaches out to a wider audience. Care leavers value the annual
awards events to celebrate their achievements.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Leaders and senior managers in Hertfordshire know their services well and are
persistent and successful in delivering improved services to children and their
families. They achieve this through both internal and external review of existing
services, together with actively seeking the views of children, families and other
stakeholders to deliver against ambitious action plans for service development.
The local authority has made substantial progress since their last inspections, with
only a very small number of areas for improvement continuing to require further
work. They recognise they have further work to do to improve management
oversight at the front line to ensure that actions are taken within childrens
timescales.
Governance arrangements between senior leaders, both political and local
authority officers, and key partnerships and boards are very clear. This ensures
preventative services through early help, and also statutory functions, are
coordinated and delivered effectively.
Commissioning arrangements have recently been effectively aligned under the
Health and Wellbeing Board into three priority areas. This is to ensure partners
build on existing strong joint commissioning arrangements to address the key
priorities for childrens services.
The use of childrens views is particularly strong. For example, the recruitment of a
youth ambassador and training for young commissioners ensures commissioning
arrangements are responsive to local childrens views and needs. The Joint
Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA), is not being effectively used to inform
commissioning across childrens services.
The local authority aims to be a committed corporate parent and has achieved
success in engaging children from the Children in Care Council in their work. The
local authority is appropriately undertaking a review of corporate parenting
arrangements to ensure they are fully embracing this crucial role.
Strong performance management and quality assurance arrangements ensure that
both the quality and performance across childrens services is fully understood at
all levels of the organisation and across partnerships. This enables leaders and
partners to respond promptly to issues or changing trends as they arise.
The local authority has achieved great success in securing a more stable workforce
and this has enabled them to reduce caseloads to a very manageable level for
social workers. They have achieved this through careful workforce planning,
alongside the creative development of their social work and management
academies.


Inspection findings

Governance arrangements are robust and clearly understood by both political
and local authority senior leaders. These arrangements ensure that lines of
accountability between senior officers, political leaders and also the Local
Children Safeguarding Board (LSCB) and Health and Wellbeing Board (H&WB)
are clear and that statutory functions are discharged effectively. An
appropriate range of meetings are established in order to promote
communication and follow-through of key issues; these include regular
meetings between the DCS, Lead Member, Chief Executive and chair of the
LSCB to ensure all are effectively held to account.


Political and local authority leaders ensure they know their services for
children and families well and that they understand what is happening at the
front line through routine consideration of a comprehensive set of
performance information. This includes data, trend analysis, audit findings and
routine reporting, such as complaints and performance of the independent
reviewing service. Furthermore, the DCS and Lead Member ensure that they
have regular contact with children and their families through, for example,
attendance at the Children in Care Council meetings and events, and visits to
childrens centres. The DCS has also invested significant energy to gain a
direct line of sight to what is happening at the front line through focus groups
with staff, visits to teams and direct observations of practice.


The local authority has been successful at developing and maintaining a
H&WB that considers childrens issues and is the body that the LSCB and
commissioning groups report to. This year, partners have worked together to
ensure childrens issues are reviewed as part of its strategy, through careful
use of a life stages model against all of their priorities. For example, the local
authority and its partners have successfully improved timely access to Child
and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) and this feeds into the H&WB
mental health priority. They plan to make childrens issues even more explicit
in the priorities of their future strategies.


The recently developed integrated commissioning framework for childrens
services establishes three main priority areas: early years and early help;
children with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND); and
safeguarding and children looked after. The three priority commissioning work
streams for the H&WB are early childhood, 025 integration, and child and
adolescent mental health. These new commissioning priorities are enabling
the local authority and its partners to build on its existing effective practice of
joint commissioning of services for children and their families. Although there
has been some delay in achieving all actions from the childrens services
strategies are now in place for 201518 to provide an effective framework for
strategic commissioning.



Particularly noteworthy developments in relation to commissioning are the
appointment of a Youth Ambassador, a jointly funded post between the local
authority, Public Health and the two clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) to
promote engagement of young people in commissioning activities. Training
programmes are also being delivered to care leavers and young people with
special needs, to enable them to undertake paid work to support
commissioning of services in the local area.


The local authority effectively pursues consultation with key stakeholders,
including parents and children in their commissioning activities. For example,
there was considerable attention to using a range of consultation methods
prior to the recommissioning of childrens centres. Contract management
arrangements are robust within the joint commissioning team and the local
authority is effectively delivering against an action plan to ensure all
commissioning activities across childrens services have these robust processes
applied.


The local authority actively pursues opportunities to develop their services
further through securing additional funds and was very successful in its
innovations bid to central government to develop family safeguarding teams.
All professionals spoken to during this inspection are excited and clear about
the potential benefits of having multi-professional teams, however, it is too
early to demonstrate a positive impact for individual children and their families
of this new working style.


Partners express great confidence in the senior leadership team of childrens
services. There is much evidence of the two CCGs, public health, the police
and schools working closely together with the local authority, particularly in
developing early help and preventative services. An example is how issues of
domestic abuse and child sexual exploitation are being addressed through the
development and use of a resilience toolkit that helps young people to explore
domestic abuse, healthy relationships, bullying and sexual health and also the
sharing of Chelseas Choice across secondary schools.

within their commissioning activities, for example in childrens centres.
However, there is further work to do to ensure the JSNA is sufficient to
effectively inform commissioning for children looked after and also to ensure
childrens services consider relevant data from the JSNA in all their
commissioning activities. Currently, childrens services undertake bespoke
needs assessments to inform particular commissioning activities.
has achieved success in engaging with young people from the Children in Care
Council to ensure services are responsive to the needs of children looked
after. The Lead Member for childrens services chairs the Childrens Services
Panel, which also provides the corporate parenting overview function. The
panel ensures performance data regarding children looked after and care


leavers is understood and scrutinised by members, and invites young people
to present when relevant, however, this does not occur at every meeting.
This arrangement is appropriately under review by the local authority to
ensure that the multi-function panel is sufficiently addressing the scrutiny
function for children looked after.
Children in Care Council and the Childrens Services Panel, and progress has
been made in key areas, such as improving care packages for young people
living in supported lodgings and ensuring that housing offers are available for
care leavers across the county. There is more to do, for example, to increase
the range of therapeutic support for children looked after, to close the gap for
members, as corporate parents, are not always engaged with celebrations and
events organised for children looked after, and training is only now being
delivered to them.
a strength, with systematic performance data being effectively used to
monitor practice. There is also good use of audit to consider both compliance
and the quality of work with children and their families. Performance
information receives regular scrutiny, by front line managers through to senior
leaders, and this helps to accurately identify where immediate intervention is
needed, or further information is required to understand emerging trends. For
example, as a result of senior scrutiny, a task and finish group was convened
to consider the issue of placement stability. Actions from this group, such as
increasing the availability of therapeutic support for children looked after,
have had a positive impact on placement stability. Senior managers recognise
that there is further work required to strengthen management oversight at the
front line to ensure timely actions are taken for children after robust
assessments have been undertaken.
complaints and serious case reviews, together with direct feedback from
children and their families. The policy and practice team carry out a full
analysis of the findings from audits, identifying any trends, areas of good
practice and areas for improvement. These findings are appropriately reported
to the Childrens Social Care Board on a quarterly basis, along with service-led
commentary and a collated single improvement tracker. Complaints are
managed well and outcomes are analysed effectively. Learning from
complaints is routinely shared with front line staff via regular bulletins to
improve practice. The local authority is also persistent in its work to improve
understanding of its services and so seeks external review to gain further
insight. Most recently this has included critical reviews of child and adolescent
mental health services and domestic abuse services, which are already leading
to improvements in services to children and their families.


views throughout all levels of the organisation: from influencing front line
practice, through to feeding into commissioning and strategy decisions. This
was identified as an area for improvement in the last inspection and is now a
notable strength.
multi-agency and themed audits, and problem profiling is understood at the
most senior levels of the organisation. This has led to clear priorities being
established to improve responses to children at risk, both in terms of
identification and in reducing their risk of sexual exploitation. Leaders and
managers have a good understanding of the priority areas for improvement
and have clear and robust plans in place to address these. However, data
regarding children missing education are not collated with other data
regarding the most vulnerable children and therefore are not currently
informing the local authoritys and partners understanding of potential risk
and prevalence.
Family Justice Board, CAFCASS and local designated family judge, both
strategically and operationally. The public law improvement group, which
includes CAFCASS, the local authority and members of the judiciary, shares
data and promotes positive communication and liaison. This has led to
improvement in the quality of public law outline (PLO) pre-proceedings work
and assessments. There is less reliance on expert and independent
assessments, which had been a contributory factor in delays in proceedings
work. The length of care proceedings has significantly reduced over the last
service; this enables managers to allocate work more often on the basis of
skill and experience to meet childrens needs. Senior leaders are aware of risks
and threats to stability and retention of staff and these are clearly addressed
and planned for within the workforce strategy. Key priorities are identified
within the strategy, with outcomes and deliverables that are both realistic and
ambitious. Short-term priorities are identified in addition to longer term
strategies. For example, a short-term priority is to deliver a comprehensive
training programme for the family safeguarding model to ensure frontline
workers are sufficiently trained with the relevant skills and knowledge to work
successfully alongside their multi-agency colleagues. This has already been
successfully delivered to the existing family safeguarding teams.
over the last 18 months by senior leaders. There are now very low vacancy
and agency worker rates, with only 32 (8% of the total workforce) vacant
posts being covered by agency workers. Of these, offers of employment have
been made to 24 posts.


supervision policy. There is clear evidence that supervision includes case
planning and reflection on most cases to drive improvement in practice and
monitor compliance with statutory guidance. Training and development needs
are addressed to encourage high standards of practice, and performance
issues are sensitively and robustly managed. Front line staff have the
opportunity to feed back issues to senior managers, both within supervision
and via focus groups and roadshows. Front line staff spoken with on this
inspection feel listened to and supported by their managers, with the
roadshows appreciated as an opportunity to speak directly to the DCS about
issues and ideas for improving practice.
have contributed to making Hertfordshire an attractive place to work. The
local authority recognises that spotting leadership potential and creating a
strong grow your own culture for the future is an important factor in
retaining talented staff and succession planning. The social work academy
provides induction and training for up to 30 newly qualified social workers at
any one time and has some flexibility to meet demand through running
additional academies where needed. There is clear impact from the academy
on improving practice, for example, in the numerous good or outstanding
assessments seen during this inspection.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good

Executive summary
This is an effective LCSB which is meeting its statutory responsibilities. Under the
leadership of a strong independent chair, it has engaged leaders at the highest
level across the partnership in promoting childrens safety, and has a strong
influence on commissioning across public services. It has a good understanding of
need and uses multi-agency data, audit, case review and child death review
findings to monitor the quality of safeguarding practice and to identify areas for
improvement. Further work is required to strengthen audit action plans.
The independent chair has effectively fostered a culture of openness, scrutiny and
challenge, which permeates the boards work, both internally and across the
partnership. This outstanding partnership working has enabled the board to
respond to emerging safeguarding issues and develop strategic responses that
positively impact on practice with children and their families.
The LSCB disseminates learning from case reviews well, without waiting for reports
to be signed off and published. A self-assessment, a multi-agency case audit and a
strategic problem profile have strengthened understanding of local issues relating
to child sexual exploitation. Child level data is effectively brought together to
inform risk assessment, although there is a need to strengthen the boards
oversight of return home interviews for children who go missing and activity to
disrupt and pursue perpetrators of child sexual exploitation. The board is
appropriately planning an evaluation of early help.
The LSCBs learning and development framework sets out clearly the way it is
delivering an appropriate range of safeguarding training. A comprehensive
approach to evaluation helps ensure good quality, although further work is
required to put in place a more systematic approach to training needs analysis,
diversify the training offer and address under-capacity on some key courses.


Recommendations
showing how relevant partners are being held to account for the
improvements required. (page 33, paragraph 118)
children who are going missing, in addition to the annual report to the board
about missing children. (page 37, paragraph 131)
approach to training needs analysis, continue to diversify the training offer
and minimise any delays for professionals who need safeguarding training.
(page 39, paragraphs 140, 141, 142)

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
leaders from partner agencies and ensured their regular attendance at board
and executive meetings. Membership and attendance is sustained at subgroup
level and at local multi-agency forum meetings, ensuring good support for the
boards activities and engagement of front line professionals. This helps the
LSCB to identify priorities for improvement and gives it greater influence over
the help, protection and care children receive.
strengthened risk management and oversight of LSCB activity. The LSCBs risk
register is now appropriately overseen at board level; previously this was
delegated to a subgroup. The board has not yet made the best use of lay
members, with no lay member attending three successive meetings in 2014
their role during the summer of 2015.
practice and to identify areas for improvement. Audits undertaken in the last
year focus on aspects of safeguarding where case reviews, multi-agency data
and other intelligence indicate the need for investigation and challenge. They
include audits of cases stepped down from child protection, neglect-related
child protection work, safeguarding for disabled children and help and
protection for young people experiencing child sexual exploitation.
protection neglect case audit revealed that, while the majority of cases involve
issues of poor parental mental health, domestic violence and/or substance
misuse, in too many cases families were either not accessing the relevant
specialist services or this was not clear from the child protection records.


Identifying specific areas for improvement like this is an important part of the
LSCB's role. The board continues to oversee improvements, by going back to
conduct further audits in order to assess progress. It is not always clear what
action plans are being implemented in response to some other case audits and
how the relevant partners are being held to account for the improvements
required.
assessments through its multi-agency dataset and it has provided an overview
of this activity it its annual report. An audit is appropriately planned for later in
practice in response to female genital mutilation is also due to take place later
in 201516.
audits are undertaken on a three-year rolling programme, with assessments
completed by Hertfordshire Constabulary, Hertfordshire Probation, NHS
England and East of England Ambulance Service in 201415. Assessments by
District Councils were also in progress at the time of the inspection.
Assessments are closely scrutinised by the LSCBs Audit Subgroup and
summarised in the LSCBs annual report. The LSCB Business Unit tracks
progress on actions required.
each other to account and to identify areas for improvement. For example, the
board noted the very high 66% of child protection plans (December 2014)
being made under the category of neglect compared to the 43% England
average (March 2014). This led to an analysis by the local authority of all
neglect cases where children had been subject to child protection plans for
over 12 months, to establish whether cases needed to be stepped down to
child in need plans or stepped up to care proceedings.
greater scrutiny of partner agencies' performance. A letter from the Chair to
the Director of Childrens Services in June 2015 demonstrates challenge to the
local authority on performance in relation to children in need, including
children with a disability. This robust challenge was well founded in case
review findings and it set out in specific terms where improvement was
needed. The letter prompted a review by the local authority of a sample of
children's cases. The board has accepted a set of recommendations to
improve scrutiny of and support for practice in this area.
serious case reviews, unpublished partnership case reviews, single agency
reviews and audits well to identify areas for learning and improvement.
Decisions on whether or not to initiate a serious case review are supported by
a clear rationale. Decision making in this area is strengthened by discussion
and challenge within the LSCB and scrutiny from outside.


Partner agencies provide good support to ensure that key messages are
conveyed to front line workers and their managers through training, bulletins
and practitioner events. Social workers who were interviewed by inspectors
were clearly aware of recent serious case reviews and their implications for
their practice. The LSCB is proactive in taking forward learning as lessons
emerge from case reviews, rather than waiting for reports to be signed off
and published. For example, it has put training in place to address a concern
emerging from review findings about a risk of uncritical acceptance of parental
self-report by professionals, which can leave childrens needs and
circumstances unassessed.
Board and with other safeguarding boards across local authority boundaries.
For example, the LSCB is currently leading a joint serious case review
regarding a care leaver who was 19 at the time of his death in a neighbouring
authority area. The board is already acting on the emerging findings from this
case review, with changes being made to patient databases to ensure that
mental health service users who are care leavers are identified as such on
patient databases. This will improve information sharing and strengthen the
help that young people with mental health needs receive.
workings of the LSCB itself. The approach taken by the board has been to use
its influence to ensure that partners listen well to young people, rather than
the board carrying out its own separate consultations. For example, during the
past year, the board has identified the need to strengthen its ability to listen
to the views and experiences of children with disabilities. The board has
supported learning and improvement events, such as an East and North
Hertfordshire NHS Trust conference on Working with Disabled Children and
the two Hertfordshire Disabled Children Conferences. This aspect also
featured within the boards own 2014 annual conference and is a significant
learning objective on its multi-agency Working with Children with Disabilities
training course.
in Hertfordshire, provides an effective overview of how services will be
provided, from early help through to specialist services. It provides practical
guidance for practitioners on thresholds for targeted and specialist services
and sets out options for supporting children and families clearly, including a
focus on early help assessments and use of the graded care profile for
children experiencing neglect. It also provides contact numbers for
professionals who need additional advice.
across LSCB work streams to ensure that policies and procedures are regularly
reviewed and that revisions and additions are made to take account of issues
and lessons emerging from case reviews, audits and other intelligence. These


revisions support improvement well. Recent examples of new and improved
procedures focus on concealed pregnancy, female genital mutilation, transferin child protection cases and children missing from care.
multi-agency audit, a self-assessment and a strategic problem profile all
produced in the last 12 months. The problem profile identifies the profile of
victims and offenders involved in reported child sexual exploitation incidents in
for child sexual exploitation. No specific hotspot localities were identified,
although two areas are noted as having a higher incidence of risk factors. This
local analysis confirms that children who go missing and looked after children
are more likely than their peers of being potentially at risk of sexual
exploitation. The problem profile uses the analysis to make evidence-based
recommendations, concerned with awareness raising, outreach and
intervention in target areas and for children who are looked after or go
missing. The LSCB has also led a Say something if you see something public
information campaign, to raise public awareness of child sexual exploitation
and seek help from local people in tackling the problem.
Safeguarding Adolescents Group. This subgroups membership and attendance
are dominated by police and local authority childrens services, with
involvement of health services and the voluntary sector less consistent.
together in order to inform risk assessment. There is a need for further
development, as the data analysis underpinning the child sexual exploitation
strategic problem profile found some gaps in information sharing. Specifically,
for a quarter of victims subject to the Polices specialist Halo team
investigation in 201415, the team had no indication as to whether they were
a looked after child, and just under a quarter did not have their status as
missing or not missing listed; there is also currently a lack of detailed analysis
of return home interviews for children who have been missing form home or
care. Such gaps could make it harder to identify and address risk for
vulnerable young people.
found that a significant number of schools were not offering any education
programmes at that time to help young people understand potential indicators
of exploitation and harmful relationships. LSCB minutes in March 2015 record
concern that few child sexual exploitation referrals were being made by
schools. Following this meeting the board has secured additional funding,
which has enabled it to extend the delivery of Chelseas Choice performances
through schools. At the time of the inspection, young people in 47 secondary
schools (53%) have seen a performance, with the funding now in place to roll
this out to the remaining 42 secondary schools (47%) in the coming months.


Performances have also been provided for some older pupils in primary
schools.
under-identification of physical abuse. In response, partners have agreed a
bruising protocol to support practice and a lite bite course has been delivered
and evaluated. Professionals, who have attended the training, report that is
has increased their knowledge and confidence and there are signs of greater
numbers of referrals coming through.
and sustains the involvement of key partners. Its analysis of cases where very
young children have suffered sudden and unexpected death has enabled
partner agencies to better understand contributing factors that can be
influenced through targeted prevention. This intelligence has informed a Love
Your Bump poster campaign on the dangers of smoking in pregnancy, and
new guidance to help midwives and health visitors tackle risks to babies from
co-sleeping and unsafe sleeping environments. CDOP also considers the wider
public safety implications of child death reviews, for example, recommending
road safety improvements following reviews of traffic-related deaths.
children and their families. It has produced a very comprehensive
safeguarding strategic needs assessment, as the childrens chapter of the
Hertfordshire Joint Strategic Needs Assessment. Drawing on this effective
overview of need, and on intelligence from case reviews and audits about how
well the system is working for children, the board effectively influences
partner agencies commissioning priorities and provides challenge and support
to ensure these are taken forward.
tackling self-harm in the light of concerns raised by the CDOP and a serious
case review into the suicide of a young person. It has initiated an analysis by
public health of local prevalence data and helped to shape a major review of
child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS). It has used its
influence to help ensure a strong focus on children's mental health as one of
the Health and Wellbeing Boards three overarching priorities.
addressing issues of childrens self-harm. It has, for example, put in place and
evaluated additional lite-bite courses to improve the take-up of training on
self-harm. These have been well received by front line staff. The board
monitors self-harm through its multi-agency dataset; this shows that the level
of hospital admissions resulting from self-harm has gradually reduced over the
last five quarters.
the Police and Crime Commissioner, the Director of the Mental Health Trust


and the Council Leader, Chief Executive and Lead Member for Childrens
Services. He also has frequent meetings with the local authoritys Director of
Childrens Services. Working closely with these high-level leaders enables him
to raise the profile of safeguarding and to influence organisational priorities.
For example, the local authoritys Overview and Scrutiny Panel has recently
held full-day scrutiny meetings on the LSCB and on child sexual exploitation.
board is delivering an appropriate range of good quality safeguarding training.
Courses take account of the different levels of training that partner agencies
require and these are provided in a number of different locations across the
county. A differential charging policy has helped to ensure good take-up of
training places. The LSCB has a comprehensive approach to monitoring the
quality and effectiveness of its multi-agency training courses. This includes
direct observation by evaluators and participant feedback. Follow up emails
and telephone calls are also used to assess how participants have put their
learning into practice.
safeguarding training, which the board commissioned. This review found that
the budget allocated for multi-agency training is modest in comparison to
other LSCBs in the region, when the size of the county is taken into account.
It also found that the board has made limited use of e-learning options and
relied more heavily than other LSCBs on face-to-face training delivered by
serving practitioners. This has meant that the demand for some courses has
been difficult to meet.
multi-agency training. Training on the use of the graded care profile tool, to
assist in assessment for children at risk of neglect, and level two multi-agency
safeguarding courses, have been consistently over-subscribed. A review by
inspectors of one quarters attendance data shows that the bulk of attendees
at multi-agency training are from childrens social care, community health and
early help services, with more limited take-up by early years providers, schools
and colleges.
identified a board member to provide a stronger strategic lead on training and
development.
requirements. It covers the main areas of the LSCBs work, such as audit,
training, CDOP, SCRs, child sexual exploitation and early help. It provides a
good overview of the effectiveness of safeguarding across Hertfordshire and
highlights areas for improvement identified through case reviews, audits and
analysis. The report draws on multi-agency and partner datasets to provide
more in-depth analysis in key areas, such as child sexual exploitation. The


LSCB is at the early stages of considering their role regarding the potential for
young people to become radicalised.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 9 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Jansy Kelly
Deputy lead inspector: Tina Shepherd
Team inspectors: Louise Hocking, Louise Warren, Jenny Turnross, Harmesh
Manghra, John Mitchell, Karen Wareing and Ian Young
Senior analytical officer: Stewart Hartshorne
Quality assurance manager: Jeremy Gleaden (Senior HMI)


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


