Isles of Scilly
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 April 2016  28 April 2016
Report published: 27 June 2016

Childrens services in the Isles of Scilly are good

Good

permanence

Not Judged


Not Judged


Not Judged


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services on the Isles of Scilly are good. Following an inspection of
safeguarding and looked after children in 2012, which judged services to be good,
the local authority implemented a successful modernisation and improvement
programme. All areas for development identified at the previous inspection have
been addressed and effectively monitored to ensure that these have been
maintained. Improvements within the quality of practice have continued to be made.
For example, in the quality of direct work carried out with children, the successful
implementation of the signs of safety model and improvements to quality assurance
and management oversight processes.
Early help provision is comprehensive and supports families well. Families can access
a range of universal and targeted services. These are greatly valued by families and
children on the islands. While the quality of early help assessments is not yet good
overall, plans are well targeted, effective and scrutinised by social workers to ensure
that targets and objectives are met. The local authority has recognised that some
health professionals attendance at key meetings is limited at times and has
identified this as an area for development.
Services for children and young people in need of help and protection are
consistently good. Thresholds have been reviewed by the local authority and these
are well understood and applied. Partnership working is strong and effective links are
in place, particularly with health and education services across the Isles of Scilly.
Preventative work is well embedded and there are a number of innovative and
creative services in place to provide early support to children and their families.
The local authority demonstrates significant strengths in a number of key areas. For
example, the use of scenario planning is used effectively to explore unfamiliar
casework and ensure that responses are well understood. Staff consistently and
meaningfully consider all issues of equality and diversity relating to children and their
families who live on the islands. Children and their parents consistently speak highly
of their social workers and of the services and support they have received and which
have improved their lives.
Where children are identified as being at significant risk, enquiries and responses are
timely and comprehensive and effective partnership working ensures that key
information is used to inform planning processes. Children receive a response that is
proportionate to their needs of protection. Arrangements to identify and support
children and young people at risk of sexual exploitation are well embedded and
understood across the partnership. Although numbers are very low, children who go
missing receive a well-coordinated multi-agency response to ensure that their
welfare is monitored and risks are reduced. Children are offered return home
interviews. Information from these interviews is used to identify any areas of concern
and to decide what help children need.
Partners work and learn well together, supported by a culture of learning across the
partnership. Partners have a genuine commitment to improved outcomes for children
and young people. Consequently, partners have succeeded in improving the
experiences of children. Senior leaders ensure that professional development is a key


priority and make effective use of learning from national research and serious case
reviews. Social workers and partners have access to a comprehensive range of
training. Staff feel well supported and morale is good. Children and their families
benefit from a stable workforce. This contributes significantly to children and their
families developing meaningful and purposeful relationships with professionals who
work with them. Direct work with children is a significant strength across the Isles of
Scilly. Social workers competently use a range of techniques and activities to enable
children to share their feelings and wishes.
Elected members give clear political support to the senior leadership team in the
Isles of Scilly and strong links are in place between the Director of Childrens Services
(DCS), the Chief Executive and the Lead Member. These relationships ensure that
key priorities are identified and that the pace of change is consistent and well
targeted. The local authority has an accurate overview of its strengths and
weaknesses. Financial investment to childrens services has been protected, and this
has facilitated the ongoing use of creative and innovative support services for
children and their families.
All areas for development identified in this inspection had already been built into the
overall service improvement plan and are being tackled. Despite a broad range of
improvements, some weaknesses remain. For example, the local authority has been
unsuccessful in recruiting an emergency foster carer for the islands. Additionally, the
local authority continues to work with Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services
(CAMHS) to reduce waiting times for children and young people to access support.
However, in response to this challenge, the local authority has been instrumental in
setting up the BLOOM service to provide mental health support to young people at
an early stage.
While the local authority has access to a legal adviser for specific casework and
advice, there is no current arrangement to ensure that any changes in legislation are
routinely identified and disseminated to staff in a timely manner.
Quality assurance arrangements have been strengthened. Learning from single and
multi-agency audit activity is well embedded and leads to improvements within the
quality of practice. The local authority continues to use a range of performance
information tools. These are used effectively to scrutinise activity and ensure that
services are well targeted and reach all families in need.
The local authority has recently delivered comprehensive corporate parenting
training across the partnership and with key leaders and elected leaders. The
concept of corporate parenting and the responsibilities of this are not yet fully
embedded and a corporate parenting strategy is in its infancy.
Arrangements to support young people who leave the islands to attend post-16
study are highly valued by children and their families. This service is provided by a
dedicated post-16 worker on the mainland. However, the local authority recognises
that more is to be done to consolidate parents ability to identify appropriate
supported accommodation on the mainland for 16- and 17-year-old young people.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates no childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements and
services for looked after children was in May 2012. The local authority was
judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services (DCS) has been in post since June 2014.
 The DCS is also responsible for Adult Services.
 The chair of the local safeguarding children board (LSCB) has been in post since
 The LSCB is shared with Cornwall County Council.
 To ensure that there is appropriate resource for the wide range of childrens
services, a service-level agreement is in place with Cornwall Council for adoption
and fostering services. The London Triborough, comprising the London Borough
of Hammersmith and Fulham, the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, and
Westminster City Council, provides the local authority designated officer service,
responding to concerns about adults who work with children.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 420 children and young people under the age of 18 years live on
the Isles of Scilly. This is approximately 20% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 1.6% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 3% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 7% (the national average is 13.9%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 5% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 Given the low numbers, no single largest minority ethnic group can be identified.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 1% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 1% (the national average is 15%).
 The Isles of Scilly are a small isolated community 28 miles from mainland
Cornwall. This isolation means that service delivery and the experiences of
children and their families in terms of ease of access to services, as well as
transport links between islands, can be significant challenges, requiring a creative
approach to service provision.
Child protection in this area
 At 12 April 2016, 25 children were identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This has been unchanged since
April 2015.
 At 12 April 2016, no children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. The most recent child protection cases were stepped down to
child in need plans in September 2015.
 At 12 April 2016, no children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This has been the case throughout the last year.
 Since the last inspection, no serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and no serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at the
time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 12 April 2016, no children were being looked after by the local authority. This
has been the case since the previous inspection.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been no adoptions
 no children became subject of special guardianship orders
 no children ceased to be looked after
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to
independent living
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.
The casework model used in this area
Signs of safety


Recommendations

Improve the quality of early help assessments to ensure that they clearly
identify the specific help that children and their families need to improve
their lives (Paragraph 11).


Ensure that key agencies fully engage with the planning and delivery of
support to families (Paragraph 12).


Continue to pursue the appointment and approval of emergency foster
carers for the Isles of Scilly (Paragraph 26).


Expedite the review of the local authoritys role in supporting parents to
secure living arrangements for 16 and 17 year olds who move to the
mainland to continue their education (Paragraph 31).


Ensure that sufficient supported accommodation is available for those young
people who might be particularly vulnerable who engage in post-16 learning
on the mainland (Paragraph 31).


Continue to pursue the appointment and approval of emergency foster
carers for the Isles of Scilly (Paragraph 26).


Summary for children and young people
 Senior managers on the Isles of Scilly really want to help children and young
people who live there.
 Social workers know their children well and see them often to make sure that
they are well and are listened to carefully. Social workers use lots of different
methods to help children talk about difficult feelings.
 Social workers and other professionals act quickly to help children or young
people who need help.
 Schools, police and health staff work hard to make sure that children who need
early help receive this straight away.
 Children, young people and parents we spoke to during this inspection told us
that their social workers make sure that their lives improve.
 Social workers ensure that assessments to get to know a child are mostly of good
quality and that this helps develop good plans to improve the life for that child.
 Young people, parents and professionals know how to keep children and young
people safe from sexual exploitation or if they go missing.
 Young people receive good preparation for when they move to the mainland to
attend post-16 studies. Support on the mainland is also provided to young people
to ensure that they are happy.
 Social workers listen to what children and young people want and work hard to
make sure that services are provided to keep them safe and also to be able to
enjoy their surroundings.
 Senior managers make sure that social workers are well trained and well
supported by their managers.
 Senior managers know what they need to do to improve services even further
and good plans are in place to ensure these improvements take place.
 Although they have tried to sort this, the local authority does not have any
emergency foster carers if there was a situation where a child or young person
could not live at home.
 Some children and young people have to wait too long to get help from CAMHS.
Senior managers are working hard with health professionals to improve this but it
is taking too long.
 Health professionals do not always attend important information sharing meetings
about children and this has meant that some information is not well shared.


The experiences and progress of
Good
children who need help and protection
Summary
Children on the Isles of Scilly who need help or protection receive a consistently
good service tailored to their family circumstances. Thresholds at all levels are
clear, appropriate and well understood by local professionals.
In circumstances where a social work response is not needed, social workers
provide advice to professionals about how best to support children. A good range
of early help services are available to children of all ages, enabling families to
manage the demands of family life before problems get worse. Early help
assessments take good account of childrens individual circumstances but some do
not sufficiently communicate professional concerns or state what specific help
families need.
Children at risk of harm are safeguarded through effective multi-agency
arrangements, comprehensive information sharing and joint consideration of risk.
Childrens circumstances are robustly analysed. Decision making is clear and
accompanied by a well recorded rationale with a timely action plan for social
workers to follow. However, danger statements could be used more effectively to
articulate concerns regarding children.
No Isles of Scilly children are looked after by the local authority or professionals.
Contingency arrangements for those children who are most at risk of being looked
after are clear and safe.
Social work assessments are comprehensive and articulate family difficulty,
diversity and strength well. Support is appropriately targeted to meet childrens
needs. However, some child in need plans could be clearer about desired goals,
who should do what and when they should do it. The perspective of children,
parents and professionals adds depth to these assessments. Social workers and
inclusion workers genuinely care about the children with whom they work and go
to great lengths to build trusting relationships with them. Direct work is creative
and integral to day-to-day social work practice.
Not all children who require specialist help with their emotional or mental health
needs can rely on the regular support of a therapist because all specialist CAMHS
support is provided from the mainland. For some children, delays or gaps in the
provision of help leads to their difficulties getting worse.
Young people are well supported to move to the mainland to continue their
education. However, there is no specialist accommodation provision for young
people who might be particularly vulnerable.


Inspection findings

The Isles of Scilly is a local authority with a unique range of challenges and
strengths. The close knit, but often isolated, nature of the islands
necessitates a highly tailored approach to meeting the needs of children,
particularly those who are vulnerable. Children who require the involvement
of childrens services, from early help to specialist support, receive a
consistently good service. Through a clear understanding of their community,
leaders and managers have designed their early help, child in need and child
protection processes and systems to effectively meet the needs of local
families, while complying with statutory and legal requirements.


A small social work team receives all requests for additional help for children.
These range from those who are just beginning to experience difficulties to
those who need more targeted or specialist help. The quality of referrals is
good overall, with comprehensive information about childrens
circumstances. Referrers and social workers routinely explain to children and
parents issues of consent and this ensures that trust is established.


A good range of well-used universal and targeted help is available,
particularly for under-fives. Professionals know families on the islands so well
that they can quickly identify those who have stopped using support. This
leads to renewed attempts to engage them. Older children can access a
range of activities depending on their interests and needs, such as Scillys
got talent and outdoor-pursuits trips to the mainland. An inclusion worker,
employed by childrens services, engages with young people through these
activities, and this means that if they need more targeted help, a positive
relationship has already been established.


Early help assessments consistently involve children and their carers and
outline the main strengths and needs within families. While a few explore
well what these mean for children, some do not sufficiently reflect identified
concerns. Many do not include what specific help the family needs, or what
difference this is likely to make. Managers accept that this is a weakness and
are actively reviewing referral and early help assessment processes
(Recommendation).


Professionals send all completed early help assessments to the Common
Assessment Framework (CAF) coordinator and these are also overseen by a
social worker to ensure consistency of response. Social workers provide
consultation to lead professionals, helping them to decide whether a
different approach or level of help is needed. Social workers adopt a fluid
and helpful approach to stepping cases up from early help to child in need
support. This ensures that lead professionals are aware of their
responsibilities, with timely assessments undertaken and regular review
meetings.



Early help assessments reflect the childs experiences. However, some do not
sufficiently analyse risk or protective factors. Where the needs identified
through an early help assessment do not warrant a social work assessment,
but two or more services are needed, a social worker chairs the first team
around the family meeting. These meetings are chaired effectively and use
the signs of safety approach particularly well, often acting as a catalyst for
change. While meetings are effective at drawing up a meaningful plan, some
cases were seen where professionals had waited until this meeting before
they offered help. Attendees jointly decide who should be the lead
professional and the vast majority accept this role with a commitment to
driving forward the plan. In a small number of cases, key professionals such
as CAMHS therapists or GPs, do not attend these critical meetings, reducing
the effectiveness of the subsequent plan (Recommendation).


The number of referrals to childrens services is proportionately low
compared to other local authorities. Contacts and referrals result in a swift
response and decisions are made by a qualified social worker or manager.
Key decisions are well recorded and accompanied by a clear rationale.
Overall, thresholds are set at the right level and partners express confidence
in decision making by social care professionals. When professionals are
worried about childrens welfare, they escalate their concerns appropriately.
Re-referral rates are very low. Almost all referrals to childrens social care
result in a single assessment, indicating that professionals refer the right
families.


Social workers respond well to a range of risk factors, including neglect,
domestic abuse, adult mental health, emotional and physical abuse and adult
drug and alcohol misuse. Social workers use danger statements to help
them to articulate their most serious worries and to facilitate straightspeaking conversations with parents. While the vast majority of these
statements are effective and well targeted, a few cases were seen by
inspectors where concerns were not sufficiently explicit.


Social workers provide a robust response to child protection enquiries.
Strategy meetings are timely and held appropriately. The quality and impact
of these meetings have improved considerably since the previous inspection,
with good access to the police and comprehensive sharing of information
from all relevant agencies. Consideration of significant harm is detailed and
analytical, and decisions about what to do next are appropriate and
proportionate. Contingency plans are practical and meaningful. For example,
they outline well how the extended family network will help social workers to
monitor childrens welfare. This is particularly important due to the individual
nature of island life.


Arrangements to investigate allegations made against professionals in the
Isles of Scilly are effective. Thresholds and reporting mechanisms are well
understood and embedded across the partnership. The local authority
commissions the services of an external designated officer who provides a


robust level of scrutiny and oversight to investigations as well as offering
advice to professionals.

While no children have been assessed as at risk of child sexual exploitation,
professionals across the partnership are vigilant about the early signs of child
sexual exploitation. This level of awareness is well supported by high quality
training and scenario planning. The local authority, in partnership with the
Cornwall and Isles of Scilly LSCB, is ensuring that all hoteliers and taxi
drivers on the islands have been made aware of what to look for and how to
report their concerns if they are worried about sexual exploitation. Social
workers are familiar with risk assessment tools should these be required.


Single assessments provide a vibrant account of how children and parents
see their lives and their difficulties. They include family history and
comprehensively explore risks and strengths using a Signs of Safety
approach. Risk and need is analysed in a clear and young-person friendly
way. Information sharing by key partners is timely and these are explicitly
recorded within the assessment. Relevant research is referred to, although
this is not always analysed or linked to the familys circumstances.
Assessments are consistently shared with parents and children. Social
workers make sure that parents who are not resident on the islands are
meaningfully engaged in assessments.


Assessments are completed in a timeframe that is appropriate, based on the
needs of children and the complexity of their lives. Help, such as sessions
with an inclusion worker, is provided alongside the assessment. Almost all
single assessments result in the child being judged to be in need. Children in
need plans include appropriate actions and result in childrens circumstances
improving. They are reviewed regularly with good engagement from
professionals, children and parents. Social workers were able to readily
describe individual plans for children. However, this was not effectively
translated into written plans in a minority of cases. Some do not clearly
articulate what needs to change, who will help or timescales for actions.


Issues of equality and diversity are extremely well considered by social
workers and professionals across the partnership. Social workers insight into
difference within families is excellent and well reflected in both assessment
and planning stages. For example, effective consideration is given to the
island culture and close knit community as well as to social isolation and
sexual orientation.


Social workers have attended signs of safety training and receive ongoing
professional consultation to help them to use the model well. During the
inspection, a range of partners attended a three-day course to strengthen
the multi-agency approach. Scaling of 010 is used flexibly and effectively in
meetings, visits and direct work. This helps children, families and
professionals to describe the extent to which they think childrens lives have
improved or have got worse. Professionals and families are positive about


the helpfulness of the approach and believe it leads to the right help being
provided for children and to improved outcomes.

No children are currently subject to a child protection plan on the Isles of
Scilly. Inspectors did not find any cases where such a plan should have been
in place, but was not. For past child protection enquiries and cases,
conferences used the signs of safety approach effectively. Minutes
demonstrate that the most important worries and strengths are carefully
considered by professionals who know the children well. Child protection
plans confront the most critical issues, and focus well on what needs to
change. These plans end appropriately when risk is much reduced and
children are safe. Families receive good ongoing help and support which is
focused on sustaining change and strengthening their resilience.


Social workers know children well and go beyond normal expectations with
help and support provided to their children. The lengths to which social
workers go to ensure children and families are meaningfully involved is
exceptional. Some children do not find communication easy, either because
of their emotional difficulties or because of their disabilities. Social workers
use a wide range of tools and techniques to ensure that children have a
sense of ownership over their plans and the help they receive, whatever
their self-esteem, ability to communicate or willingness to engage. This focus
is pivotal to everything that social workers do on the islands to help
vulnerable children. Social workers establish trusting relationships with
families, to find out what children are worried and scared about and to lay
the foundations for tougher conversations in the future. Direct work is
integral to daily practice, and frequent, with a range of approaches. For
example, ideas, apps, books and tools are used well according childrens
age, understanding and particular family circumstances.


Children are encouraged to share their thoughts not only about their own
assessments and plans, but also to contribute to the wider understanding of
their lives. For example, they are encouraged to take part in national surveys
about young people's mental health, or to explain what life is like on Scilly
for other children who might come to live there.


Advocacy arrangements are well embedded and provided through a
commissioned service. Children, parents and professionals report that while
this service is not often used, when it is, it is supportive, effective and
greatly valued. Where parents have particular support needs, an adult social
worker is offered to advocate on their behalf. A commissioned mainland
service provides advocacy service to parents with learning disabilities or
mental health needs.


A disproportionate number of children experience emotional or mental health
difficulties. Island professionals work sensitively with them to understand
their worries and needs. Specialist child and adolescent mental health
support is provided from the mainland. Poor weather and staff sickness have


led to some children, particularly those with lower level emotional health
needs, waiting too long either to be assessed or between sessions with a
therapist. For a few children, their difficulties and worries have got worse.
Managers are working with their partners in CAMHS to find solutions, for
example, to enable children to talk to therapists via a video link, but the
support is still not equitable with children living on the mainland.

Social workers go to considerable lengths to keep families together.
Inspectors did not find any children who should have been in care, but were
not. Family and community networks are used well during times of family
stress or difficulty. Despite sustained efforts, the local authority does not
have any emergency foster carers. Where there is a potential risk that a child
may need to be looked after in an emergency, partnership working and
information sharing is effective. This ensures that a plan is in place for most
eventualities. During the inspection, managers implemented a policy for
assessing and agreeing emergency friends and family placements and the
process now complies with regulations (Recommendation).


Children with disabilities receive a good service, proportionate to their needs.
Parents told inspectors that they particularly value easy access to specialist
advice, despite the practical challenges of travelling between the islands, or
between the islands and the mainland. They also appreciate the flexibility of
direct payments because this empowers them to improve their childrens
lives through a range of creative services. A sibling and young carers group
gives children whose brothers or sisters have a disability opportunities to
have fun with other children, away from their worries and responsibilities.
Children attending these activities give consistently positive feedback.


Daytime social workers run the out of hours service on a rota basis; the
service is responsive and helpful to families. However, on-call staff are not
able to access the client database when they are undertaking these duties.
This potentially limits their ability to make sound decisions based on known
information. At the time of inspection, managers had purchased laptops and
these were in the process of being set up for this purpose.


The local authority responds effectively to the rare occasion that a child or
young person goes missing. Arrangements are effective and well-coordinated
and result in significantly reduced risks to young people. Local residents are
proactive in keeping children safe and in helping each other to locate
children or vulnerable parents. Professionals are alert to the possible risks
associated with children who might go missing from school. Where children
are late for or miss a lesson, steps are taken to explore and understand the
reasons for this.


Arrangements to support the educational needs of children and young people
in the Isles of Scilly are strong. No child has been permanently excluded
from school over the past few years and no child currently receives
alternative education. Where this has been needed in the past, creative


packages have been provided to ensure that children continue to engage
with learning and with their peers, making re-integration successful. Home
education is rare. Where parents opt to educate their children at home, the
local authority offers the right level of information, support and oversight.

To continue their education beyond Year 11, young people leave home to
study and live on the mainland. School staff, a careers adviser and a post-16
support worker prepare young people and their parents well, starting from
Year 9. This includes help to choose the right course and accommodation,
and support to deal with the challenges of living away from home. Most stay
with host families, many are family members or known adults. The Isles of
Scilly post-16 support worker is based on the mainland and provides
effective targeted support to young people to help them make the most of
their new experiences while keeping themselves safe. Managers are actively
considering options to strengthen these arrangements. Plans include
incentivising families so that they thoroughly check the suitability of host
families and finding more supportive accommodation for vulnerable young
people (Recommendation).


No young people aged 16 or 17 have presented as homeless or at risk of
homelessness in the past year. As part of their routine scenario planning,
managers and partners have ensured that they are ready to respond to such
a situation. Contingency plans comply with legislation and case law.


Multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC) arrangements are
appropriately tailored to the Isles of Scilly, with the trigger for convening a
meeting set at medium rather than high risk. Independent Domestic Abuse
Advocates (IDVAs) are commissioned but based on the mainland. Victims
access this support independently as well as via referral. There is no waiting
list. The police are very rarely called to domestic abuse incidents where
children are part of the family. Domestic abuse is thought by professionals to
be under-reported. When reports are made, professionals share this
information appropriately with childrens social care. Professionals attend
multi-agency domestic abuse training and are confident to complete a risk
assessment. School staff in particular are alert to the signs of family upset on
children.


There are currently no children privately fostered on the Isles of Scilly. Steps
to increase local awareness are comprehensive. During the past 12 months,
every professional and every parent has received a letter explaining what
private fostering is and who to notify if they believe a child is living in such
an arrangement.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Not Judged

Summary
The council of the Isles of Scilly does not have any children looked after, care
leavers, or children who are adopted. Consequently, this area has not been
judged. However, policies and procedures are in place should the local authority
need to respond to these needs. Staff are well trained and continue to be made
aware of recent practice developments and good practice examples across these
areas. Learning from other local authorities and research is effectively
disseminated and staff are well prepared to respond to a child who may need to
become looked after.

The graded judgement for adoption performance.
Adoption performance was not judged. At the time of the inspection, and within the
timescales for judging adoption performance, the Isles of Scilly has not commenced
adoption proceedings nor placed any child for adoption.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers.
This aspect was not judged. At the time of the inspection, the Isles of Scilly had no
care leavers for whom it was responsible.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
The local authority has maintained a strong focus on improvement and has
undergone a significant modernisation programme. The roles of Director of
Childrens Services and Director of Adult Services were merged into one post last
year and this has ensured that an effective, well targeted and innovative use of
resources has been provided. The corporate plan is well focused and is clearly
linked to the children and young peoples plan and this ensures that outcomes for
children and young people continue to improve. Senior leaders strive for excellence
and are making good progress.
The senior leadership team continues to have a good overview of key strengths
and weaknesses across the service. Senior leaders have ensured that
improvements in the quality of practice have been implemented and sustained.
The commitment of politicians is clearly demonstrated. Combined with support and
oversight, this collective, determined focus has ensured that efforts to maintain
high quality service provision and planning are well coordinated. The needs of
children and young people in the Isles of Scilly are a key priority and childrens
services budgets have been protected.
Senior leaders have significantly strengthened arrangements with the LSCB to
ensure that the focus of the Isles of Scilly within the shared board is not diluted.
An Isles of Scilly executive board is being developed.
Management oversight of casework has received significant focus and this is
consistently good in purpose, as well as timeliness. Case records clearly reflect
effective high quality management oversight. Supervision arrangements have been
strengthened as a result of learning from the peer review in 2015, as well as
individual and multi-agency audit activity. Social workers feel well supported by
their managers and have access to high quality individual and multi-agency
training programmes.
All professionals spoken to during the inspection reported a learning culture across
the partnership. Professional development is a key priority and is well supported
through innovative scenario planning. Performance management is effective and
quality assurance processes are comprehensive.
Despite a wide range of improvements, some key weaknesses remain. For
example, access to CAMHS is slow and the quality of early help assessments vary
considerably. Additionally, despite continued and focused efforts, the local
authority has not yet been able to appoint emergency foster carers for the Islands.


Inspection findings

Governance arrangements in the Isles of Scilly are clear and well founded.
The post of senior manager for services to our community incorporates the
roles of director of childrens services and director for adult services. This
post enables greater efficiency in the use of resources across the islands, as
well as ensuring that services are effectively coordinated through a
consistent and well understood perspective.


The senior leadership team has an accurate and well-informed overview of
the strengths and weaknesses of services and quality of practice and this is
well reflected in the recent self-assessment. The DCS and senior staff are
described as approachable and are well respected by members of staff.
There is sustained and demonstrable commitment to the needs of children
and families from elected members and senior leaders. Aspirations for young
people are a key priority and a core value across the partnership and these
are well underpinned by the Isles of Scilly corporate plan. The senior
leadership team has fostered a learning and improvement culture across the
service and this has been successful in directly improving outcomes for
children and young people at operational and strategic level.


Links between the chief executive, lead member and the DCS are strong.
Relationships between the childrens committee, the LSCB and the health
and well-being board have been reinforced and this has resulted in sustained
improvements for childrens services at strategic level.


The local authority has recognised that the shared Cornwall and Isles of
Scilly LSCB has not sufficiently focused on the specific needs of the Isles of
Scilly. The involvement of the Isles of Scilly within board activity has now
been greatly increased. Strategic links have now been fully established and
these have led to significantly improved communication and challenge
between the LSCB and senior leaders. The LSCB has recently agreed to set
up a dedicated Isles of Scilly executive board and this is designed to be more
streamlined, efficient and focused. Learning from serious case reviews is
effectively identified and disseminated to staff. Front-line staff spoken to by
inspectors are able to describe their learning as well as identify the impact of
this on their practice.


The Isles of Scilly children and young peoples plan has been recently
developed by the childrens trust board. This ensures that service planning
and delivery is well supported and focused on clear and measurable
outcomes. Senior leaders have identified that, despite sustained and
purposeful efforts, a key challenge across the Islands is the need to identify
emergency foster placements (Recommendation).



The recently updated joint strategic needs assessment is well aligned to local
priorities and ensures that service provision is well targeted and meets the
needs of children and families across the islands. For example, it identifies
the need to develop greater integration between the health and well-being
board and the children's committee to align aims and aspirations as well as
to increase mental health support services. A key local priority has also been
focused on children accessing services and moving away from the
assumption that children are expected to travel to where the service is
provided. For example, young people accessing mental health support and
drug and alcohol support services are now able to use video conferencing
arrangements.


The local authority has identified that corporate parenting had not been
sufficiently well embedded across the Isles of Scilly. Consequently, training
was commissioned and this has been recently delivered across the
partnership. The concept of corporate parenting has been a challenge for the
local authority in that there are currently no children looked after in the Isles
of Scilly. The local authority does not currently have a corporate parenting
strategy. However, one is being developed.


Senior leaders have worked effectively with partners and good progress has
been made in improving the quality of practice in a number of key areas. All
recommendations from the previous inspection have been implemented. For
example, there is now a more timely, well targeted and consistent multiagency response to protecting children on the Isles of Scilly. The quality and
effectiveness of supervision and training across the partnership has been
improved. The quality of social work assessments of children has improved
and now routinely reflects a robust analysis of need and risk factors and a
more comprehensive consideration of issues of equality and diversity,
specifically related to the island culture and potential social isolation of living
on the islands. Robust arrangements are now in place to respond to child
sexual exploitation and services are well coordinated and comprehensive.


Arrangements to gather the views of children and young people and parents
in the Isles of Scilly are a key strength. Mechanisms for gathering these
views include childrens ambassadors, the school council, parent-carers
forum, sibling and young carers group, as well as through the youth
parliament representatives. Additionally, the social work team periodically
attends the parent carers forum to ensure that senior managers are kept up
to date and informed about key messages. Feedback from children and
young people and parents has resulted in changes to service provision. For
example, the setting up of the Bloom service and additional mental health
support for children and young people, increased inclusion worker time and
increased road safety training for young cyclists through the Bikeability
programme.


The multi-agency early help strategy has now been implemented and the
multi-agency forum has been developed to ensure that children and their


families receive a broader partnership response to their needs. The early
help offer is now comprehensive and well delivered across the partnership.
Management oversight has been improved. This has resulted in more
effective, time limited and well targeted work with children and their families.
Thresholds have been adjusted and are now well embedded and fully
understood and applied across the partnership.

The local authority has worked innovatively to ensure that learning and
professional development is maintained despite some of the confines within
caseloads. Senior managers have introduced multi-agency scenario planning
sessions to ensure that professionals are aware of what action they should
take in particular cases. For example, how to identify and support a child
who is privately fostered, or how to respond to the needs of a young person
at risk of sexual exploitation or if a child needs to become looked after.
Scenario planning has also been used should a 16- or 17-year-old present as
homeless or for children who have been permanently excluded from school.


Scrutiny arrangements are both robust and comprehensive, and effectively
monitor performance across childrens services. Measures have been
significantly strengthened through the provision of training, as well as
through appointing a buddy system in order to target and maximise this
function. Senior leaders ensure that committee members have an accurate
awareness of strengths and weaknesses across the islands and through
scrutiny of the information included in the performance scorecard as well as
anonymous narrative of casework. The recently revised scrutiny committee
has become increasingly proactive in gathering a comprehensive range of
performance information, including learning from audits and complaints. The
level of challenge provided by the children's committee has led to
demonstrable improvements for children and young people across the
islands.


The performance management information system is well established and
provides appropriate information to senior leaders through the data
scorecard as well as a comprehensive narrative of performance. While these
are effective tools, the data collection inevitably reflects such small numbers
and does not readily facilitate identification of key themes or trends. As a
result, senior leaders also work creatively to scrutinise work and performance
through organisational memory. For example, cases are well known and
senior managers can monitor individual cases alongside taking an overview
of performance information. Monthly performance meetings are chaired by
the DCS and ensure that performance is tracked consistently and that
learning from key strengths and weaknesses is used to inform future
priorities and training as well as strategic planning across the islands.


Management oversight of practice is well established and clearly reflected in
case recording. Support to social workers is strong and social work caseloads
are described by workers as manageable. The supervision framework has
been revised and improved. The supervision template has been amended to


facilitate effective recording and linking to professional development.
Reflective supervision has been a key priority for the Isles of Scilly and is
now routinely taking place and is well recorded. The quality of case
supervision is consistently good and demonstrates effective and timely
challenge and scrutiny by managers. Signs of safety is well evidenced in
supervision records. Additionally, the local authority chose supervision as a
focus for the Section 11 audit to ensure that this was well targeted and that
it led to additional scrutiny and improved arrangements.

Governance arrangements for child sexual exploitation have been
strengthened. The Isles of Scilly has recently signed up to the peninsula child
sexual exploitation and missing protocol and the accompanying screening
tool which helps professionals to decide if children may be at risk of child
sexual exploitation. Professionals across the partnership are now well trained
and while there are currently no children identified as being at risk of child
sexual exploitation, staff are able to clearly articulate a robust knowledge of
local multi-agency procedures. A comprehensive range of information is
available to staff, and this assists them to make sure that any child or young
person identified as being at risk receives an effective and well-coordinated
response. Senior managers and the LSCB ensure that learning from cases on
the mainland is disseminated to staff to ensure that professional
development and learning for staff in the Isles of Scilly is ongoing.


The local authority has revised the quality assurance framework and this has
significantly improved the overall quality and timeliness of quality assurance
processes across the Isles of Scilly. For example, the audit tool has been
improved and now links to practice standards and to key priority outcomes
for children. Audit activity is well established and is completed by managers
at all levels, including the chief executive and DCS. Learning from audits is
shared with practitioners and has been used effectively to identify key areas
for development. For example, the quality of early help assessments has
begun to improve following lessons learned from audit feedback.
Additionally, audits have identified the need for children to be observed by
social workers in differing environments in order to improve opportunities to
communicate and gather their wishes and feelings and assess their
experiences.


The local authority has needed to develop a flexible and innovative approach
to commissioning services due to the unique environment and diverse needs
of the community. Resources have been effectively matched and the
modernisation programme has further strengthened senior leaders ability to
match need with resources in a timely and effective manner. Senior leaders
ensure that value for money is consistently delivered across the service. The
local authority has developed a creative range of both commissioned and inhouse services for young people and families, and monitoring arrangements
of these are robust. For example, the local authority has commissioned new
alcohol and substance misuse services from an independent agency. This
service has contributed to reducing risks to children across the Isles of Scilly


through well targeted intervention services as well as a community-based
detox programme.

Strategic planning is effective and well targeted. Recent activity has
identified, for example, the need to improve support services for parents
with mental health needs and, as a result, the local authority has responded
by appointing a dedicated community psychiatric nurse to provide crisis
intervention support in conjunction with the CAMHS worker. Senior leaders
have actively encouraged parents and young people to contribute to the
commissioning and development of services. The views of parents and young
people have been well considered by senior leaders and have been
incorporated into strategic planning arrangements. For example, advocacy
arrangements are now commissioned through a national voluntary agency.
This has ensured that when children request an advocate they are provided
with one and in good time. The local authority has also recently
commissioned services from an independent domestic violence adviser.


The Isles of Scilly workforce training and development strategy ensures that
the professional development and focus on learning for staff is a key priority
for the service. The learning and improvement framework provides
professionals across the partnership with a wide range of well-used learning
opportunities, including on corporate parenting, female genital mutilation,
child sexual exploitation and Prevent. Additionally, the local authority has
ensured that domestic abuse awareness has been a key priority. Robust, well
targeted risk identification, assessment and management model training on
domestic abuse, stalking and honour-based violence (DASH) has been
successfully delivered through the community safety partnership. Staff report
that they have easy access to good quality training. Annual appraisals ensure
that individual staff learning needs are identified and mapped against
training provision. Evaluation of training provided is routinely completed and
used to inform future training programmes.


Childrens workforce planning is effective and is underpinned by a clear
strategy. Strong recruitment processes are in place. The local authority has a
very small but stable workforce. Social workers are allocated to work with
children from preventative stages through to statutory intervention. Staff
morale is good and children across the Isles of Scilly benefit greatly from the
consistency and stability of the workforce.


Arrangements to deal with complaints in the Isles of Scilly are well
coordinated and understood. The number of complaints is extremely low.
However, learning from these is well embedded and key lessons are
effectively disseminated and lead to well-targeted and sustained
improvements. For example, the education, health and care plan has been
revised to ensure that social care outcomes are fully integrated into the
single plan.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement

Executive summary
The LSCB is a joint board covering both the Isles of Scilly and Cornwall. The LSCB
requires improvement to be good. However, it is now well positioned to enhance
significantly the coordination and effectiveness of safeguarding arrangements for
children and young people in the Isles of Scilly.
The LSCB is meeting its statutory responsibilities and has made significant progress
in accelerating and strengthening strategic partnerships over the last year. Links
between senior managers and the board are increasingly effective, although the
role of the lead member for childrens services needs to be strengthened. Leaders,
the chair and partners recognise that the boards priorities and business plan do
not sufficiently reflect the needs and priorities of the Isles of Scilly. Plans to resolve
this, including establishing a separate executive board, have been well considered
and are nearing implementation.
The board has addressed gaps in partner agencies capacity to provide
performance information and outcomes, illustrating how children and young
peoples safeguarding is central to their provision of services. Quality assurance
and scrutiny panels rigorously challenge all partner agencies.
Leaders and managers have prioritised awareness raising with local businesses, as
well as training for professionals, to ensure that they are ready to respond should
child sexual exploitation concerns arise on the Isles of Scilly. However, the board
has not yet strategically coordinated or driven this awareness-raising programme.
The chair undertakes regular case audits of early help and social work practice but
has not yet facilitated a comprehensive multi-agency auditing programme to
evaluate the quality of practice. This is being addressed, but the impact on multiagency service development and improvement is limited at this time. The board is
not yet systematically evaluating the effectiveness of early help services.
The influence and participation of children and young people in understanding and
informing the boards priorities, and providing ongoing feedback, are in its infancy.
The annual report does not comprehensively analyse the safeguarding
arrangements for children who live on the Isles of Scilly.
The board has a comprehensive multi-agency training programme, ensuring
lessons from serious case reviews (SCRs) are carefully promoted across partner
agencies. The board has appropriately considered safeguarding issues, including
around modern slavery, female genital mutilation and radicalisation.


Recommendations


The board should evaluate the impact of early help services across the
partnership (paragraph 64).


The board should ensure that multi-agency audits provide an effective
overview of front-line practice and inter-agency cooperation to safeguard
children. The views of children should routinely be included (paragraph 67).


The board should expedite plans to ensure that the needs and priorities of
Scillonian children are fully reflected in all aspects of its work (paragraph 67).


The board should ensure that children and young people have the
opportunity to influence the boards priorities, and that feedback from their
experiences regarding multi-agency safeguarding arrangements is well
considered (paragraph 68).


The board should promote a better strategic understanding and response to
raising awareness of and responding to child sexual exploitation (paragraph


The LSCB annual report should include a full evaluation of the effectiveness
of multi-agency safeguarding arrangements on the Isles of Scilly (paragraph

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

Following a self-assessment in September 2015, the LSCB is purposefully
tackling areas identified as requiring improvement. As a result of robust
discussions between senior Isles of Scilly leaders, the chair of the board and
key partners, plans are progressing well to strengthen the boards specific
focus on Isles of Scilly safeguarding children arrangements by developing a
separate executive board and business plan. The boards visibility and impact
in calling to account the childrens safeguarding priorities of other
partnerships is gaining momentum within the childrens committee and
health and well-being board (H&WBB). The impact of stronger partnerships
is illustrated in an objective to improve the range, quality and access to
emotional and mental health well-being services becoming one of the boards
five priorities.


The board provides robust scrutiny of partners performance. For example,
the board regularly challenges the clinical commissioning group (CCG) and
the emotional and mental health well-being board (E&MHWB) on the pace


and breadth of reforms, influencing the progress of the child and adolescent
mental health service (CAMHS) transformation programme. The board has
also been instrumental in challenging inconsistent access for Isles of Scilly
children to CAMHS services, with the development of some innovative
practices to help to remedy service deficits.

Earlier frustrations experienced by the LSCB in monitoring the effectiveness
of local multi-agency safeguarding arrangements have been assertively
addressed. This has been achieved through setting up scrutiny panels in
which all board partners have to demonstrate and evidence the rigour and
effectiveness of their operational safeguarding arrangements. Partners are
questioned on six common core safeguarding themes, including child sexual
exploitation and missing children, the quality of their single agency audits
and how children and young people are involved in their decision making. A
further set of questions is tailored to the specific focus of each partner
agency. Partners are required to provide evidence to support their selfassessments. However, the evaluation of some areas, for example the
impact of early help services and attendance of professionals at key
meetings, has not yet been completed and this is an omission
(Recommendation).


While social care safeguarding arrangements are considered by the board to
be working well, board scrutiny panels have identified some areas for
improvement within partners safeguarding and auditing practices. For
example, community health safeguarding audits were found by the boards
scrutiny panel to be too focused on cases where a social care referral is
needed. This level of scrutiny has strengthened the culture of multi-agency
cooperation and accountability through peer challenge and public oversight.
Recommendations are closely tracked and scrutiny reports published on the
LSCB website. Partners are expected to make timely progress towards better
outcomes. The boards understanding of the quality of multi-agency
safeguarding, while rapidly developing, is not yet complete.


The LSCB has engaged productively with the council of the Isles of Scilly to
build awareness and strategic and operational responses to issues such as
modern slavery, radicalisation and female genital mutilation. Devon and
Cornwall police have engaged well with the five islands school staff in order
to raise their awareness of radicalisation. The boards influence in increasing
the content for young people in the H&WBB suicide strategy is testament to
the boards growing influence by holding other boards to account and
increasingly influencing their priorities.


The quality and value of auditing by childrens social care is well established,
with a multi-agency element adding breadth and depth to findings. However,
a key omission is that the views of children on the islands have not been
included. Audit activity undertaken by the board is improving. The board
chair has ensured oversight of social work practice on the Isles of Scilly
through regular visits and case audits. This has included a focus on child


protection work, early help and step-up and step-down arrangements. The
board has not yet introduced a comprehensive programme of multi-agency
audits to inform its understanding of the quality of front-line practice and
management oversight. An independent multi-agency case audit, linked to
board priorities and with a focus on Island children, was commencing at the
point of the inspection (Recommendation).

The board has not included the views of children and young people in
deciding its priorities, nor sought their contributions to the evaluation of
multi-agency safeguarding with sufficient attention. Partner agencies are
asked to self-assess the inclusion of childrens views in their scrutiny panel
presentations to the board, but the impact of consultation with children and
young people is yet to be demonstrated (Recommendation).


The LSCBs website is not an attractive nor interactive platform for children
or the wider public to engage with the board, although plans are in progress
to modernise it. This will help in the board chairs objective to achieve an
ongoing exchange with children, helping his understanding of how safe
children feel in their schools and communities.


Child sexual exploitation has not, to date, been identified as a feature in case
work on the Isles of Scilly. Much work has been done to raise awareness
among local businesses such as hoteliers and taxi drivers, and to ensure that
professionals have the skills to respond effectively if this were to become a
challenge in the future.


While robust scenario planning is used to good effect, an effective multiagency strategic and operational response to child sexual exploitation and
missing children is not yet in place, reducing the effectiveness of front-line
practice. Efforts to tackle this shortfall are delayed across key partner
agencies and the board has only recently addressed this concern with
sufficient energy. The boards recent changes to the governance
arrangements have strengthened its ability to improve. In particular, the
amalgamation of the child sexual exploitation and missing sub-group, along
with the appointment of a police superintendent to chair it, supported by
senior managers from partner agencies, provides the seniority required to
achieve improvements (Recommendation).


The board has been active in improving both the quality and volume of
returns of partner agencies Section 11 reports. The large majority of
agencies submit returns. The local authority chose supervision as a focus for
a recent Section 11 audit. This has assisted managers to strengthen
supervision arrangements which were found to be good during the
inspection. The council of the Isles of Scilly completed a Section 11 return to
the LSCB, commenting on the joint LSCB arrangements. This good practice
positively contributed to the ongoing review of the LSCB function. The board
has assessed the content of reports more closely than previously, returning
them for further work when required, and conducting monitoring visits to


schools to evaluate compliance in onsite reviews. The boards scrutiny panel
process is aligned with major Section 11 themes, adding a further layer of
checks and balances.

Effective use has also been made of information collected under Section 175
of the Education Act 2002 report and this has added to the richness and
depth of information provided to the LSCB.


The board facilitates a varied and carefully targeted programme of training
through the learning and development group and training contract
monitoring groups. An Isles of Scilly operational manager is well engaged
with this group, disseminating learning to fellow professionals. There is a
diverse pool of experienced trainers, many with extensive operational and
practitioner backgrounds, delivering well-evaluated courses to practitioners,
first line and senior managers. Careful training needs analyses and emerging
themes from local learning and serious case reviews are considered, allowing
course content to adapt to intelligence from multi-agency practice. Course
capacities and allocations for optimising the attendance of agencies is
carefully planned, and patterns of low attendance from some partner
agencies, particularly adult agencies and the police, are challenged. Isles of
Scilly professionals are well engaged with this training programme.
Certificates validating professional development are issued three months
after attendance, when both practitioners and managers have completed
reflective learning feedback, sharing how learning has improved practice.


Serious incident notifications are thoroughly scrutinised by board partners
through the Serious Case Review (SCR) sub-group with appropriate and
timely recommendations reviewed and endorsed by the chair. The rationale
for recommendations is recorded meets statutory criteria. Opportunities for
learning from cases not progressed to a formal review are generated through
local learning reviews. Learning from serious case reviews is well integrated,
with lessons concerning fabricated illness carefully disseminated across
health and social care settings following publication of an SCR in 2014.


The board is innovative in considering different methods of distributing
learning from a range of activities and these are valued by professionals in
the Isles of Scilly. The board is part of a Department for Education pilot,
undertaking reflective analyses of live cases, tested in real time to assess
the extent to which core groups are considering well-formed questions in
implementing child protection plans concerning babies and infants. The
group uses a wide range of methods to communicate key messages from
SCRs and learning reviews, through providing well attended annual multiagency conferences, seminars, and newsletters.


The boards published threshold document is a helpful matrix guide for frontline practitioners and managers exploring and balancing levels of
vulnerability. The document provides comprehensive guidance on securing
parental consent, although concerned professionals are only directed


towards the Cornwall multi-agency referral unit (MARU) and not to childrens
social care on the Isles of Scilly. The board lacks data and analysis on the
extent to which targeted early help interventions are reducing the level of
demand on the statutory childrens social work service and improving
childrens outcomes at an earlier stage of their difficulties.

While the board does not maintain a specific log of challenges about multiagency safeguarding practice, they are well recorded and tracked. The chair
is tenacious in his challenge of partner agencies shortfalls in safeguarding
arrangements identified in the scrutiny panel programme. The chair
corresponds with and visits senior managers to address any delayed
progress.


The boards risk register has been reduced to two overriding risks: child
sexual exploitation and missing children; and the quality and lack of timely
access for children to emotional and mental health services. The second of
these is particularly relevant to the Isles of Scilly given the identified delays
children can experience in accessing high quality support. A large number of
earlier risks have been addressed and it is evident that improvements are
consistently made. The board recognises the need to sharpen its focus on
the unique nature of the Isles of Scilly, for example by increasing its scrutiny
of the effectiveness of arrangements for 16- and 17-year-old young people
who move from the Isles of Scilly to the mainland to continue their
education.


The Isles of Scilly LSCB chair is the representative on the child death
overview panel (CDOP) and proactively disseminates learning from child
deaths to partners. Modifiable factors in childrens deaths are analysed on a
peninsula-wide basis rather than at an individual local authority level. The
most recent CDOP annual report identified that governance arrangements
between the CDOP and CCGs needs to be strengthened and this is now
being addressed. Scrutiny of the panel has also identified that the process
for following through actions and outcomes between the CDOP, LSCBs and
Childrens trusts should be improved. This work is in its infancy.


The forthcoming LSCB Annual Report for 201516 should more explicitly
address how the boards improving oversight and scrutiny arrangements are
contributing to improving outcomes for children and young people across
partner agencies. The last annual report was comprehensive but its content
largely described safeguarding arrangements rather than providing a cogent
evaluation of them. The effectiveness of safeguarding arrangements for Isles
of Scilly children was not sufficiently integrated within this report
(Recommendation).


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of two of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Emmy Tomsett
Deputy lead inspector: Stephanie Murray
Quality assurance manager: Christopher Sands, Senior Her Majestys Inspector


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


