London Borough of Islington
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 28 April  25 May 2017
Report published: 14 July 2017

Childrens services in Islington are good

Good

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Outstanding

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Islington benefit from highly ambitious, capable and confident
operational and political leadership. The population of Islington is richly diverse.
Some localities have high levels of social deprivation, and many families in need of
support have highly complex needs. The borough has a number of challenges in
relation to gang culture, knife crime and substance misuse. Nevertheless, almost all
vulnerable children who come into contact with childrens services receive good
support from resilient and well-managed staff. Building on the safeguarding and
children looked after inspection of 2012, services continue to be good, underpinned
by outstanding leadership, management and governance.
Elected members are passionate and actively involved as corporate parents. They
engage well with young people and take their views seriously. Members take an
active role in quality assurance activity and have a good level of understanding of
frontline practice. This enables them to scrutinise practice effectively.
Performance management is very strong at strategic and operational levels. Leaders
and managers know their service very well and are clear about their priorities for
improvement. Management oversight, monitoring arrangements and supervision
provide clear guidance to social workers regarding progression of actions and
timescales.
Effective joint commissioning arrangements are underpinned by a robust assessment
of local needs. This results in services that reflect the diverse communities in the
borough.
Early help provision in Islington is both of high quality and effective. Comprehensive
early help and targeted services focus on improving childrens circumstances before
they reach the threshold for statutory services.
When children who are, or may be, at risk of significant harm are referred to the
local authority, action is taken quickly to ensure their safety. The local authority has
identified that, for other children, processes at the front door are not sufficiently
streamlined, and action is being taken to ensure a consistent response.
Social workers see children regularly. They get to know them well through goodquality direct work and they build relationships of trust with them. This helps to
improve the outcomes that children achieve. Social workers are supported in doing
this by having manageable caseloads. There is a strong focus on, and investment in,
recruiting sufficient social workers to make this possible. This has a positive impact
on reducing staff turnover and reliance on agency staff. The professional
development of social workers is supported by well-planned and resourced training.
Children and families benefit from high-quality, focused and timely assessments,
which reflect the seriousness and urgency of their needs, identifying the key risks


and protective factors. The subsequent plans identify appropriate goals, although the
quality of plans is more variable. Most children have good access to advocates.
Young people at risk of child sexual exploitation receive excellent support, which is
delivered with sensitivity and persistence. The monitoring of children who go missing
is managed well by the missing children coordinator. However, the quality of return
home interviews when children have been missing is too variable.
Children and young people at risk of radicalisation, female genital mutilation, forced
marriage and honour-based violence are protected through a range of clear multiagency arrangements.
Islington has an extensive, well-coordinated network of services to help children and
families address difficulties concerning domestic abuse, substance misuse and
parental mental ill health. Consequently, children are protected from harm.
Decisions for children to become looked after are made quickly and in their best
interests. Children only become looked after when it is necessary. When legal
proceedings are required to secure their safety, assessments and support to children
and their families are good and progress is swift. When the plan is for children to
return home from care, outcome-focused assessments, planning and support ensure
that the decisions are safe and appropriate. Unaccompanied asylum-seeking children
receive excellent support.
The health needs of children looked after, including those placed outside of Islington,
are met very well by a highly motivated team of health professionals. Children looked
after receive good support for their education, although personal education plans
(PEPs) are not sufficiently targeted, and the impact of the pupil premium grant is not
measured effectively.
When children cannot return to their birth families, new permanent homes are found
as quickly as possible. When adoption is the agreed plan for the child, there is a
relentless focus on securing the right placement at the right time. Children are well
prepared and supported. However, life story work and later life letters are variable in
quality. The local authority has recognised this and is taking action to ensure that the
quality improves. Adopters are very positive about their experiences, including their
post-adoption support.
Leaders and managers have high aspirations for care leavers. There is a range of
suitable and safe accommodation options to support care leavers with differing
support needs. Islington has a strong track record in supporting care leavers to
remain with their foster carers after their 18th birthday. Effective preparation for
independence and significant tenancy support enable care leavers to sustain their
tenancies when they embark on independent living. Pathway planning is timely, but
care leavers are not fully involved in determining their goals and the actions required
to achieve them. The numbers of care leavers in education, employment and training
are increasing.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates no childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
February 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for children looked
after was in February 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since February 2016.
 The chief executive has been in post since May 2011.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since September 2013.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 40,500 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Islington. This is 17.4% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 35.3% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 29.1% (the national average is 14.5%)
 in secondary schools is 33.6% (the national average is 13.2%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 67% of all
children living in the area, compared with 26% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
young people of mixed ethnicity and from the White-Other ethnic group.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 43.7% (the national average is 20.1%)
 in secondary schools is 45.9% (the national average is 15.7%).
 Islington is a relatively small authority, but has the highest population density in
the country. The authority is one of stark contrasts, with high levels of
deprivation and areas of significant wealth.

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2017, 2,902 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 31 March 2017, 205 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 161 at 31 March 2016.
 At 31 March 2017, five children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from three at 31 March 2016.
 In the two years prior to this inspection, two serious incident notifications have
been submitted to Ofsted, and two serious case reviews (SCRs) have been
completed. One SCR was in progress at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area


At 31 March 2017, 343 children were being looked after by the local authority.
This is lower than the 353 children at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
authority area
 none live in a residential special school3

 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 14 adoptions
whom had been looked after
returned to be looked after
 four young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to
independent living
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses in multiple occupation.
The casework model used in this area
 The local authority uses its own motivational social work model.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Recommendations

The local authority to work together with partner agencies to improve the
quality of referrals, to ensure that all information is available as early as
possible, so that there is no delay to taking prompt action.


Ensure that plans for children are concise and clear and that children in need
reviews and core groups effectively measure and record the progress of the
child against the plan.


Take action to improve the engagement of children and young people in
return home interviews, and ensure that all return home interviews effectively
identify risk and result in clear safety plans.


Ensure that PEPs for children looked after involve children and young people
and are specific about targets and achievements.


Ensure that the virtual school measures the impact of pupil premium spend
for children looked after, so that the grant is used to best effect.


Ensure that care leavers are more engaged in the completion and review of
their pathway plans, so that the plans become more meaningful.


Summary for children and young people
 Children and families in Islington receive high-quality services when they need
them.
 Children and families are provided with a wide range of services to help and
support them to feel safe. Social workers act quickly when children need help and
protection. Senior leaders make sure that everyone understands the problems
faced by children and young people and that different agencies work together
well to protect them.
 Social workers, teachers, police and health workers work well together to help
things to get better for children and families. This means that problems are often
solved at an early stage.
 Children and young people at risk of sexual or gang exploitation are helped by
specially trained workers to make them safe.
 Senior leaders and councillors have a passion to make things better for all
children. They want them to do well. This is making a positive difference to young
peoples lives.
 Social workers spend time getting to know children and families. They are good
at listening to children and understanding things that are important, such as how
they feel and where they want to live.
 Children and their families who arrive from different countries are provided with
good help and advice.
 When children and young people are unable to live with their parents, social
workers find them a good home with caring adults. Social workers always try to
keep brothers and sisters together, and enable children to see people who are
important to them. If it is safe for children to return home, social workers make
sure that families continue to get the help that they need for as long as they
need it.
 Social workers make every effort to find the best possible families for children
who need to be adopted. When children and young people cannot return home to
live with their parents, social workers need to give them more information to help
them to understand the reasons why this needs to happen and to have
information about their background.
 Care leavers are getting good support to prepare them for independence.
 Most care leavers are living in suitable accommodation and are given good
information about their rights and the things that they are entitled to.
 Too many care leavers are not in education, employment or training (NEET), but
numbers are now improving.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Children in Islington receive high-quality and effective early help support. This is
due to an accessible range of early and targeted support delivered by committed
multi-agency professionals. Staff implement specific plans on completion of holistic
early help assessments. The shared vision and priority of prevention and a Think
Child, Think Parent, Think Family principle are strong features of the early help
offer, so children and families receive consistently good support services when
they need them.
Strong multi-agency partnership working and inclusion of childrens views are
integral across early help, targeted and specialist intervention. These result in
children having a clear voice on decisions made about their lives. Children with
child protection plans have additional help to express their views and can access
advocacy services.
Children needing early help intervention or immediate protection are effectively
identified and receive a prompt and efficient response from the front door by the
childrens services contact team. However, contacts are variable in quality, so in
some cases it is unclear what service or help is needed.
Childrens assessments are analytical and child-focused. They are informed by
research on complex family difficulties, including domestic abuse, and they identify
the significant events in childrens lives. Inclusion of childrens views means that all
information gathered is used effectively to inform appropriate decision-making, risk
assessments and plans. Children missing from home and school receive an
effective response. However, return home interviews for children are too variable
in quality.
Children and families are set appropriate and realistic goals following assessments.
Not all children have good-quality plans or concise actions supporting how the
goals will be achieved. This, combined with inconsistent recording of meetings that
review plans, means that, for a small number of children, it is not easy to identify
progress.
Social workers receive good support from the expertise of co-located specialist
workers, including the child sexual exploitation and missing coordinator and the
integrated gangs team. This enables social workers to have confidence and
growing resilience to help and protect children living in families that have
extremely complex and diverse needs. They are passionate about helping families
and they build strong relationships with children, which means that they know
them well.


Inspection findings

Children in Islington receive good early help support. The well-established
early help offer is implemented by a multi-agency professional workforce that
uses its skills to provide targeted interventions across a range of available
services. Agencies share a deep-rooted early help vision and effectively adopt
a Think Child, Think Parent, Think Family principle that demonstrates their
commitment to tackling concerns at an early stage. The early help offer
extends to services of support for disabled children and their families,
inclusive of a comprehensive local offer and a range of short break
opportunities. As a result, children and families receive services targeted to
their individual needs.


Early intervention teams are successfully implementing the early help and
family support strategy 20152025. Childrens centres have a strong
relationship with health partners, and family support workers link to all
schools and general practitioner (GP) surgeries. This enables the early
identification of children in need of help.


Early help assessments are thorough. They consider the whole familys needs
and consistently include the views of parents and children. The focus on
family strengths as well as areas of concern, using a range of assessment
tools, enables a detailed analysis of childrens circumstances and the help
required to improve their outcomes. Early help plans implemented by multiagency lead professionals have clear, measurable targets and expected
timescales for achieving positive change for children and families. Most
children and families receive a proportionate and consistent response to meet
their needs. Childrens services respond well when childrens circumstances
change. When risks to their health and welfare increase, effective decisions
are made to keep them safe.


Children considered at risk of significant harm are quickly identified. All urgent
multi-disciplinary requests receive an effective and timely response from a
single point of contact in the childrens services contact team (CSCT). The
CSCT has impressive and experienced senior social workers who utilise a
range of resources to access information, including those provided by an
integrated multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH). This helps to identify the
most appropriate service response to meet childrens needs, including those of
children in need of early help. Children in need of urgent protection transfer
quickly to one of six locality children in need teams, resulting in prompt
assessment of their needs.


When the MASH receives contacts, staff respond effectively to identify risks to
children. A wide range of multi-agency intelligence is used to inform effective
decision-making, including information from schools and early years support,
ensuring that workers have a holistic overview of childrens attainment as well
as their social and family circumstances. Clearly recorded management
oversight and the rationale for overriding consent, if necessary, are


appropriately identified at the point of contact, ensuring robust decisionmaking relating to childrens needs.

Some contacts and requests for information are variable in quality. This
means that the concerns are not always clear. Senior managers know that
these areas need improvement, as a result of a commissioned external review
in October 2016. However, the review recommendations have not yet been
fully implemented, so for a few children the positive impact is not yet evident.
(Recommendation)


Children receive a good-quality and timely response from dedicated and
committed social workers in the children in need service. Social workers
benefit from considerable support and advice from a range of skilled specialist
workers co-located across the service. This includes expertise from a
dedicated child sexual exploitation and missing coordinator, domestic abuse
intervention workers and the integrated gangs team. All workers contribute to
the identification of known and anticipated risks to children; shared
knowledge is used effectively to inform strategy discussions and analysis in
childrens assessments.


Childrens assessments are of high quality. They identify precise risks to
children, and social workers give due consideration to the individual needs of
brothers and sisters within families. Workers use research effectively to inform
their analysis of strengths and risk factors and include significant events in the
childs family history. Inspectors saw purposeful examples of this, including
research on domestic abuse, honour-based violence and religious beliefs
within specific cultures. Social workers understand the emotional impact and
stress that children may experience when living within complex family
structures and clearly report on the actual impact that this has on children.


Social workers build strong relationships with children; they spend time with
them and understand their needs well. All workers have an individual staff
profile that they share when meeting children for the first time. This enables
children to understand why social workers need to be involved with families
and helps to build a strong rapport so that workers can ascertain what life is
like for them at home. Direct work and childrens views are integral to
assessments, and the majority give thoughtful consideration to childrens
identity and cultural needs at home, school and within their communities.
Workers in the disabled childrens team use a creative range of direct work
tools to understand and ensure that those children who have complex
communication needs are able to express their views and wishes.


Assessments identify the complexity of risks and diverse needs of children.
They inform childrens plans, and subsequent direct work appropriately
enables workers to check on childrens progress. Girls at risk of female genital
mutilation receive the help and support that they need through early
identification of risks. Culturally sensitive analysis demonstrates that social


workers have a good understanding of specific cultures and use this
information to inform safety plans for children.

Plans for children are not consistently concise or clear. All plans contain
appropriate family-focused goals derived from strong assessments, so that
parents know exactly what needs to change. However, the actions supporting
the achievement of those goals vary in quality and detail. Children in need
meetings and core groups that review the progress of childrens plans do not
consistently evidence progress made. This has led to some delays in the goals
of a small number of children being achieved, particularly those children who
have experienced more frequent changes in social workers.
(Recommendation)


Most children with child protection plans can access advocacy support to
attend or participate in meetings about the progress of their plan. Social
workers are diligently helping children to complete All about me books and
they promote appropriate advocacy support. As a result, childrens wishes and
feelings are represented in child protection planning.


Multi-agency partnerships and coordination of support to children are
exceptionally strong in Islington. These are particularly effective for those
children living within families in which there is domestic abuse, parental
mental ill health and substance misuse. Lead professionals and social workers
co-work with a range of commissioned services to enhance their knowledge of
parental risk factors. Specialist workers offer consultations and advice and
undertake direct work with children and families. Contingency plans are
effective. Families access services when they need support, and this includes
therapeutic and practical help.


Multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC) arrangements are
extremely effective. Consistent engagement and attendance from over 20
agencies and professionals in MARAC meetings ensure that broad holistic risks
are considered for children living with parents identified as having experienced
domestic abuse. The impact of domestic abuse is not seen in isolation and is
consistently linked to other inter-dependent risks in childrens lives, for
example gang activity and child sexual exploitation. A dedicated MARAC
coordinator vigorously monitors actions. Agencies share information
purposefully and effectively. An appropriate level of challenge results in tight
safety plans, which reduce risk for children.


Children at risk of and subject to child sexual exploitation receive timely and
appropriate action to safeguard their welfare. Social workers and child
protection coordinators use the expertise of a specialist coordinator in the
assessment of risks to children. Complex strategy meetings effectively
coordinate multi-agency identification and planning, so that children benefit
from comprehensive and high-quality support. This results in interventions
being effectively coordinated to minimise any future risks.



Children receive an appropriate and swift response when they are missing
from home. Coordinated activity endeavours to locate children and ascertain
their safety, with effective information sharing on individual children. Children
are consistently offered a return home interview when they are found.
However, not all children engage with this process, and return home
interviews themselves vary in quality. This means that not all information on
potential risks to children is identified to inform their safety plans.
(Recommendation)


The local authority and managers are well informed about children missing
from school and implement timely and persistent processes to locate them.
Good liaison with other professionals, including UK Visas and Immigration,
neighbouring boroughs and schools, together with use of data from a variety
of information sources, ensure that they are aware of all children missing
education in Islington. All children identified without a school place have clear
plans in place to meet their education needs.


A qualified teacher visits children who are electively home educated at least
annually. Robust oversight contributes to all families engaging with the local
authority in decisions relating to the education of their children.


Experienced workers with a range of multi-disciplinary knowledge provide
effective and responsive out-of-hours support to children and families in need
of emergency help. Emergency duty team workers visit children to assess
their needs and identify any risks to their welfare.


Children living within private fostering arrangements receive a good service.
Children are seen within statutory timescales and they are seen alone.
Assessments are of good quality and appropriately consider the needs and
views of children and the parenting capacity of carers.


Young people aged 16 and 17 who present as homeless receive timely,
analytical and thorough assessments. Assessments consider their views and
those of their family. Social workers explain to young people their legal
entitlements, enabling them to make informed choices about their futures.
When young people choose not to be looked after, suitable accommodation
and support are provided and are regularly reviewed to ensure that their
needs continue to be met.


Arrangements for managing allegations against staff, carers and volunteers
who work with children in Islington are well managed by the head of
safeguarding as the designated officer. Good coordination of activity and
strong procedures ensure that effective strategy meetings are held to protect
children. Effective work to raise awareness and provide consultation to other
agencies results in appropriate referrals. Subsequent action is timely and
proportionate to the level of risk identified.


The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Good

Summary
Services for children looked after in Islington are good. Managers and staff are
ambitious and aspirational for children and care leavers, and this is underpinned
by a clear vision and strategy to continue to strengthen social work practice.
Social workers are committed to the children with whom they work. They know
the children well and have trusting relationships, and go the extra mile to
support childrens needs.
Children only become looked after following timely, high-quality assessments,
which are clear about risks and what needs to change. When a child returns
home, good multi-agency support is in place to make this move successful. Plans
are reviewed regularly to ensure that a childs changing needs continue to be
met. When a child cannot return home, plans are made early to ensure that there
is no delay in identifying a permanent home.
Risks for children looked after are recognised, and swift action is taken to reduce
them. This includes the risk of child sexual exploitation, going missing from care
and gang activity. Children are involved in their safety planning and, when risks
increase, managers take effective protective measures to safeguard children.
Children live in good, stable homes that meet their needs well. The timeliness of
children looked after reviews and childrens participation in those reviews are very
good.
Children looked after who are at the early years foundation stage or key stages 1
or 2 achieve at the same level as their peers. The virtual school headteacher has
identified that more work is required to ensure that those children at key stage 4
achieve as they should. PEPs lack input from children, and the targets are not
sufficiently explicit. Managers identify this as an area that needs developing.
Adoption services are strong. Permanence through adoption is achieved quickly
for children from a diverse range of backgrounds and who have complex needs.
Matching is very effective. Social workers prepare children well for their
transitions. Adopters are very positive about the level of support that they receive
throughout their adoption journey, including post-adoption support.
Care leavers are well supported, they feel safe where they live and have very
good access to health provision. The care leavers service, Independent Futures,
works well with partners to ensure prompt access to services. Care leavers have
access to a good range of accommodation. However, they are not sufficiently
involved in the development of their pathway plans.


Inspection findings

Decisions about children becoming looked after are appropriate, timely and
based on good-quality assessments. Assessments take family history into
account to inform the analysis of risk and needs, and clearly articulate
childrens and parents views and wishes. Legal planning meetings are
effective, ensuring clarity on the threshold for care, options appraisal and the
rationale for decisions made. Effective use of parallel planning and family
group conferences ensures that early assessment of extended family members
takes place, minimising delay in decision-making for children.


Pre-proceedings work is comprehensive and clear on risks and concerns.
Social workers ensure that parents understand clearly what needs to happen
and how support will be offered. The Child and Family Court Advisory and
Support Service (Cafcass) and the judiciary are complimentary about the
quality of pre-proceedings work and information sharing by social workers,
which minimise delay for children in Islington. Care proceedings are
progressed within the 26-week threshold with good, well-prepared evidence.


Children do not return home from care unless it is safe for them to do so.
Accurate assessments outline ongoing risks and the ways in which support will
mitigate these. Child-centred plans result in comprehensive and intensive
support, meaning that a return home for children can be sustained.


The vast majority of assessments of children looked after are of good quality,
explicit about risks and needs and include the views of parents and children.
Placements of brothers and sisters are generally informed by a thorough
exploration of each childs individual needs and those that they have as a
brother/sister group. Assessments are not up to date for a very small number
of children, resulting in some delay in progressing plans, particularly in
confirming permanent placements.


The majority of care plans are of good quality and all are reviewed regularly.
Placement plans detail childrens routines and needs and are specific about
the expectations of the local authority and what carers can expect, including
delegated authority arrangements. Identity and cultural needs are explicit,
and plans reflect how carers will meet these needs. Parents views inform
placement choice. Children make good progress as a direct result of the care
that they receive. Parallel planning starts early in order to reduce delay for
children, and recommendations regarding permanence are routinely made at
the second review. Reviews are effective and timely, ensuring that care plans
are implemented in a consistent manner. Children report having opportunities
to speak to their independent reviewing officer (IRO) between reviews and
are supported to contribute to decisions and plans. Children directly influence
how their reviews are conducted.


Independent visitor and advocacy services are strong. Disabled children have
good access to advocacy support, with a referral to specialist services if their


needs cannot be met in-house. Children and young people confirmed to
inspectors that they understand how to make a complaint and receive support
to do so. Numbers of children and young people (including care leavers) who
have made a complaint have increased in the last year: 37 in 201617
compared with nine in 201516. This increase reflects good use of advocacy
to give children the confidence to say when things could be improved. The
outcomes of complaints are being used to make things better for children.
Complaints learning meetings, chaired by the complaints manager and
attended by service managers, share learning, identify themes and result in
an appropriate action plan.

Social workers see children regularly and alone. Direct work with children
informs assessments and planning. Some life story work and later life letters
are used to good effect to assist a childs understanding of their situation and
plan, but these are variable in quality. In some cases, poor recording does not
show direct work or reflect the social workers relationship with the child.
Children living with kinship carers do not routinely receive life story books or
later life letters to help them to understand why they are not living with their
parents. A life story tracker, which provides social workers with clear targets
for completion, is now helping to improve practice.


The IROs are a dedicated team with manageable caseloads who are strong on
scrutiny and clearly own their children. They engage quickly with children
and young people, following allocation, and see children or have contact with
them between reviews. IROs keep up to date with childrens changing needs,
and there is effective challenge to progress on agreed actions and plans. In
some cases, the IRO writes the review record to the young person as a letter,
which is highly effective in reflecting their views and wishes.


The children in care health team, including child and adolescent mental health
services (CAMHS), offers a comprehensive and well-managed service to
children looked after and care leavers, which means that their health needs
are very well met. All health assessments seen by inspectors were timely and
provided good-quality, child-centred information written in a way that was
easy for a young person to understand. Children looked after, including those
placed out of Islington, have their health needs comprehensively met by
active follow-up. Young people receive services promptly when substance
misuse is identified.


Emotional health provision for children is effective. Managers have taken
decisive action to improve the number of children who have an up-to-date
strengths and difficulties questionnaire (SDQ). The recently introduced SDQ
pathway helps social workers to understand and use the questionnaires to
identify the emotional health needs of children. When a score indicates some
concerns, emotional well-being meetings offer a reflective space to inform
interventions and care planning, ensuring that children who would benefit
from additional help are identified.



At the time of inspection, Islington was looking after 50 unaccompanied
asylum-seeking children. Very high-quality social work and multi-agency
support result in positive outcomes for these children. The impact of trauma
explicitly informs the professional network approach to working with this
group of young people and includes supporting foster carers, some of whom
are former asylum seekers themselves. Particularly strong, sensitive work was
seen in relation to forced marriage and bullying, resulting in high-level support
for young people that ensures their safety.


Partnership working is an area of strength, and good multi-agency work
makes a tangible difference to childrens outcomes. The response to the risk
of child sexual exploitation is good. Risk assessments are updated in response
to changes in circumstances, and quick multi-agency action is taken to
address any concerns identified. Effective direct work engages young people
in their safety planning. Children missing from care benefit from effective
multi-agency risk management and oversight by senior managers. Swift action
is taken to safeguard young people through the use of secure accommodation
when risks become unmanageable in the community, particularly in relation to
gang activity. Workers make tenacious efforts to engage young people.
Return home interviews are completed and most are clear on risks; they make
links with other risk areas like child sexual exploitation, substance misuse and
gang affiliation, and the analysis is shared with the professional network. This
means that important information is gathered to help to inform planning to
keep children safe.


The vast majority of children attend good or better schools. Those who do
not, have additional visits by the school improvement team to ensure that
they are not disadvantaged. The virtual school headteacher has clear
attendance records for all children looked after, which are updated each day.
The vast majority of children achieve an attendance of over 90%. At the time
of the inspection, 20 children were struggling to maintain acceptable levels of
attendance. All of them had an action plan that had good targets and
appropriate strategies to help them to improve their attendance.


Most children in the early years foundation stage, key stage 1 and key stage 2
achieve expected levels of attainment. However, attainment of young people
at key stage 4 is lower than that of their peers. Thirteen children are not
receiving a minimum of 25 hours of education each week. The virtual school
provides online tutoring and support within 24 hours of their leaving
education. Currently, this offer is between 12 and 15 hours per week. Child in
Focus meetings discuss each of these children to ensure that actions are in
place to get them back into a fuller programme of education.


PEPs are not good enough and do not involve all children sufficiently in the
process. Most children do not have specific actions or timescales in their
plans, which means that they do not know what they need to do to meet
targets. Currently, the virtual school does not judge the impact of the use of


the pupil premium. This means that the local authority does not have a
systematic way of measuring any resultant benefit for children.
(Recommendation)

Fostering assessments are timely and of good quality and contain clear
analysis and recommendations for learning in all cases seen by inspectors.
Child-centred review assessments were seen, with good use of the fostering
clinical psychologist to support carers through difficulties. The fostering panel
has a robust quality assurance process and has not had to defer any cases
due to poor-quality assessments in the past two years.


The fostering panel benefits from a highly experienced chair and committed
membership, including a health partner and a care leaver. Panel minutes show
relevant and insightful identification of areas for further exploration, and the
panel offers clear advice and recommendations, both to the service and to the
agency decision maker (ADM). Managers in the fostering service are
responsive to feedback, and there is a clear feedback loop between the panel
chair and the ADM, which drives improvements in practice for the benefit of
children.


Recruitment of foster carers remains a challenge, despite significant
recruitment activity undertaken by the local authority. A rolling programme of
recruitment and a community development officer working with local schools,
churches, mosques and nurseries have led to a number of applications. This is
helping to ensure that children live in a diverse range of homes that are
reflective of the local community. The local authority shares fostering
resources with other north London authorities. This helps to ensure that
children are placed near their communities, when this is appropriate. Careful
matching takes place and options appraisals are completed. In relation to outof-area placements, a specific hazards analysis identifies any local issues of
concern, and there is a well-thought-out process that matches need with
resource.


Foster carers are unanimous in their praise for the help, support,
encouragement and feedback that they receive from their supervising social
workers. They are clear about the decisions that they can make on behalf of
the children and young people in their care. They praise the opportunities that
children looked after have to participate in a range of leisure and social
activities that help to promote childrens physical and emotional health and
social development.


Islington supports and encourages childrens interests, and all children looked
after are given free access to leisure facilities in the borough. If a child lives
out of area, the equivalent access is sought in that area. In addition, the
Chrysalis project, aimed at higher achievers, encourages children to expand
their learning and to have high aspirations for their futures, by visiting
theatres, museums and universities, alongside extra sessions offered by the
virtual school.



Participation of children looked after is high, including disabled children, who
benefit from a highly skilled specialist participation worker, and they are well
represented by the Childrens Active Involvement Service (CAIS) Council.
Members of the CAIS Council attend the corporate parenting board and are
influential in developing and improving services. Younger children have fewer
opportunities to contribute, but the wide range of activities and work
completed by CAIS is highly impressive, and feedback from young people is
very positive.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good.

Adoption is considered for all children who may need permanent or alternative
families. There has been an increase in the number of adoption orders in the
last year, from eight in 201516 to 14 in 201617. This increase, combined
with a growing number of special guardianship orders being granted, means
that permanence is achieved for those children who need it.


Children receive an effective service from a well-established and experienced
team of social workers, led by committed and knowledgeable managers.
Social workers and managers know their children very well and robustly track
all of those awaiting permanence. All children waiting have potential links with
adopters. Information about children and prospective adopters is shared
promptly across the north London adoption consortium and cross-London
partnership. This, together with the good use of national links, helps to ensure
that permanence is achieved quickly for children in Islington.


Family finders are tenacious and, as a result, the local authority has been
successful in achieving adoption over the last year for brothers and sisters
together, disabled children and children from Black and Mixed ethnic
backgrounds. Some older children have also been adopted by their long-term
foster carers, which is a very good outcome for them, although this has had a
negative impact on the local authoritys overall performance in relation to the
timeliness of adoption. Setting aside this small cohort of children with
exceptional circumstances, the vast majority of children move to live with their
adopters well within national timescales.


Parallel planning routinely takes place to minimise delay. However, some
children potentially miss out on the opportunity for very early permanence
during court proceedings, as there are currently no adopters in Islington
approved to foster to adopt, and such foster carers from external agencies are
not always available. Managers are aware of this and are taking appropriate
action to increase options.


Assessments of potential adopters are thorough. They are undertaken in a
timely way and in line with national requirements. Social workers explore all


relevant areas, making good use of research. Detailed reports enable the
adoption panel and the ADM to make informed recommendations and
decisions about approval. Adopters from a wide range of backgrounds are
approved, reflecting the diverse ethnic communities in Islington.

The vast majority of child permanence reports are of a good quality. They
provide a clear understanding of the childs lived experiences and their specific
needs in relation to their age, health, development, any disability and their
identity. Matching reports are also of a high standard, demonstrating the
tenacious efforts of social workers to find the right match for children. There
have been no adoption disruptions in the past two years, either before or after
the making of an adoption order, highlighting the effectiveness of the
matching processes and support services.


An appropriately experienced individual chairs the adoption panel and
provides strong leadership to an established team of panel members, who
have a range of experience and skills. Panel and ADM minutes demonstrate
scrutiny and appropriate challenge when considering approvals and matches.
Quality assurance systems and feedback are robust. The chair also produces
good-quality six-monthly and annual reports on panel activity. She provides
feedback to social workers in every case considered and seeks feedback from
prospective adopters. Senior managers know the service very well and are
committed to continually improving the quality of the service.


Adoption support is a strength. Adopters speak extremely positively about the
support that they receive from their social workers throughout their adoption
journey. They report feeling very well prepared for becoming adoptive
parents. Having the opportunity to meet with the medical adviser to discuss
potential lifelong or future needs of their child or children is greatly valued. A
particular strength identified by adopters was the additional expert therapeutic
support that they received from a psychologist prior to, during and following
their childs transition into their family. This enables children who have
complex attachment difficulties to move successfully and to settle quickly.


Children benefit from meaningful contact with those important to them.
Assessments focus on what is right for the child following their adoption. A
dedicated contact worker facilitates and supports both direct and letterbox
contact. Consequently, children benefit from maintaining relationships, when
appropriate, and receiving letters that will add value to their lives in terms of
their identity.


Social workers undertake some excellent work with children in preparation for
adoption, using a range of tools to assist with their understanding of what is
happening. All children receive life story books, but the quality of these is
variable, and a significant minority lack important information. Some later life
letters written for children use too much social work jargon, making them
harder for children to understand. Managers have recognised that these are
areas for improvement, and work is in progress to address them.



Post-adoption support is very good. Children and their adopters have access
to an impressive and wide range of post-adoption support. This includes
training opportunities, access to workshops, counselling, therapy, support
groups for children, teens and adults and signposting to other voluntary sector
support services. Once approved, adopters receive a comprehensive support
handbook and then receive quarterly newsletters, highlighting pertinent
issues, training and support opportunities. Very good use is also made of the
adoption support fund, ensuring that families receive the specialist support
that they need.


Birth parents have access to positive counselling and support. Additionally, the
Pause team carries out highly effective work with women who have had
children removed as a result of legal proceedings. The team is currently
working with 18 women who have had 80 children placed in local authority
care. The multi-disciplinary team has passionate and committed staff, who are
clear about their roles and know when they need to make a safeguarding
referral. There is a high level of engagement, and powerful, early impact for
children is evident, particularly in relation to the quality of relationships and
adoption processes. Sustaining change following the end of Pause
involvement is the next challenge, and the team is engaged with a national
charity that is leading on this longitudinal research.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good.
Inspection findings

Over the past year, the local authority has improved the quality of service for
care leavers. Managers are clear about the actions necessary to improve the
service further. They have a clear understanding of the young peoples needs
and ensure that the service offers complete wrap-around provision to meet
their social, emotional, health and accommodation needs.


Young persons advisers and social workers work effectively together in
Independent Futures, Islingtons care leavers service, and they are in contact
with nearly all of their care leavers. They know their care leavers well.
Workers can clearly articulate care leavers support needs and the provision
available to meet these needs. These care leavers include those who have
higher support needs, such as those at risk of sexual exploitation, those in
custody, those involved in gangs as both victim and perpetrator and those
who are unaccompanied asylum seekers. Care leavers report that they know
how to contact their workers, and the vast majority feel appropriately
supported. One care leaver stated that he was made to feel that he belonged
in this country and that he belonged in Islington by his adviser.



Young persons advisers and social workers work well with other professionals
for the benefit of care leavers. This includes positive relationships with the
youth offending service, probation, CAMHS, the Department for Work and
Pensions, the police and the prison service. Targeted support is offered to
help care leavers to progress into independent living. For example, young
persons advisers ensure that prisons receive pathway and other plans to
ensure that care leavers receive the support that they need while in custody.


The vast majority of pathway plans are up to date. However, these plans vary
too much in quality, and many have insufficient involvement of care leavers.
Many targets identified in plans do not explain to care leavers how they can
be achieved. Care leavers in many cases do not feel that they are set
challenging and worthwhile targets by their advisers and they are therefore
insufficiently motivated to complete the actions. Recent actions taken by
managers, combined with training undertaken by IROs, show an increased
focus on the quality of pathway planning. The impact in terms of care leavers
engagement with the pathway planning process is not yet sufficiently evident.
(Recommendation)


High numbers of care leavers are in further and higher education and achieve
well. Currently, 41 care leavers are undertaking degree courses and 140 care
leavers are undertaking further education courses at various levels. These
care leavers receive good support, both from their young persons advisers
and from appropriate financial provision while they are on their courses.
Nineteen young people are undertaking apprenticeships to enable them to
gain valuable skills while working. The local authority has developed plans to
expand its apprenticeship programme next year so that more care leavers can
benefit from such provision. A care leaver stated that she would not have
been where she is now without the support and guidance of her young
persons adviser. An adviser explained how proud she was when she attended
a graduation ceremony of one of her care leavers.


Over a third of care leavers are NEET. However, staff do have clear and
precise plans in place to support them into worthwhile activity. Specialist
workers offer tailored, specific provision, and care leavers report that they
receive good support to find work. Managers discuss each young person who
is NEET at quarterly education review meetings to check that plans are in
place and appropriate, so that their young people can progress.


Care leavers have very good access to health facilities. A childrens looked
after health adviser facilitates a weekly drop-in at Independent Futures, to
support care leavers sexual, general and emotional health, in addition to
providing specialist substance misuse support. Care leavers welcome this and
the service is well used. Regular liaison between CAMHS and adult mental
health services ensures continuity of provision for those care leavers who
have specific emotional health needs. Health advisers refer care leavers to
specialists as necessary. Young persons advisers often take care leavers to


these appointments to give them moral support and to facilitate their
attendance.

Care leavers receive health passports when they leave the service. This
ensures that they are aware of their medical histories and of any allergies or
medical concerns, and that they have contact details of medical and dental
practitioners. They also receive a list of local specialist health provision, which
is individualised to the locality in which they live. All care leavers who spoke to
inspectors are aware of their health issues and needs and know whom to
contact if they have any problems.


Staff at Independent Futures support care leavers well to find appropriate
accommodation. There is a clear accommodation pathway with a good range
of options available to care leavers. An effective accommodation panel
ensures clear tracking of care leavers needs. Young persons advisers place
care leavers in the most appropriate provision for them at the time, based on
a careful assessment of their needs. Care leavers report feeling safe in their
homes and know that their young persons adviser will support them with any
difficulties that they may have.


Young persons advisers support them to move to independent
accommodation when they are ready. There are clear and robust plans for
care leavers in temporary accommodation, and these are reviewed frequently
by managers to ensure that they have effective moving-on plans in place. No
care leavers have been evicted from their permanent tenancy since
September 2015, which is reflective of the substantive levels of tenancy
support and good preparation activities to ensure that they have the skills
necessary to maintain a tenancy. Managers have a clear focus on sustaining
staying-put placements for care leavers with foster carers, beyond the age of
arrangements. This enables continuity of provision for care leavers and
ensures that they are not placed in more independent accommodation before
they are ready to proceed with such a transition.


Independent Futures provides additional and relevant activities for care
leavers throughout the year. Groups have visited companies, job fairs and
universities to expand their knowledge of job and training opportunities.
Driving lessons are available to care leavers who complete their independent
skills passports. Care leavers have access to Grand-mentors; these are older
professional people, who give enduring emotional and practical support.


Independent Futures, alongside partner organisations, provides a two-day
independence programme. This course supports care leavers into
independence and covers housing, relationships, sexual health and education,
employment and training. Care leavers reported to inspectors that they feel
that they receive good support from their young persons advisers to become
independent; this includes help with cooking, completing forms, financial
benefits, conflict management and practical help with moving house.



Sixty care leavers are also young parents, and young persons advisers ensure
that they have access to many activities, specifically provided for them,
including soft play dates, childrens centre facilities, Inspire (a group for new
mums) and the support of the family nurse partnership service. One young
mother said that these activities stopped her from feeling isolated and that
she has made many good friends through these activities and groups.


Staff and elected members in Islington are proud of their care leavers and
recognise their achievements by holding an annual celebratory event. A
steering group of staff and care leavers plans this event each year. Care
leavers report that this event boosts their confidence, gives them real pride in
their achievements and helps them to move forward.


The care leavers service is proactive in seeking the views of care leavers. This
is achieved through the use of regular surveys and information informally
gathered. This is used to help to inform service improvement, with the views
of care leavers reflected in the service development plan.


Care leavers are aware of their rights and entitlements and know how to
obtain support to access them. Each care leaver receives a book explaining
what they can expect from Independent Futures and their financial
entitlements. Their young persons adviser ensures that they discuss these
rights, which helps care leavers to access appropriate financial support at the
right time for them.


Leadership, management and
governance

Outstanding

Summary
Senior leaders, operational managers and elected members are ambitious,
aspirational and determined to provide outstanding services for all children and
families in Islington. Effective use of political influence to engage key partner
agencies at the highest level reflects the strong and committed partnership
contribution to good local services.
Strategic partners demonstrate effective engagement through aligned key priorities
that fully reflect the diverse needs of local people. Established and mature
governance arrangements support the Islington Safeguarding Children Board to
know and improve the quality of multi-agency frontline practice that leads to
effective integrated services to children and families. This includes successful
coordination of work to effectively identify and support children at risk of sexual
exploitation, gang affiliation, radicalisation and female genital mutilation.
The highly effective use of available resources ensures delivery of services
consistent with local needs and priorities. Good joint commissioning arrangements,
informed by a robust assessment of local needs, result in services that are
reflective of, and sensitive to, the diverse culture, religion and ethnicity of families
in Islington. Leaders and managers fully understand the value and impact of early
preventative services, and this is reflected in the wide range of high-quality
provision available to children and families at a local level.
Elected members, leaders and operational managers are excellent corporate
parents. They are proactive, highly ambitious and aspirational for children looked
after and care leavers, and take real pride in their achievements, celebrating with
them as any good parent would.
Senior managers know the quality of frontline practice, informed by extensive and
comprehensive performance management information and enhanced by regularly
shadowing workers, observing practice and involving young people in a meaningful
way. Decisions, taken with the right level of confidence and authority, ensure that
children receive the right level of service when they most need it.
The local authority uses creative approaches to recruit and retain staff, and this is
leading to improved stability in the workforce. Social workers have manageable
caseloads with good supervision and support and extensive training. This helps to
improve their capacity and their resilience in undertaking effective direct work with
children and families, many of whom have highly complex needs.
The local authority has successfully developed an environment where social work
can flourish; children are safer as a result and enabled to achieve their best.


Inspection findings

Senior leaders, managers and politicians are highly effective, ambitious and
passionate about improving outcomes for children and young people, and aim
to provide outstanding services. They are aspirational and effective advocates
for all children in Islington, and the quality of services and practice improves
as a result. This is in the context of high levels of deprivation, substance
misuse and knife-related crime. Many children in need of help and protection,
children looked after, including care leavers, and those adopted in the
borough have highly complex needs and present considerable challenges.
Work completed since the inspection in 2012 has strengthened the quality of
practice and has ensured that children remain protected. There are very many
examples of highly effective practice that provide children and young people
with the support that they need to be safe and do well.


The chief executive is tenacious about the local authoritys ambition to provide
excellent services to local people. Her commitment to continuous
improvement has been instrumental in establishing innovation and creativity
to improve the lives of children. For example, the pledge to tackle youth
violence has led to the highly effective and integrated partnership
arrangements to address the prevalent gang and drug culture in the area.


The leader of the council, the lead member for childrens services and elected
members are clearly committed to improving services for all children and
families in Islington. They meet regularly with children and demonstrate a
good understanding of the challenges that they face. Effective use of political
influence to engage key partner agencies at the highest level reflects the
strong and committed partnership contribution to good local services.
Strategic partner representatives demonstrate effective engagement through
aligned priorities that reflect and meet the needs of local people.


Routine safeguarding assurance meetings with the corporate DCS fully inform
the chief executive and elected members of the quality of frontline practice.
This results in a strong corporate understanding of safeguarding and the good
quality of social work practice. Effective elected member scrutiny of
performance information has led to specific and targeted focus on key areas
of risk, for example the multi-agency understanding of the approach to the
supply of drugs across local authorities, known as the county lines model.
Proactive and persuasive work by the lead member for childrens services with
elected members has resulted in a corporate understanding and prioritisation
of services to vulnerable children, including retention of services that provide
effective early help for families.


Creative use of available resources increases capacity to provide and extend
services across the borough, leading to accessible support at a local level. This
includes effective investment in services for children on the edge of care,
which has enabled some children to remain living safely with their families.



Leaders and managers fully understand the value and impact of early
preventative services, reflected in the wide range of good-quality provision
available to children and families. A recent example is the investment in
research to understand the trauma that children experience living in
households in which there is domestic abuse, to improve social workers
confidence and to develop diverse approaches to best help and support them.


The highly motivated and effective strategic partnership demonstrates
ambition to provide high-quality services in Islington. Established and mature
governance arrangements, including effective collaboration with the clinical
commissioning group, support the LSCB to know and improve the quality of
multi-agency frontline practice. This leads to successful arrangements that
provide effective integrated services to children and families. An example of
this is the strategic response to strengthening organisational governance
arrangements following the inspection of the youth offending service in 2016.
As a result, effective joint working and the co-location of a number of services
have considerably strengthened the areas response to public protection,
including the multi-agency response to youth violence and children at risk of
sexual exploitation.


Partnership work with voluntary agencies is inclusive and empowering. Strong
and effective collaboration with voluntary sector organisations results in the
delivery of high-quality, locally accessible services at universal, targeted and
specialist levels. These are making a difference, for example, with mentors
who are engaging effectively with young people affiliated with gangs.


The agency coordination of work with children at risk of sexual exploitation,
gang affiliation, radicalisation and female genital mutilation is highly effective.
The innovative specialist intervention pilot, resulting from a successful bid to
the Department for Education innovation fund to tackle serious youth
violence, supports two specialist workers who provide exceptional direct
intervention to those most vulnerable children assessed as at high risk of
harm from gang-related activity or child sexual exploitation. In addition, their
expertise through consultation effectively supports social workers to improve
the identification of risk and a reduction of harmful behaviour, including, for
some, the disengagement from gang-related activity.


Work with the police to identify and broker cross-authority police cooperation
for children placed in the borough by other local authorities is effective. A
detailed analysis of this group identifies those most at risk, and contact is
made with the placing local authority. In one case, this resulted in a robust
challenge to the placing local authority about the effectiveness and safety of
the care planning for a highly vulnerable child; this led to immediate
protective action.


Effective action to raise awareness of parents in primary schools and of Year 5
and Year 6 pupils, in conjunction with the healthy schools coordinator, is
leading to early identification of the possible risks of female genital mutilation.


Specific training delivered to a range of professionals, parents and pupils is
leading to greater understanding of the indicators of risk and the protection of
children.

Established and effective joint commissioning arrangements, informed by a
robust assessment of local needs, reflect detailed knowledge of the local
population. As a result, services are reflective of, and sensitive to, the diverse
culture, religion and ethnicity of families in Islington. For example, parenting
programmes developed to address and challenge specific cultural norms, and
in the first language of families, enable accessible support that improves the
experience of and help to children from specific minority ethnic groups.
Children are involved in a range of commissioning processes, and their views
inform service specification and procurement. Recently, young carers
contributed to the re-procurement of services, directly participating in the
redesign of support to them and their families.


The quality of corporate parenting is excellent. Elected members, leaders and
managers are proactive, highly ambitious and aspirational for children looked
after and care leavers. They take real pride in their achievements, and
celebrate with them as any good parent would. The chief executive is an
inspirational mentor for at least three young people and she has been
instrumental in influencing and improving their life chances.


The CAIS enables the In Care Council to be a highly influential advocate for
children looked after and care leavers as members of the corporate parenting
board. The service widely consults children, including those who live outside
the borough, about their experiences of care. These views inform services,
which have improved as a result of their ideas and input, such as
improvements to holiday arrangements with foster carers. Children looked
after and care leavers who live outside the borough, provided with travel costs
and overnight accommodation, were able to attend the annual evening
celebrations of achievements held at the Arsenal Emirates Stadium in 2015
and 2016.


The local authority knows the quality of frontline practice, informed by
extensive and comprehensive performance management information. The
electronic intelligence hub brings together over 60 sources of data, providing
team managers and social workers with accessible information on key
performance areas of practice, which includes data on individual children,
families, households and the wider community. This results, for example, in
effective identification and profiling of geographical hotspots where young
people involved with, affiliated to and at the fringes of gang activity live and
congregate. This leads to effective targeted interventions to those most at risk
and early identification of those potentially at risk.


Senior managers have a comprehensive knowledge of their strengths and
areas for improvement, well informed by shadowing workers, observing
practice and involving young people in a meaningful way. At all levels,


decisions taken by managers ensure that children receive the right level of
service at the right time. Team managers and social workers know the
children well, and good management oversight of practice at an operational
level is helping to improve the quality of social work practice.

A wide range of effective quality assurance activity includes thorough audits
arising from scrutiny of performance management information. This
contributes to the local authoritys well-informed understanding of areas that
require improvement. The recently introduced practice week, involving senior
leaders, enabled parents, carers, children and professionals to provide
feedback to inform a clear and comprehensive action plan that focuses on
improving their experience of help and support. Learning from SCRs leads to
effective changes and improvements in multi-agency practice. As a result of
the SCR on Child E, improved coordination between occupational therapists
and housing support workers led to comprehensive assessment and actions
that improve the safety of children who live at height in accommodation
across Islington.


The local authority has successfully completed the first phase of its social
work model, doing what counts and measuring what matters, a motivational
social work approach. Implemented in the children in need service, this
improves the quality of relationships between social workers and children, and
this was evident during the inspection. This model will be extended across the
whole service, to strengthen practice for all vulnerable children.


The local authority has effective relationships with Cafcass, which is highly
complimentary of the authority regarding the quality and timeliness of preproceedings and care proceedings work. Social workers produce good
evidence, which negates the need for further independent assessments,
resulting in timely completion of care proceedings, the vast majority of which
are completed within 26 weeks.


The local authority is creative about how to recruit and retain staff, and this is
leading to improved stability in the workforce. Recent recruitment of social
workers tests the core attributes underpinning the motivational social work
approach through role play, and identifies the applicants ability to build
positive relationships and to demonstrate empathy and collaboration skills.
This approach, also applied to locum workers, demonstrates good practice.
This has resulted in 24 agency workers becoming permanent members of
staff, providing continuity of workers for children, and, together with
strengthened managerial oversight, this is improving the consistency of social
work practice. Key worker housing provided by the local authority is attracting
professionals and has enabled 22 social workers to live and work in Islington.


Young people are fully involved in the recruitment to all social work and
manager, including senior manager, posts and they take part in the induction
of new staff. They have developed and deliver the listening and connect


module of training, to describe their experiences to new staff and foster
carers. The training powerfully conveys what matters to them.


Social workers spoken to on this inspection have manageable caseloads that
improve their capacity to undertake effective direct work with children. An
established culture of learning and continuous professional development
results in a good level of support, supervision and training to workers, with
specialist workers and consultants available to help them to improve their
practice and build resilience. The local authority has developed an
environment where social work can flourish, and as a result, children seen on
this inspection are safer and enabled to achieve their best.

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
The LSCB is ambitious. It has a clear sense of vision and purpose and is well led,
well managed and well run. Partnerships, particularly with health, are well
developed and effective. Governance arrangements are robust. The board makes a
significant contribution to the development of services at both a strategic and an
operational level. The board fulfils all of its statutory functions, including those
relating to private fostering and allegations against people who work with children.
Early help, thresholds for access to childrens social care services, children looked
after and care leavers are very much in scope and constantly under review.
The LSCB and its partners have a strong understanding of child sexual exploitation.
They have taken decisive and effective action to strengthen the local response to
children who go missing from home or care.
The board makes good use of single and multi-agency audits to identify and
address any shortfalls in practice and performance. Its management of, and
response to, SCRs and local management reviews are robust and effective. Plans
are in place to ensure that the section 11 audits, which partners are currently in
the process of updating, are subject to rigorous critical challenge and scrutiny.
The board uses performance management information from a number of different
sources to monitor and evaluate the impact and effectiveness of frontline
safeguarding and child protection practice. However, the boards child protection
performance report lacks sufficient commentary or analysis and currently does not
include any health or police data.
The boards website provides easy access to a comprehensive range of high-quality
policies, procedures and practice guidelines, which are regularly updated. The
training provided by the board is of a consistently high quality.
The boards business plan is detailed and comprehensive, but it is not being used
to best effect to monitor the activities and track the progress of the boards various
sub-groups. Although easy to read, the last annual report was also overly
descriptive. It did not provide a clear evaluation of the effectiveness of local
arrangements to safeguard and protect children and young people in Islington.
Children, young people and families are not yet sufficiently involved, either directly
or indirectly, in the work of the board.


Recommendations

Ensure that the board has access to the right level of performance
management information and data with which to monitor the impact and
effectiveness of multi-agency safeguarding and child protection practice.


Ensure that the business plan is used effectively to monitor the work and track
the progress of the various sub-groups in a way that makes their activities
more visible to board members.


Ensure that the annual report provides a clear assessment of the effectiveness
of local arrangements to safeguard and protect children and young people.


Ensure that the work of the board is better informed and influenced by the
lived experiences of children, young people and families.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

With a clear sense of purpose and direction, an impressive independent chair,
a tenacious business manager and good engagement from partner agencies,
the board is making steady progress to achieve its overarching objectives.
Meetings are well structured. Decisions taken and actions agreed are clearly
recorded and routinely followed up. Meeting minutes provide clear evidence of
effective challenge between board members and partner agencies and, when
applicable, the LSCB and external bodies. While the boards commitment to
continuous improvement is very evident, there are unresolved issues
regarding financial contributions by some partner agencies.


Robust governance arrangements ensure an appropriate level of
accountability, while at the same time making it possible for the LSCB to hold
other strategic boards to account. The independent chair of the LSCB meets
at quarterly intervals with the chief executive of the local authority, the leader
of the council, the lead member and the DCS. A written protocol clearly
defines the relationship and reporting arrangements between the LSCB, the
Health and Well-being Board, the Safer Islington Partnership, the Children and
Families Partnership Board and the Adult Safeguarding Board. This means that
the board is not operating in a vacuum and is able to exert its strategic
influence.


The board continues to make a significant contribution to the development of
services at both a strategic and an operational level. For example, working
collaboratively with the Youth Justice Management Board, the board has
helped to revolutionise the local response to gangs and youth violence.
Currently, the board is actively involved in the ongoing transformation of early
help services. The board uses its influence effectively to ensure that
safeguarding issues are prioritised appropriately.



The LSCB provides effective critical challenge. Within the last 12 months, the
board has, for example, challenged schools about their contribution to core
groups and child protection conferences, childrens social care about the offer
and completion of return home interviews and the local authority about its
response to the Prevent duty. During the same period, the board has
reviewed the work of the designated officer to assure itself that allegations
against people working with children are dealt with appropriately, received
updated reports on early help and children looked after and redoubled its
efforts to raise awareness of private fostering arrangements. The board is
able to demonstrate its impact on raising practice standards and improving
outcomes for children, young people and families.


The board does not yet have its own performance dashboard. Although the
LSCB is using performance management information from a range of different
sources to monitor and evaluate the impact and effectiveness of frontline
practice, the commentary in its bi-monthly child protection performance
information report is insufficient and lacks detailed analysis. The LSCB is
aware of this shortfall and has plans to address it, but in the short term, the
board does not have a direct line of sight on, for example, the number of
young people who present at accident and emergency units as a result of selfharm, substance misuse or peer/gang violence or the number of cases that
are stepped up or down between early help and childrens social care.
(Recommendation)


The LSCB takes quality assurance very seriously. Since June 2016, the board
has audited childrens participation in child protection conferences, the
operational response to female genital mutilation, the use by the police of
their powers of protection, repeat child protection plans, the level of
consideration being given to disability and/or childrens voices in child
protection medicals and knife-related harm. Any remedial action required is
clearly recorded in the form of simple, but specific and measurable, audit
action plans. By identifying and systematically addressing shortfalls in practice
and/or performance, the board is making a positive difference to the lives of
children, young people and families.


Annual safeguarding self-assessment reports completed by schools and
providers of early years services are rigorously analysed by the board to
identify areas for improvement and to evaluate the impact of multi-agency
safeguarding training. These reports have been used very successfully to
consider referral patterns, explore partners understanding and application of
the threshold criteria for access to childrens social care and assess their
awareness of, and responses to, the lessons learned from SCRs. When
necessary, appropriate follow-up action is taken. For example, designated
safeguarding leads have visited those schools that did not have an effective
missing policy and organised refresher training on the use of the neglect
toolkit for early years providers.



Partner agencies are currently in the process of updating their section 11
audits. The LSCB business manager recognises the need, and has plans, to
ensure that section 11 audits are subject to robust scrutiny and rigorous
critical challenge.


Although the number of sudden or unexpected deaths involving children or
young people in Islington is relatively small, the child death overview panel
(CDOP) ensures that each case is carefully reviewed. Whenever the causes of
death are judged to have been preventable, the CDOP works hard to ensure
that lessons are learned and appropriate action is taken. For example, an
increased focus on knife crime and knife-related homicides is resulting in
increased awareness of such incidents by partner agencies.


The LSCB has significantly strengthened its approach to SCRs by, for example,
ensuring that the referral pathways are clear and unambiguous and that the
decision-making process is rigorous and robust. Lessons learned from SCRs
and local management reviews (LMRs) are widely disseminated, and the SCR
sub-group is persistent and effective in holding partner agencies to account
for implementing their SCR and LMR action plans. Following the death of Child
E, well-coordinated action involving housing officers and occupational
therapists led to a marked reduction in the number of disabled children whose
families were on the housing waiting list. Senior managers have also taken
appropriate action to improve the communication between Cafcass, IROs and
childrens social care services in response to the lessons learned from the SCR
regarding Child F.


Through its website, the board ensures that partners and practitioners are
able to access high-quality policies, procedures and practice guidelines, which
are regularly updated. For example, the LSCB has reviewed and updated its
policies and procedures to reflect the latest developments in relation to child
sexual exploitation, female genital mutilation and the Prevent duty. This
means that those engaged in safeguarding and protecting children and young
people have the policies and procedural tools that they need to do the job.


The LSCB and its partners have a thorough understanding of child sexual
exploitation. They are making good use of data and intelligence to develop a
coherent local profile of the risks associated with child sexual exploitation. The
child sexual exploitation, missing and trafficking coordinator is visible, active
and influential and ensures that the potential links between child sexual
exploitation and other vulnerabilities are recognised and explored. Year-onyear, the number of children and young people who are identified as having
been, or are at risk of being, sexually exploited has increased. The LSCB is
able to evidence its impact on managing and reducing risks while, at the same
time, disrupting the activities of perpetrators.


The LSCB has been influential in strengthening the response to children who
go missing from home or care. A comprehensive missing and child sexual
exploitation action plan, which is regularly reviewed and periodically updated,


provides clear evidence of progress and impact. Senior managers and leaders
now have a much clearer line of sight on the offer and completion of return
home interviews. Although there is still some way to go, children and young
people are being better safeguarded and protected.

The training provided by the LSCB is of a consistently high quality. Directly
linked to the pan-London Competence Still Matters framework, the training
delivered by the board is being used very effectively to promote multi-agency
working. In the last 12 months, over 1,100 staff have completed training
provided by the LSCB. Online feedback is generally very positive. Members of
the training and development sub-group recognise that they need to do more
to evaluate the impact of training on practice and performance. However,
annual safeguarding reports have demonstrated that the use of chronologies
to record issues and concerns relating to individual children, particularly in
schools and early years settings, has increased as a result of the training
provided.


While priorities in the annual report are clear and explicit, the business plan is
only updated once a year. This means that it is not being used to best effect
to monitor and track the progress of priorities or to evaluate the work being
undertaken in the various sub-groups. (Recommendation)


Although the annual report is reasonably comprehensive and easy to read and
provides a coherent overview of the work of the LSCB and its sub-groups, it is
overly descriptive. By concentrating more on the role and function of subgroups, the focus of audit activity and the content of the multi-agency
training, the annual report does not provide a clear and unequivocal
assessment of the impact and effectiveness of local arrangements to
safeguard and protect children and young people in Islington.
(Recommendation)


While partner agencies are able to demonstrate their individual efforts to
reach out to and engage children and young people, the LSCB recognises that
it needs to do more to strengthen the voice and influence of children, young
people and families in the work of the board. Holding a recent board meeting
at a local primary school, and hearing directly from the children about the
things that worry them, are steps in the right direction, but there is still a long
way to go. (Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Andy Whippey
Deputy lead inspector: Marcie Taylor
Team inspectors: Rachel Griffiths, Dawn Godfrey, Julie Knight, Neil Penswick, Nigel
Parkes, Tracey Zimmerman
Senior data analyst: Stewart Hartshorne
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2017


