Kent County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection dates: 6 March to 30 March 2017
Report published: 13 June 2017

Childrens services in Kent are good

Requires improvement

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Kent County Council is delivering a good service to children and families. Leaders and
senior managers have responded purposefully and methodically to service
weaknesses, resulting in strengthened services and improved outcomes for children.
Through his effective leadership, the director of childrens services (DCS) sets clear
priorities, demonstrating a firm resolve to improve outcomes for children and young
people. This is in the context of a significant increase in the number of
unaccompanied asylum-seeking children arriving in Kent during 201516. The local
authority tackled the increased demand on childrens services effectively, along with
work it was already doing. Senior managers have responded swiftly to these
changing needs through considered restructuring of services for care leavers.
Political leaders have been responsive to budget pressures, supporting increased
financial investment.
Following an inspection of safeguarding and children looked after in 2010, which
found services for children inadequate, the local authority has engaged with partners
in a substantial improvement journey. By 2013, inspections of child protection and
children looked after found services had improved to adequate. Building on these
foundations, managers have systematically tackled weaknesses across the service,
using a comprehensive quality-assurance framework and regular case-auditing to
identify areas for practice improvement. However, the help and protection that
children receive continue to require improvement. Some aspects of practice have
improved, but more work is required to ensure consistently effective decision-making
when children first come to the attention of the service, as well as to improve the
quality of assessment for those children living in private fostering arrangements.
Services are well targeted and coordinated to meet the specific needs of
communities of Kent. Children and their families have access to a wide range of early
help services from the earliest point of need. When need becomes more complex,
children are referred to the Central Referral Unit (CRU) and most receive a prompt
response that ensures their needs are met at the earliest opportunity. However,
some referrals closed prematurely, before all relevant information had been gathered
and analysed to ensure safe and appropriate decision-making. Once alerted to this
by inspectors, senior managers took decisive action to review recent referrals,
reopening some for further scrutiny, and revising working practices, structure and
management oversight in this part of the service.
Social workers develop strong and constructive relationships with children. They see
them regularly and use creative direct work to ensure that they understand childrens
experiences and views. The majority of assessments are analytical and result in highquality plans that focus on the needs of children and lead to effective interventions,
with positive outcomes. When child protection referrals lead to strategy discussions,
they involve relevant professionals, are mainly timely, and, when appropriate, result
in initial child protection conferences. However, for a small number of children open
to the district social work teams, there are delays in recognising escalating risk. This
is particularly evident for children living in neglectful circumstances or affected by


domestic violence. The local authority appropriately identifies children who are at risk
of sexual exploitation and has developed strong working relationships through the
multi-agency child sexual exploitation team. Adolescent risk management (ARM)
panels are in place, but vary in their effectiveness. The local authority identifies and
responds to children who go missing from home or care, but the quality and
timeliness of return home interviews is too variable.
Effective services, including adolescent support teams and family group conferences,
support children on the edge of care. This ensures that when possible children
remain with their families. Children looked after by the local authority receive a good
service. The vast majority become looked after at the right time and benefit from
comprehensive assessments of their needs, and the majority live in stable
placements. Assessments for foster carers, connected persons and special guardians
are comprehensive. However, for a small number of children there is a lack of clarity
about the steps required to formalise living arrangements with family and friends.
Children who have a care plan for adoption benefit from the effective service that the
adoption team provides. Services for care leavers are good. Personal advisers remain
in touch with large numbers of young people and most live in suitable
accommodation. More work is required to ensure that young people in custody have
regular visits and focused planning for their discharge.
Performance management systems provide detailed data and helpful analysis to
monitor and develop services effectively. However, some data relating to care
leavers is not accurate or reliable enough to enable proper scrutiny and oversight.
Management oversight and case supervision and direction have significantly
improved. Inspectors saw some examples of analytical case supervision, but the
quality is not always good enough, and managers do not always sufficiently identify
risks or challenge lack of progress.
The local authority recognises the vulnerabilities of unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children and works closely with the Home Office, immigration services, police and
partners from adult services. They work effectively to reduce risks such as those
related to trafficking, sexual exploitation, female genital mutilation and possible
radicalisation. Arrangements for tracking missing unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children are rigorous. A panel provides management oversight of those children who
are missing, or at high risk of harm, to ensure that risks are understood and
minimised when possible.
Young people aged 16 and 17 at risk of homelessness are supported by housing
officers. There is a lack of consistent protocols with district housing departments. As
a result, arrangements for support and accommodation are too variable. No young
people were in bed and breakfast accommodation at the time of the inspection but
this is used by district housing departments in some circumstances, which is not
acceptable practice and leaves young people potentially vulnerable.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. Four were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspections.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in January 2013. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
August 2013. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The corporate director of Social Care, Health and Wellbeing is the DCS for Kent
County Council and has been in post since November 2011.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services and public health.
 Kent County Council does not have a chief executive. The DCS is currently
responsible directly to the County Council. However, following a County Council
decision in January 2017, the DCS will report to the head of Paid Service with
effect from 3 April 2017.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
March 2014.
 The local authority uses the Signs of Safety model of social work.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 330,000 children and young people under the age of 18 live in
Kent. This is 22% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 17% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 are living in
low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 12% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 10% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 9% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data when this was available.


 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Mixed and Asian/Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 11% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 8% (the national average is 16%).
 Due to over 1,300 unaccompanied asylum-seeking children entering Kent since
January 2015, the county (including the unitary Medway towns) continues to look
after and accommodate disproportionately high numbers of children and young
people from the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region, Afghanistan and the
Horn of Africa.
Child protection in this area
 At 6 March 2017, 9,193 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from 9,290 at
 At 6 March 2017, 1,176 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 36 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 1,049
children (32 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 6 March 2017, 40 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from 25 at 31 March 2015.
 In the last two years prior to inspection, 19 serious incident notifications had
been submitted to Ofsted and one serious case review has been completed.
 There are four serious case reviews ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 6 March 2017, 1,893 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 57 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 2,310 (70 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
authority area
authority area
authority area


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 86 adoptions
returned to be looked after
to independent living
care leavers living in houses in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that prompt consideration is given to convening strategy discussions
and, when appropriate, that strategy discussions are held for all children when
risk increases.


Ensure that private fostering assessments are robust and include all required
safeguarding checks, and that visits to children are timely.


Ensure that homeless young people aged 16 and 17 years are aware of their
right to become looked after, assessments of risk are completed and there is
adequate accommodation to meet their needs.


Improve the response to all children at risk of sexual exploitation, ensuring that
assessments and safety plans are of a consistently good quality.


Improve the timeliness and quality of return home interviews for children who
go missing, to ensure that they are an effective tool to safeguard individual
children and inform strategic response.


Ensure that all care leavers in prison or secure training centres have purposeful
visits and an up-to-date pathway plan.


Review the data routinely provided to the Kent Safeguarding Children Board
(KSCB), and in conjunction with the board take steps to ensure that this is
sufficiently comprehensive to enable the partnership to scrutinise the local
authoritys safeguarding performance.


Evaluate the quality of case and staff supervision across teams and districts and
take steps to ensure that managers pay sufficient attention to social workers
performance, and to their development needs.


Ensure that data relating to care leavers is accurate, and that it provides
leaders, managers and corporate parents with a clear view of the performance
of the service.

ensure that early help and specialist childrens services and professionals who
work with families at all levels of need are equipped to identify, assess and
address neglect within families.


Summary for children and young people
 In 2013, inspectors found that children in Kent did not get good enough services.
Since that time, senior leaders, managers and social workers have worked hard
to make changes to ensure that children get the help and support they need. In
this inspection in March 2017, inspectors found that nearly all services in Kent are
good.
 Political leaders have a real commitment to improving the lives of children. They
have made sure that there is enough money available so that children get the
help they need.
 When professionals are worried about children, they know who to contact to
ensure that children get the help and support they need to keep them safe.
However, social workers do not always find out enough information to make the
right decisions. Managers know what they need to do and plans are already in
place to make improvements.
 Social workers are good at working with other professionals, such as police
officers, health visitors and teachers, to keep children safe. They meet children
regularly, listen to what they have to say, and work hard to improve things for
them.
 Social workers have a good understanding of what support children need to help
them to lead fulfilling lives. Social workers ensure that children get the support
they need to live with their families when possible.
 When children cannot live safely with their families, social workers work hard to
ensure that children live with families that take good care of them.
 Social workers are good at ensuring that children are adopted quickly when this is
the right decision for them.
 Nearly all children looked after go to good schools. Most have good attendance
and are helped to do their best in their studies.
 When young people leave care, staff visit them regularly and provide the right
support to help them live independently. Young people spoken to by inspectors
said they feel safe where they live.
 The well-established Children in Care Council ensures that children are involved in
helping to develop services. They regularly attend council meetings, sit on
interview panels, and help to arrange interesting events, such as activity days,
where they have fun and meet new friends.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement

Summary
A comprehensive range of early help services provide good support to children and
their families from the earliest point of need. Services are well targeted and
coordinated to meet the specific needs of the communities of Kent. When need
becomes more complex, step-up to statutory social work services is timely.
Decision-making in the CRU for children requiring statutory intervention is not yet
consistently good. As a result, some children do not receive intervention as early
as required. When immediate risks to children are identified, the response is timely
and proportionate. Strategy discussions involve relevant agencies, and make the
right decisions about the next steps. Initial child protection and review conferences
are timely and well attended by agencies. However, in a small number of childrens
cases open to the district social work teams, action is not consistently timely in
response to escalating concerns. Consequently, inspectors saw a small minority of
children who had remained in situations of unassessed risk for too long.
Social workers see children regularly and know them well. Effective direct work
enables social workers to gain a comprehensive understanding of childrens wishes
and views and to understand what life is really like for them. Assessments are
analytical, and capture family histories, views and experiences and result in highquality plans. Plans focus on the needs of children and lead to effective
interventions, with positive outcomes. However, the quality of some assessments
is not good, with some lacking analysis and not recognising all risk factors. Support
for a small number of children subject to child protection plans ends too soon,
before change has been sustained, resulting in childrens circumstances
deteriorating.
Inspectors saw appropriate action taken in the multi-agency child sexual
exploitation team to monitor and reduce risks for children identified as being at risk
of sexual exploitation. However, inconsistencies in the effectiveness of district ARM
panels mean that intervention is not always successful in reducing risks for all
children. Arrangements for children who go missing are variable, and improvement
is required to ensure that all children have timely return home interviews and
safety plans.
Children living in private fostering arrangements are identified but assessments are
not rigorous enough to ensure that the arrangements are suitable. Services to
homeless 16- and 17-year-olds are underdeveloped. District housing departments
do not always refer homeless young people to specialist childrens services for an
assessment of their needs.


Inspection findings
commissioned services, childrens centres and youth hubs that ensure that
support is available as soon as need is identified. Intensive early help is
delivered successfully through early help units across Kent, supporting 3,080
children and families in response to needs resulting from a variety of issues,
including domestic abuse, parental substance misuse and behavioural issues.
clear expectations of parents and professionals and include specific timescales.
Weekly step-down panels ensure that decisions to step support plans down
from specialist childrens services to early help are appropriate and that families
experience a smooth transition between services. An effective quality-assurance
process is informed by feedback from children, parents and carers, which
evaluates the quality and impact of support provided and is used to inform
service planning. Inspectors saw examples of early help preventing escalation
to specialist childrens services and making a tangible difference to childrens
lives.
professionals and families when there are concerns about childrens welfare.
This supports comprehensive information-sharing and provides immediate child
protection responses. Partner agencies have the opportunity to consult with
social workers to inform decision-making regarding next steps, which reduces
the number of inappropriate referrals. Recent changes to the recording of these
consultations have provided greater clarity about professional responsibility for
subsequent actions. Consent to share information is appropriately sought from
parents. In childrens cases sampled by inspectors, the vast majority
demonstrated partner agencies understanding the threshold criteria for access
to childrens social care.
meet the criteria for statutory intervention or early help services. Although
thresholds for referral are clear, they are not consistently applied in the CRU.
Inspectors saw a small number of referrals closed prematurely before all
relevant information had been gathered and analysed to ensure safe and
appropriate decision-making. Senior managers accepted inspectors findings
and took immediate and appropriate action to address these shortfalls.
cases. When strategy discussions and meetings are held, they are effective,
attended by relevant agencies, result in appropriate outcomes, and ensure that
children are protected. Child protection enquiries are comprehensive, and when
appropriate lead to initial child protection conferences.
was poor, risk had escalated or there had been a lack of professional curiosity.


For these children, strategy discussions should have been held to consider
whether a child protection enquiry was needed to further explore and
understand risk. The local authority accepted inspectors concerns and took
action to strengthen childrens plans or to arrange strategy discussions to
consider whether child protection enquiries were necessary. (Recommendation)
comprehensive, with sound analysis of risks, and result in coherent plans.
However, the quality of practice in the district childrens social work teams is
too variable, with a small number of weaker assessments seen. Together with a
lack of professional curiosity, these assessments did not fully explore the
potential impact of cultural differences or consider the views of significant
adults, including non-resident fathers. Consequently, these assessments are
superficial and fail to provide the focus needed to help improve childrens
circumstances at a sufficient pace.
why the majority of children are subject to child protection plans under the
category of neglect, and to address the increasing number of repeat child
protection plans under this category. Despite the prevalence of this issue, the
local authority and the KSCB have been slow to take decisive action to equip
professionals to assess and respond to neglect within families. A draft multiagency neglect strategy is yet to be approved. (Recommendation)
and well attended by agencies. They are effective in ensuring that risks to
children are understood and reduced. Children are supported to attend their
meetings to ensure that their views are known and considered. However, social
workers are not clear about recent changes in how to access advocacy services.
As a result, the number of referrals to the commissioned advocacy service has
reduced.
owned by families, that reflected childrens needs well, but overall the quality of
plans is too variable. Weaker plans are not sufficiently outcome-focused and do
not track change effectively, which hampers progress. A small number of
childrens cases seen by inspectors had been stepped down from a child
protection plan to a child in need plan before sustained change had occurred.
The impact of this was that concerns re-emerged and children re-entered the
child protection system. Social workers visit children regularly and develop
trusting relationships with them. Inspectors saw many examples of effective
and creative direct work by social workers to enable children to express their
views and inform assessments and intervention plans.
good. Supervision generally covers immediate casework issues, but is not
sufficiently rigorous in driving planning and reviewing overall progress. As a
result, complexities and concerns in childrens lives are not fully explored, and,


for a small number of children, this has led to drift and delay in taking decisive
action to meet their needs and to ensure that they are protected.
effectively. Social workers provide good-quality, child-focused work, which
leads to improved outcomes for children.
children, including those who have experienced domestic abuse. Multi-agency
public protection arrangements and multi-agency risk assessment conferences
are effective in sharing information, identifying risks and developing appropriate
protective responses for children who have contact with adults assessed as high
risk.
concerns and actions required. When childrens circumstances do not improve
or risks escalate, legal planning meetings are, for the majority of children,
swiftly convened. However, management oversight and monitoring needs to
improve to ensure that letters are timely and children do not spend extended
periods at this stage with no progress made against agreed actions.
children at risk of sexual exploitation. Operational practice within the multiagency child sexual exploitation team is effective, with many examples of
successful risk reduction. However, the quality of risk assessments needs
strengthening to ensure that they are regularly updated and proactively used to
inform safety plans. The district ARM panels vary in effectiveness, with some
lacking clear actions and safety planning. As a result, professionals are not clear
about what they should collectively do to safeguard children, and risks do not
reduce quickly enough. (Recommendation)
missing from home, school or care. Two missing coordinators within the CRU
track and record all missing notifications effectively. They ensure that local
authorities who place children looked after in Kent are informed of missing
episodes. Social workers or early help workers offer children return interviews.
Some of these conversations are meaningful and help practitioners to
understand children better, but they are not always timely and the quality of
the records is not consistently good enough to inform safety plans and reduce
risk. (Recommendation)
missing education team works closely with schools and other partners to return
children to school or improve attendance. Alternative provision meets the needs
of 668 children well, and virtually all are on full timetables.
increased in the past year. At the time of the inspection, 40 children were living


in private fostering arrangements. Childrens needs are assessed, but
assessments are not sufficiently rigorous to ensure the suitability of
placements. Inspectors saw a small minority of children living in arrangements
that were not meeting their needs, with delays in visiting and in providing
appropriate support. (Recommendation)
departments, they are offered support and mediation to help them to return to
their families. However, district housing departments do not refer all young
people to specialist childrens services for a joint assessment of need. As a
result, some young people are placed in bed and breakfast establishments by
district housing departments. The local authority recognises that this is
unacceptable and intends to review the housing protocol as a matter of
urgency. (Recommendation)
designated officer provides a timely and effective response. Work to raise
awareness of the designated officer role has taken place, with a wide range of
professionals engaged, including foster carers.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
A range of good services appropriately support children who are on the edge of
care, to remain living safely with their families whenever possible. Decisions for
children to become looked after are timely and proportionate. When children
return home, they are well supported and monitored.
The large majority of children looked after live in stable, local placements in which
their identified needs are met. Children develop meaningful and consistent
relationships with social workers who visit them regularly and know them well.
Children benefit from regular direct work, including life-story work, which helps
them to understand their histories. Children regularly participate in their own
timely reviews. The majority of childrens assessments are of good quality, with
their wishes and feelings carefully considered. However, the quality of childrens
plans is more variable.
Senior managers closely monitor childrens plans for permanence. Fostering panels
are used well to agree long-term placement matches for children. For a small
number of children, there is a lack of clarity about the steps required to formalise
living arrangements with family and friends.
Inspectors saw appropriate action taken to monitor and reduce risks for children
who are missing or at risk of sexual exploitation. However, inconsistencies in the
effectiveness of district ARM panels means that risks are not always reducing for
some children. Children benefit from regular and thorough health assessments and
access to well-established services for emotional support.
Educational outcomes for children looked after are improving at key stages 1, 2
and 4. The virtual school uses personal education plans well to enable pupils to get
the right support for personal and social development and academic progress.
Children who need to be adopted benefit from timely decision-making and
effective planning. Good assessment, training and support are available for
prospective adopters. Children enjoy stability and thrive in their adoptive families.
Care leavers form good relationships with their personal advisers, who know them
well and visit them regularly. Pathway plans are effective and help care leavers to
develop the skills needed for independent living. Managers and staff ensure the
active participation of young people in service improvements, such as in the new
pathway plan and in the recruitment of staff.


Inspection findings
a wide range of services. These include an effective family group conferencing
service and the adolescent support teams who work alongside families to
enable them to find their own solutions to effect change that is sustainable. As
a result, children are able to remain safely in the care of their birth families
whenever possible, and only become looked after when it is in their best
interests.
found thresholds for children to become looked after were timely and
proportionate. When children no longer need to be looked after by the local
authority, they return home safely to their birth families with comprehensive
support plans, which are regularly monitored.
judiciary and the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service to
ensure timely court decision-making for children. Close scrutiny and monitoring
of the recent decline in timeliness of court performance is supporting the
progression of court work effectively.
know them well and visit them regularly. Children benefit from regular direct
work, including good-quality life-story work, which helps them to understand
their histories. This is not yet consistent across all children in care teams.
Children are encouraged to use an advocate if needed. Some children benefit
from having an independent visitor. However, the service does not currently
have the capacity to allocate a visitor to all children who would benefit from
this. At the time of the inspection, 28 children were waiting for an independent
visitor.
needs. A minority of plans seen were of poorer quality, but plans do routinely
outline childrens wishes and feelings. Management oversight demonstrates a
clear focus on improving less effective care plans and placement plans, to
ensure that they are clear, with a focus on meeting childrens needs in a timely
way.
earliest opportunity. Managers oversee permanence decision-making and
ensure that children move to permanent placements in a timely way. Children
who are long-term fostered are carefully matched at fostering panels. Social
work teams track children who are waiting to be matched with permanent
carers effectively.
sexual exploitation result in appropriate actions to reduce harm, with the


support of the child sexual exploitation team. However, discussions at the ARM
panels vary in their effectiveness, resulting in risks not always reducing for
some children.
performance relating to health assessments and dental checks for children,
ensuring that their identified needs are well met in childrens timescales. Child
and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) for children looked after are
undergoing a substantial redesign as part of the re-tendering of local emotional
and mental health services. Innovative health practices for unaccompanied
asylum-seeking children, jointly run with a local university, provide advice and
support across a range of areas, such as nutrition and sleep projects. Work is
under way to further develop this so that it will benefit all children looked after.
be good or outstanding. A very small proportion who are not on a school roll
are children who have specialist complex needs and are waiting for an
assessment, or unaccompanied asylum-seeking children awaiting assessment at
a reception centre.
improve their levels of development after a period of stability in placement. In
and mathematics was in line with national rates and above these in writing. The
number achieving 5 GCSEs A*C in English and mathematics at key stage 4
improved from previous years and is in line with the national rate for children
looked after.
children looked after are permanently excluded. Robust approaches by the
inclusion and attendance officers of the virtual school, together with improved
curriculum arrangements, have contributed to the decrease in the numbers of
those experiencing fixed-term exclusions over the previous year to January
after by the virtual school has resulted in a decrease in the differences in
achievement between children looked after and their peers at the different key
stages. Several supplementary and highly appropriate arrangements, such as
activity days, buddying and participating in fostering workshops, improve the
confidence, self-esteem and resilience of children. There are 39 children in
alternative provision, mainly at pupil referral units, primarily for behavioural
reasons. Participation and progression officers work effectively with local
schools to secure re-entry of these pupils to appropriate schools.
contributed to improving the outcomes for children looked after. For example, it
is used to fund appropriate tuition. English language support and school ready


projects for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children are provided, alongside
literacy and numeracy development programmes and projects that improve the
emotional and social well-being of pupils. Personal education plans show clearly
how well the Pupil Premium is used, directly related to the needs of the pupils.
Plans focus well on pupils attendance and identify activities that will benefit
their academic progress and social development. However, targets are not
precise enough and plans do not show pupils views about their progress,
achievements and aspirations. They also do not contain meaningful
contributions from foster carers towards supporting pupils.
from stable local placements, with access to a wide range of educational, social
and recreational opportunities. Comprehensive assessments inform decisionmaking regarding whether children should be placed with their brothers and
sisters. A helpful in-house supervised contact service ensures that children are
able to maintain regular contact with family members.
in place, with appropriate actions being taken to improve the figure of 13% at
the time of inspection. For example, the sense of belonging project, outdoor
activity days and residential courses provide more targeted support for carers
and children. A relaunched focus on thorough matching and placement
planning was due.
local authorities (1,309 at the time of the inspection), the local authority has
innovatively appointed an out-of-area officer who assertively liaises with the
has had an impact on placement availability for all children. However, effective
commissioning arrangements and monitoring of external placements for
children, alongside the fostering recruitment strategy, are working to increase
the range of local placements available. Since June 2016, the appointment of
new senior managers in the fostering service has led to active and successful
progression of a wide range of developments, and has ensured that highquality foster care is in place. Foster carers spoken to by inspectors were
positive about the implementation of these developments.
regulations. While assessments of connected carers and special guardians are
comprehensive, confusion over the procedures for assessing connected carers
has resulted in a very small number of placements being unregulated for short
periods of time. Inspectors found that while regulations had not been robustly
followed for the children in these arrangements, appropriate actions had been
taken to ensure that their needs were met and they were safeguarded. Senior
managers have acknowledged this issue and taken immediate action.


age, children of secondary school age and young people aged over 16, are well
established. Childrens views regularly inform the corporate parenting panel,
service development and commissioning activity, through a range of engaging
participation events.
their wishes and feelings carefully considered by independent reviewing officers
(IROs) who know them well. Caseloads for IROs are manageable. IROs meet
children before their reviews, and monitor the progress of plans between
reviews. A culture of challenge is in place across the service, and appropriate
dispute resolutions are progressed.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
Planning is purposeful and any unnecessary delays are avoided. The local
authority actively pursues parallel plans for children to minimise delays in
securing permanence. During 2016, the local authority placed 88 children for
adoption. Of these children, 41 had additional complexities to consider when
matching with adoptive families. The local authority is successful in securing
adoption for older children and brothers and sisters together. Very few children
experience disruption. On the rare occasion that this happens, managers take
steps to identify what they can learn from the childs experience.
services ended and Kent resumed the management of its adoption service,
while continuing to work with the provider as an improvement and innovation
partner. Effective oversight of this transition has seen adoption performance
improve. Senior managers track and maintain regular oversight of each
individual childs progress to adoption effectively. This is proving successful,
and for those children coming into care in the last 12 months, they have
achieved timely adoptive placements and adoption orders. The head of the
adoption service, supported by experienced managers and teams, scrutinises all
performance and drives improvements effectively.
thorough, focus on the child and inform their plans well. Adopters report
positively about how well they are informed about children and prepared for
introductions. Wherever possible, birth parents are involved in meeting
prospective adopters and supporting their childs plan. A number of adopters
noted that their child had recognised them when they arrived for a first visit,
which demonstrates how well prepared children are to meet them.


them understand their history. Adopters receive helpful training to support their
childs ongoing life-story work. Children receive informative and sensitively
written later-life letters to help them make sense of their identity and history
when they are older.
takes for children to be matched with, and move to live with, their adoptive
families. The local authoritys data demonstrates that performance continues to
improve, with a reducing number of children waiting to be linked with families
or to be placed for adoption. However, for a very small minority of children
efforts to find adoptive families went on too long before alternative plans were
made.
good progress in their adoptive families. Adopters are very positive about their
experiences of contacting the service. They consistently told inspectors that
they had received clear information and prompt responses to enquiries, and
that the quality of the training prepared them well. Prospective adopter
assessments are thorough, and reports are analytical and child-centred, with
clear rationales for supporting the recommendations to approve prospective
adopters. A number of adopters had already successfully adopted with Kent.
This demonstrates their confidence in the experience they will have in adopting
their second or third child. The local authority has a well-promoted policy for
fostering to adopt, and this has successfully supported children to form early
attachments and not experience further moves when adoption becomes the
plan. The capacity to offer fostering to adopt placements continues to increase,
with six carers due to be considered for dual approval at adoption panel at the
time of inspection.
information to carefully consider their recommendations for approving adopters
and matching children. The panel quality-assures all presenting information and
regularly reports to the agency its findings on the quality of practice. This has
supported improvements, for example in the quality of prospective adopter
reports. The agency decision makers (ADMs) make timely decisions, and
challenge on the rare occasions that information is insufficient. The ADMs meet
regularly with panel chairs and undertake appraisals to maintain oversight and
accountability. Panel members receive regular appraisals and comprehensive
training to ensure that their contributions are informed by current practice and
developments in the service.
ensure that a wider resource of potential adopters can be considered for the
needs of children. At the time of inspection there were 14 Kent adopters
approved and waiting for a link. The local authority utilises all local, regional
and national events to link adopters and children. If no matches can be


identified at an early point, the local authority promptly refers to the adoption
register and adoption link.
innovative range of options and services provided by a multi-disciplinary team
under partnership arrangements. The support offered is flexible, and options
include group workshops, training, specific and tailored support groups for
adults and children, mentoring of newly approved adopters, and individual and
family therapeutic interventions. There is creative and very successful use of
the adoption support fund to support adoptive families. The team members are
intuitive and use their expertise well. The capacity of the team has recently
been increased to ensure that it can provide the full scope of therapeutic
assessments and interventions. Adopters are extremely positive about the postadoption support they and their children receive. For example, one adopter
described the support as phenomenal, so pertinent to what we need.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good
people, outcomes are good. The local authority has high aspirations for its care
leavers and has taken timely, proactive steps to plan for the increase in
unaccompanied asylum-seeking children who became looked after during
advisers in the 18-plus service support 1,278 care leavers effectively, of which
their foster carers as they progress into adulthood. The local authority has
recognised that arrangements for young people moving from the children-incare teams to the 18-plus service do not start early enough. Advanced plans
are in place for young people to be introduced to personal advisers at an earlier
stage.
their personal advisers, who are enthusiastic, persistent and tenacious on their
behalf. Young people who met with inspectors spoke highly of their personal
advisers commitment to getting things done. When young people lose touch
with the 18-plus service, personal advisers make persistent efforts to engage
them and continue to support them indirectly through family members.
Assertive steps are taken to trace young people through last-known associates.
However, managers and personal advisers have not maintained sufficient
oversight of, and contact with, care leavers in custody. The result is that prerelease planning is not always effective and does not help young people to find


suitable and stable accommodation and reduce the likelihood of reoffending.
(Recommendation)
plans. The large majority of pathway plans are comprehensive; they identify
risks, contain appropriate actions and contingency plans, and are regularly
reviewed.
with decisions about their future. Foster carers and accommodation providers
attend helpful workshops on how to support transition to adulthood.
Unaccompanied asylum-seeking young people regularly attend drop-ins run by
a voluntary organisation that provides helpful emotional and practical support
for independent living.
police and partners from adult services. They recognise risks such as those
related to trafficking, sexual exploitation, female genital mutilation and possible
radicalisation. A panel considers young people who are missing or at high risk
of harm, and provides sound management oversight of these young people to
ensure that risks are mitigated and managed.
support to care leavers who are parents. However, the practice of referring all
care leavers who are expecting a child to childrens specialist services for an
assessment is not proportionate to young peoples differing needs. Senior
managers acknowledged that there was some confusion in practice and are
taking immediate action to clarify practitioners understanding.
maintaining their accommodation and budgeting. Personal advisers ensure that
they make applications for permanent accommodation in a timely manner, and
young people attend workshops to help prepare them for managing their
tenancies. The local authority reports that 92% of those that they are in touch
with are living in suitable accommodation. Taking careful account of the views
of young people, it has increased its supported accommodation and shared
housing. Good placements meet the needs of the vast majority of young
people, and all those spoken with by inspectors felt safe in their
accommodation and reported that it was in a good state of repair.
breakfast accommodation at the time of the inspection. This type of
accommodation is used only in exceptional circumstances, and some young
people in bed and breakfast accommodation had rejected other suitable
alternative accommodation offered to them. The local authority recognises that
the use of bed and breakfast accommodation is not acceptable practice and is
actively reducing this. It has introduced safety pods to provide emergency
accommodation for young people while more permanent options are explored.


officers to help them into education, training or employment. As a result, the
numbers of young people not in education, employment or training reduced
from 305 in 201516 to 179 in February 2017. The virtual school has supported
care leavers to undertake apprenticeships and supports care leavers in higher
education.
have not received initial health assessments or their health history. The health
service is rectifying the situation through the provision of increased resources.
It has also responded well to increased demands to meet the emotional and
mental health needs of asylum-seeking young people by providing innovative
support programmes.
entitlements. Care leavers also receive a pack of information about their rights
and the pledge, which is translated when necessary. The authority has
approved a new leaflet describing financial entitlements.
improvements, for example in the development of the new pathway plans and
in the recruitment of staff. The Young Adults Council, facilitated by an
apprentice from the virtual school, has been involved in reviewing the pledge
and the councils commitment to care leavers. Personal advisers take pride in
the young people they work with and take steps to ensure that their
achievements are recognised and celebrated.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Determined senior leadership, sustained over a number of years, and firm political
support are key factors in the steady progress made by Kent in improving services
for vulnerable children from a low base. Senior managers have adopted a
systematic approach to analysing practice through comprehensive qualityassurance activity and detailed performance information. This has ensured that, in
almost all parts of the service, leaders have an accurate view of whether practice
meets expected standards, and whether the help families receive is leading to
good outcomes for children. Senior managers seek external advice and peer review
to identify weaknesses and plan service improvements. This has led to positive
changes in key areas, such as in the fostering and adoption services.
Senior and political leaders are proud to be the corporate parents of Kents
children looked after and care leavers. They demonstrate this through listening to
childrens care experiences, the comprehensive work programme of the corporate
parenting board and members self-critical analysis of their progress against the
promises made to children in the pledge. Key forums receive and interrogate
helpful performance information. However, some data relating to care leavers is
not accurate or reliable enough to enable proper scrutiny and oversight.
The local authority works well with partners in the police and health services to
agree priorities, such as tackling domestic abuse and ensuring a comprehensive
response to children at risk of sexual exploitation or radicalisation. A common
purpose is evident. This facilitates improvements in service provision when a need
is identified. Together with its partners, the local authority is recommissioning
services such as CAMHS, early help, accommodation for care leavers and domestic
abuse. Although not all new services were in place at the time of the inspection,
the approach evidences detailed needs analyses and close consultation with young
people and families in order to provide better services. Close partnership working
at a strategic level has helped staff to find creative solutions to challenging
problems, such as the co-location of Kent staff with the Home Office to provide a
more joined-up early response to unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
Senior managers engage well with the KSCB and are influential in the work of the
boards sub-groups, but the local authority does not share detailed enough data
with the board to enable partners to scrutinise safeguarding performance. Social
workers are positive about the environment they work in. Morale is good,
workforce stability is improving and staff at all levels have ample opportunity to
develop their skills and experience. However, not all team managers provide
sufficiently challenging, analytical or supportive supervision. Although staff have
access to largely comprehensive procedures, guidance and training, more work is
needed to ensure that staff in early help and specialist childrens services are
properly equipped to understand and respond to neglect within families.


Inspection findings
relationships with each other and with key partners. In most cases, these
relationships have been sustained over a number of years, cemented through
local challenges, such as the influx of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
Leaders routinely share child-related concerns and service risks, strengths and
weaknesses. Cross-party commitment is clear. This is underpinned by financial
investment, which supports improvement, such as the substantial additional
funds dedicated to the leaving-care service in order to meet demand and
reduce caseloads. The lead member for childrens services has a good
understanding of the needs of vulnerable children and brings his influence to
bear on behalf of children and social workers. He has been instrumental in
improving reward packages for social workers who are loyal to Kent, and in
improving mobile technology for staff.
place. Senior managers positively influence the work of the board through the
chairing of sub-groups and work-streams. However, senior managers have not
engaged assertively enough with the board to ensure that it has the right
information to scrutinise frontline practice within childrens services properly.
For example, the board does not receive data relating to the conversion rates
from strategy meetings, child protection enquiries, conferences and plans, or
the rate of repeat child protection plans. This is a joint responsibility.
(Recommendation)
They aim high for children looked after and care leavers, and enthusiastically
congratulate them on their progress and achievements. The co-chairs of the
corporate parenting board are passionate and well-informed; this helps the
board to interrogate data effectively and improve childrens experiences.
Children attend the board regularly and participate well. Children were actively
involved in developing the pledge, which has received full council sign-up.
Senior and political leaders seek out opportunities to hear what young people
think about their experiences, and routinely consult them about important
decisions, such as the appointment of social care staff.
good progress in increasing the sufficiency of accommodation for the
unexpectedly large group of care leavers. The recommissioning of supported
lodgings accommodation was well informed by detailed analysis and
consultation with care leavers. The provider now provides places for 250 young
people with host families who are carefully vetted and overseen. The two
remaining stages of the accommodation review, to increase the range and
quality of semi-independent accommodation and floating support, have not yet
taken effect. Senior managers are taking appropriate steps to increase the
range and number of placements for children looked after, with increasing


numbers of foster carers responding to targeted recruitment campaigns and
subsequently being approved.
almost met its target to achieve 83% permanent staff by 1 April 2016. Turnover
is also steadily reducing. Senior and human resources managers have taken the
right steps to attract and retain staff at all levels. Loyalty payments, targeted at
the parts of the service most difficult to recruit to, complement a supportive
environment in which staff at all levels can develop their skills and careers.
Caseloads in most teams are manageable, and when they are not, there are
firm plans in place to address this. For example, in Thanet the boundary lines
have been changed to better balance the caseloads of the teams in that area.
the training they receive, which is comprehensive. Morale is good. The principal
social worker has led the successful implementation of the chosen model of
assessment, and inspectors saw the positive effect of this approach in
casework. However, further work is needed to ensure that social workers and
early help practitioners have the right tools to properly understand the impact
of neglect on children. (Recommendation)
saw some good examples of analytical case supervision, which is helping social
workers to work more effectively with complex families. However, not all social
workers benefit from this high-quality oversight, support and direction. In the
cases brought to the attention of senior managers by inspectors, managers had
often not identified risks or sufficiently challenged a lack of progress in
childrens lives. The quality of staff supervision, including appraisal and
attention to social workers overall development needs, is also too inconsistent
across teams. (Recommendation)
early help. Overall, it is helping managers to gain a clear view of practice and it
is leading to service improvement. Robust monitoring of minimum standards
ensures clear messages to staff about the importance of, for instance,
comprehensive chronology. Senior managers have not taken a one size fits all
approach to interrogating the quality of practice. They use a range of methods,
including a strong emphasis on individual observation and coaching through a
team of professional development officers, overseen by the principal social
worker. Managers at all levels are involved in case-auditing, and they plan to
strengthen this activity further through the imminent roll-out of a more
analytical and reflective auditing tool. Overall, case audits undertaken by
managers for the inspection were an accurate appraisal of practice. Senior
managers have identified a need to track more robustly all quality-assurance
related actions to ensure maximum whole-service learning. During the
inspection, inspectors identified a small number of weaknesses that had not
previously been identified, for example the lack of performance monitoring of


no further action decision-making in the CRU, and the quality of support for
children who are privately fostered.
information lead officers work closely with senior and operational managers to
ensure that data is intuitive, easy to navigate and flexible to changing priorities
across specialist childrens services and early help. Commentary and clear
benchmarking help to ensure that performance information is well understood
and valued by leaders, managers and key forums in all parts of the service and
is supporting service improvement. For example, a recent detailed analysis of
children who go missing identified gaps in the recording of the reasons why
children run away. Improving this has resulted in the identification of an
increase in children looked after going missing to see family and friends, and to
emerging targeted work to support older children to enjoy this contact in a
more planned way. The live-data dashboard, updated each night, is tailored to
the needs of each team. It is particularly useful to managers in analysing the
work of their teams. However, inaccuracies and anomalies in data relating to
care leavers have limited the line of sight of senior leaders in some key areas,
such as the proportion of care leavers who are in touch with the service.
(Recommendation)
complaints made by children and parents is timely and proportionate. The
analysis of themes and issues raised by complainants is increasingly detailed,
and this is helping leaders and managers to better identify the need for service
changes. The next step is to establish a more coherent approach to ensuring
that specific actions are followed up, and that the experiences of other children
and families improve as a result. Most children who complain do so with the
support of an advocate, but for some children more could be done to resolve
their issues and worries at an earlier stage.
months prior to the inspection. Clear commissioning plans are now in place.
Detailed mapping and consultation informs specific reviews such as the
recommissioning of early help services. Senior managers and partners engage
well with children, families and stakeholders, such as general practitioners,
when they are planning to change a commissioned service. The major review
and recommissioning of CAMHS and emotional well-being services demonstrate
a commitment across the partnership to increasing service capacity for the
most vulnerable children. Although only part of the new service is in place, the
firm plans to create a single point of entry for all children who need emotional
or mental health support evidences an understanding of the needs of local
children, including those who have been placed in Kent by other local
authorities.
health and well-being board, to promote a clearer focus on children, including
vulnerable children. The 0-25 board has been instrumental in establishing local


childrens partnership groups in all 12 districts, each signing up to an agreed set
of local indicators linked to Kent health and well-being priorities. Although a
recent development, with some groups not yet fully functional, it is an
important step in public health, clinical commissioning groups and the local
authority integrating the district councils with the health and well-being agenda.
A named council member is linked to each group. Grant funding facilitates
commissioning of local services to meet local need.
exploitation and children who go missing is informed by a careful analysis of the
community, joint investment in services, and a strong commitment to educating
the local community to be able to spot the signs of abuse. A well-developed
strategy and clear structures are in place to ensure that the Prevent duty is
implemented across the county in a proactive rather than reactive way. Good
in-house expertise and effective links with Home Office and counter terrorism
units are used well to develop comprehensive training packages for a range of
professionals, including foster carers, elected members and school governors.
Appropriate referrals to the channel panel are increasing.
sharing of information from return home interviews for other local authority
children looked after who are placed in Kent, does not routinely occur. This
hampers the development of strategic local knowledge, limiting opportunities
for targeted disruption activity to reduce risks for all children.
partners, such as the actions taken with health, education, housing, the police
and the UK Border Agency in response to the increase in unaccompanied
asylum-seeking children. The co-location of Home Office and Kent staff is a
creative and child-focused development. Leaders continue to seek opportunities
to develop services in an innovative way, for instance through a partnership
with an independent agency to support the transformation of childrens services
using a whole-system approach. Social innovation money is funding a different
model of working through the launch of a new kind of family group conference.
The approach is designed to build safe and enduring relationships between
children looked after and their friends, carers and family members in order to
promote resilience as they head towards independence. Early signs, based on
pilot meetings and consultations with staff and families, are promising.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
The Kent Safeguarding Children Board (KSCB) requires improvement to be good.
The board is meeting its statutory responsibilities, and the experienced chair has
ensured that robust governance arrangements are in place. In some areas, the
board positively influences local safeguarding arrangements, such as the strategic
response to child sexual exploitation and radicalisation. However, it does not
collect all the performance information that it needs to be able to fully challenge
partner agencies and hold them to account. An audit programme is in place, but it
is not robust enough to enable the board to assure itself about the effectiveness of
local safeguarding practice. The board does not have a mechanism to ensure
effective oversight of the key risks that might reduce the ability of partner agencies
to safeguard children.
Partners are well represented on the board and attendance is good. The board has
two lay members, who are valuable participants. A well-developed sub-group
structure ensures that the board is able to deliver its work programme. The boards
website includes helpful information about campaigns and safeguarding updates,
alongside reports on recent learning reviews and serious case reviews. Up-to-date
multi-agency procedures are in place and are available on the website. The board
has not responded to the issue of neglect at sufficient pace; a multi-agency strategy
is yet to be approved and multi-agency training is underdeveloped. The boards
annual report does not provide a comprehensive analysis of all key areas of
safeguarding practice.
The case review group and the child death overview panel (CDOP) are well
developed and effective. The board has taken appropriate steps to disseminate
learning from serious case and child death reviews. However, due to a lack of
robust follow-up, there is limited evidence that the impact of learning from these
reviews has improved practice. Robust strategic and operational arrangements are
in place to safeguard and protect those children who go missing, are at risk of
child sexual exploitation, or are at risk of being radicalised.
The board has ensured that an up-to-date multi-agency threshold document is in
place, and has taken reasonable steps to ensure that it has an understanding of
the application of thresholds. Although the board has identified a lack of agency
understanding about these thresholds, it has not done sufficient further work to
fully understand this. Although a process for undertaking and learning from multiagency Section 11 audits is in place, local schools have not conducted a regular
and comprehensive evaluation of their safeguarding arrangements. Through their
active engagement, young people are positively influencing the work of the board.


Recommendations
board to scrutinise local safeguarding performance.
potential to have an impact on the ability of agencies to safeguard and protect
children.
audits to improve the scrutiny of safeguarding practice across partner agencies.
assessment and scrutiny of frontline practice, the effectiveness of safeguarding
services and the work of the independent reviewing service, as well as learning
from serious case reviews and child deaths.
and ensure that local professionals working with families, at all levels of need,
are equipped to identify, assess and address neglect within families.
practice within early years settings, schools and colleges.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
before it can be considered to be good. Governance arrangements between the
KSCB and the local authority are effective, with a well-developed sub-group
structure and appropriate communication between the board and the subgroups to ensure that priorities and work plans are shared. The chair meets
regularly with the head of Paid Service and the DCS, and a joint working
protocol clearly defines the relationships between the different strategic boards.
The chair, who attends the health and well-being 0-25 board, ensures that
safeguarding issues are given a sufficiently high profile.
level to be able to influence safeguarding practice within their own
organisations. They regularly challenge each other to understand and improve
services for vulnerable children. Attendance is good, and a shared commitment
to delivering high-quality safeguarding services is evident. The boards two lay
members bring a unique perspective to the boards work. Sitting both on the
board and on a number of sub-groups, they have been able to offer challenge
and honest evaluation of the effectiveness of agencies in safeguarding of
children. The chair holds agencies to account for the delivery and improvement
of services to vulnerable children in some key areas, and this has contributed


to, for example, a coordinated and effective response to unaccompanied
asylum-seeking children.
board and its priorities. Young people deliver presentations to the board, in
which they share and reflect on their experiences. This has resulted in
appropriate action to improve services, for example in relation to police
responses to youth homelessness and the provision of more suitable young
peoples housing by district councils.
such as the number of early help assessments undertaken and the number and
rate of referrals made to specialist childrens services. However, the board has
not received data relating to the proportion of referrals to specialist childrens
services that result in child protection enquiries, or how many child protection
enquiries lead to a child protection conference. This has reduced the boards
ability to identify any potential themes or trends in the application of child
protection thresholds. The board has considered the report of the designated
officer and the annual private fostering report, but it has not had sight of the
annual report by the independent reviewing officers IROs or performance
reports from child protection conference chairs. The board recognises that the
breadth and depth of the multi-agency performance information it receives
needs to be further improved. (Recommendation)
programme as well as a challenge log. There is a reliance on partners to report
any identified risks that have an impact on agency performance to the board,
and these are not automatically transferred to the challenge log. In the absence
of a single, shared risk register, the board cannot be confident that it has a
sufficiently clear overview of risk across the partnership, and this makes it
difficult for the board to be sure that any risks are addressed in a timely way.
(Recommendation)
document is in place, and has undertaken some work to test the application of
thresholds across the partnership. A number of audits undertaken in the 12
months preceding the inspection highlighted potential gaps in professionals
understanding of thresholds, inconsistencies in the consideration of consent and
some concerns about the multi-agency use of safeguarding leads within
professionals own organisations. Although these issues were highlighted and
shared, the board has not taken sufficiently assertive action to further
interrogate or address these issues.
and young people who go missing or who are at risk of sexual exploitation. The
multi-agency sexual exploitation sub-group oversees the multi-agency sexual
exploitation team effectively and has recently completed a problem profile. A
significant awareness-raising and training campaign has been delivered, and


child sexual exploitation champions have been appointed across agencies.
These champions are appropriately trained and are expected to be proactive in
advising colleagues and cascading learning. Following a review of the sexual
exploitation tool, a shorter version is being developed to better support
professionals in identifying and responding to sexual exploitation. Taxi drivers
and hoteliers have received training to increase their awareness of child sexual
exploitation. Direct and assertive action is taken when safeguarding concerns
are identified. Considerable work has been undertaken across agencies to
promote awareness and improve the local response to radicalisation.
developed an audit programme that reflects its business priorities. A range of
multi-agency audits are undertaken in order to analyse the effectiveness of
frontline practice. Audits have identified relevant learning across the
partnership, with appropriate recommendations to improve multi-agency
working. The board is unable to assess fully how well agencies are
implementing these findings, or to judge the impact of the learning on practice,
because it has not put into place a robust process to track actions or analyse
practice changes. The board also has not established a system for routinely
overseeing or receiving the findings from single-agency audits. This means that
it cannot judge whether each agency is doing enough to interrogate practice
within their own organisation, and cannot assimilate or share relevant findings.
(Recommendation)
audits are subject to appropriate peer review and provide assurance to the
board regarding safeguarding practice within agencies. Underpinning evidence
is robust. However, the board, together with the local authority, has not
consistently required local schools, early years settings and colleges to
undertake a regular and comprehensive evaluation of the arrangements they
have in place to safeguard children. (Recommendation)
deaths. The CDOP is effective and there is good multi-agency engagement in
the child death process. The development of an innovative e-system has
addressed the backlog of cases and ensured an effective and efficient response
to, and consideration of, child deaths. The annual report is appropriately
detailed, reflects the work undertaken by CDOP and identifies key priorities.
The CDOP has led a successful campaign on safe sleeping, producing
information and tools that have been distributed to parents and rolling out
training for health professionals. Learning from child deaths is routinely shared
with partners and cases are referred to the case review panel for consideration,
as appropriate.
serious case review or, in those cases which do not meet the criteria for such a
review, a learning review, are appropriate. The board has completed two
serious case reviews in the last 12 months, which are due to be published. A


number of events have been held alongside informative material to disseminate
learning across partner agencies. Safeguarding procedures are regularly
updated and reflect learning from audits and case reviews, as well as national
developments. However, the board does not rigorously evaluate the impact of
learning from serious case reviews on frontline practice.
training strategy is in place and is available on the website, alongside the
training tree, which sets out a simple training development structure. Training
events and courses reflect the findings from local serious case reviews and
learning reviews, and trainers are subject to a thorough quality-assurance
process. However, the board has been slow to ensure that local professionals
are properly equipped to identify and assess neglect within families, and the
current programme does not sufficiently address this. Action has been taken to
improve agency attendance at courses and the completion of e-learning
modules. A recently developed training matrix assists agency professionals in
identifying appropriate courses to attend according to their role. The board has
not undertaken a multi-agency training needs analysis to inform the future
training plan, limiting its ability to target learning and training activity
effectively. Evaluation of the impact of training on frontline practice has so far
been limited and the board has identified this as an area for further
development.
highlights key achievements and identifies areas for development. However, it
does not provide a rigorous and transparent assessment and scrutiny of
frontline practice, or a comprehensive assessment of the performance and
effectiveness of local services. While the report includes limited analysis of a
number of key aspects of safeguarding, such as managing allegations against
professionals, it does not include learning from serious case and child death
reviews. (Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI), one
regulatory inspector (RI) and two additional inspectors (AI).
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Linda Steele HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Stephanie Murray HMI
Team inspectors: Caroline Walsh HMI, Tara Geere HMI, Louise Warren HMI, Maire
Atherton SCRI, Cathy Blair AI, Fiona Parker AI, Peter Green HMI, Nicola Bennett
HMI,
Shadow inspectors: Richard Beynon HMI
Senior data analyst: Patrick Thompson
Quality assurance manager: Janet Fraser SHMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


