Royal Borough of Kingston upon
Thames Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 22 May 2015  18 June 2015
Report published: 3 August 2015
Childrens services in the Royal Borough of Kingston upon
Thames are good
Good leadership means that children and young people are protected, the risks to
them are identified and managed through timely decisions and the help provided
reduces the risk of, or actual, harm to them. Children and young people looked after,
those returning home and those moving to or living in permanent placements outside
their immediate birth family have their welfare safeguarded and promoted.


Good

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Executive summary


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority does not operate any childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in June 2013. Ofsted judged that services were inadequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for looked after children
was in May 2012. Ofsted judged that services were adequate.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since July 2012. The Director
of Childrens Services is a shared post with the London Borough of Richmond
upon Thames.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
May 2013.
 The LSCB shares an independent chair with Richmond upon Thames.
 Childrens services are delivered through Achieving for Children (AfC), a
community interest company established by Kingston upon Thames and
Richmond local authorities. This means that AfC is commissioned to provide the
services for children in need of help and protection, children looked after and care
leavers evaluated by this inspection.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 36,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Kingston upon Thames. This is 21.4% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 14% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 9.6% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 8.3% (the national average is 14.65%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 33.4% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian/Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 33.7% (the national average is 18.7%)
 in secondary schools is 28.6% (the national average is 14.3%).
 The largest ethnic group in the borough is from Korea.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 May 2015, 906 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from 916 at
 At 31 May 2015, 134 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 100 at 31 March 2014, but it is lower
than in March 2013 when 163 children were subject to a child protection plan.
 At 31 May 2015, five children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from seven at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection, two serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and two serious case reviews have been completed or are ongoing at
the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 May 2015, 118 children are being looked after by the local authority (a rate
of 34 per 10,000 children). This is a slight increase from 115 (33 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015, and a significant reduction from 147 in November
 five live in residential childrens homes, all of whom (100%) live out of
the authority area
 four live in residential special schools, all of whom (100%) live out of the
authority area
 no children are placed with parents
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 12 adoptions
 five children became subject of special guardianship orders
returned to be looked after


 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to
independent living
living in houses of multiple occupation.


Executive summary
Services to children and their families have been transformed since the last
inspections of children looked after services and safeguarding. The 2012
safeguarding and looked after children inspection found services for looked after
children to be adequate and safeguarding services to be inadequate. The 2013
inspection of local authority arrangements for the protection of children also found
provision to be inadequate. Council leaders, together with Achieving for Children
(AfC), the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) and the Childrens Services
Improvement Board (CSIB), have successfully delivered against an ambitious
improvement plan. This has led to an impressive level of change in service delivery
for children and families across Kingston upon Thames. Almost all areas identified for
improvement in the previous inspections have been addressed in full and this is
having a positive impact for children.
The local authority oversees effectively the work of AfC through robust
commissioning and contract management arrangements. The integrated
arrangement between the two local authorities is proving to be an effective one for
Kingston upon Thames. The integrated service, delivered through AfC, is leading to
greater efficiencies, for example through a single senior management team. It also
encourages the sharing of best practice and processes between the two boroughs.
The Director of Childrens Services has a determined and innovative approach and,
together with a highly skilled senior management team, this leads to a constant drive
to deliver high quality services for children and their families.
Children and their families in Kingston upon Thames now receive coordinated,
effective and timely early support from a wide range of universal and targeted
services. If their needs or risks escalate, prompt referrals are made to childrens
services, which are progressed efficiently for statutory assessment. The large
majority of children receive a good service from diligent and skilled social workers
who take account of their views. Assessments are detailed and appropriately identify
risk. Plans meet needs and reduce risk, and the regular review of progress ensures
delays are usually avoided. For those children in need of protection, including those
who become looked after, swift and robust action is taken to reduce risk and secure
stability.
The vast majority of children who are looked after live with families within, or close
to, the borough and rarely experience changes of placement. They have their
physical and emotional health needs assessed and have prompt access to relevant
services. Children, including those with complex needs, are adopted where it is in
their best interests. Care leavers have a choice of a range of accommodation and the
large majority benefit from meaningful and enduring relationships with their key
workers.
Particularly strong areas of practice are the creative and thoughtful direct work
undertaken with children to gain an understanding of their thoughts and feelings and
ensure these inform their plans and the wide range of effective post-adoption


support services.
No children were identified in this inspection that were left at risk of significant harm;
however, there are areas where the quality of work with children requires further
improvement to ensure all children receive a good service. These include the sharing
of reports before child protection conferences; timely intervention and support for
children who are privately fostered; routine multi-agency attendance at strategy
discussions; the quality and analysis of return home interviews for children who have
been missing from home or care; take-up of advocacy and independent visitor
services; and permanence planning, including the use of parallel planning.
Strong governance and commissioning arrangements have underpinned the swift
improvements to services for children and their families. Effective recruitment and
workforce development activities have achieved a more stable and permanent
workforce with the skills to deliver good services. A strong and committed senior
management and leadership team are providing constructive challenge and
delivering against a demanding agenda. Comprehensive performance management
information is used across all levels of hierarchy within the council and AfC to inform
delivery and service development.
Aspects of leadership and management where improvements are still required
include oversight within the children with disabilities team and of emergency
placements, reducing delay in the assessment of prospective adopters and improving
the content and use of the adoption panel chairs report. Other aspects include the
range of post-16 options for care leavers, broadening oversight of issues affecting
children looked after and care leavers by the corporate parenting panel, and the
inclusion of childrens safeguarding issues in the joint strategic needs assessment so
that this can inform commissioning decisions.

Recommendations

Ensure child protection reports are shared with children and parents/carers,
allowing sufficient time for them to understand and consider the report, and
prepare for and participate fully in conferences (paragraph 24).


Ensure that assessments of potential private fostering arrangements, and visits
to children in these placements, are carried out in a timely manner (paragraph


Ensure that strategy discussions include social care, the police and health
professionals, with other agencies as appropriate, to ensure decisions regarding
the investigation and protection of children are fully informed by all key
agencies (paragraph 23).



Improve the quality of return home interviews so that when children go missing
the reasons are well understood and this learning informs plans to protect
children, individually and collectively (paragraphs 29, 48).


Review independent visitor and advocacy arrangements to ensure that the
service is accessible to all children who may benefit from it (paragraph 52).


Ensure that all permanence plans for children, including the use of parallel
planning, are pursued with urgency and that progress is tracked robustly to
avoid any unnecessary delay (paragraphs 43, 71).


Further strengthen management oversight in the children with disabilities team,
particularly when plans change in response to childrens emerging needs and
risks (paragraph 20).


Ensure that all decisions to place children with family members and friends in
an emergency are timely, made by an appropriately senior manager and clearly
evidenced in case records (paragraph 39).


Ensure that the adoption panel chairs report to the local authority provides a
detailed understanding of Kingston upon Thames adoption work and supports
the development of the panel and local services (paragraph 80).

care leavers, including apprenticeships (paragraph 96).
full range of issues affecting children looked after, including the work of the
independent review service; the effectiveness of services to reduce the risk to
children who go missing from care; and the effectiveness and uptake of
employment and training opportunities for care leavers (paragraph 108).
safeguarding of children and ensure commissioning decisions are fully informed
by this partnership needs assessment (paragraph 101).


Summary for children and young people
 Senior managers have improved support for children and young people in the
areas found to be weak when the borough was last inspected. Services that
support children and young people now work together well and managers are
constantly checking to ensure childrens and young peoples needs are met,
particularly during difficult times in their lives.
 When children and families need help and support they are provided with
effective services quickly. Teams of staff working in the different localities across
the borough, including childrens centres, provide the right sort of help at an early
stage. This is helping improve childrens and families circumstances.
 Children and young people who are most at risk are protected by different
agencies working together. They get the support they need from social workers
who listen and take account of their views. Professionals talk to children and
young people who have gone missing when they return, but more needs to be
done with the information to help keep children safe.
 Social workers care about the children and young people they work with and, if
children and young people can only be supported and protected by being taken
into care, they make the right decisions at the right time. Social workers listen to
childrens views carefully when planning for their futures. Foster carers are
supported well by the borough.
 Children and young people who are cared for by the council usually go to good
schools and make good progress in their education. Their personal education
plans help in this respect. Their progress is followed carefully and support or oneto-one tuition is provided if they are not doing as well as expected. Children and
young people are encouraged to develop their interests and take part in sport
and after-school activities.
 The Children in Care Council has achieved a lot. It helps organise social events
for young people and has established a youth club that has good facilities and
activities for children and young people of all ages. The Children in Care Council
is working hard to get young people involved as older members leave.
 Social workers are good at considering adoption for all children who might need
it, including children with complex needs. As a result, older children, disabled
children, brothers and sisters, and children from minority ethnic groups are being
adopted.
 Young people who are leaving care are helped well and have a good choice of
accommodation that meets their different needs. Sixteen-year-old young people
are supported well and progress to education, training or employment and to
university but not enough young people have the opportunity to take up an
apprenticeship.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Children and families who need help and support receive effective and timely
services. Locality teams and childrens centres deliver a wide range of wellcoordinated early help services, which are improving outcomes for children and
families.
The single point of access (SPA) and the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH)
provide a timely and effective response to contacts and referrals. Children and young
people in need of protection are prioritised and their needs competently assessed by
social workers.
Social workers are imaginative and resourceful in working with children. Children are
listened to and understood, and their views are used to inform assessment and
planning. Social work visits to children are regular, purposeful and child-centred.
Assessment in the vast majority of cases is robust, with risks well analysed. In most
cases, plans are effective in reducing risks and improving outcomes for children and
young people.
Strategy discussions make the right decisions about relevant actions when there are
concerns about the safety of children and young people. However, the vast majority
are undertaken only by the police and childrens social care, which means that other
professionals are not contributing to key planning and decision-making. Child
protection conferences are timely, sensitively chaired and attended by relevant
professionals. Social work reports are of good quality, but children and parents or
carers do not always receive these in good time and this inhibits their full
participation in conferences. Children and young people are supported to attend their
child protection conferences when they wish to and this is appropriate; their views
are sought, analysed and used to improve services.
Children who go missing are offered return interviews. The quality of recording of
interviews completed when children return is not thorough enough and findings are
not analysed to identify patterns and trends that can inform service delivery.
The multi-agency child sexual exploitation group (MASE) discusses all young people
recognised as vulnerable to sexual exploitation. MASE meets monthly and reviews all
children identified by any agency as potentially at risk of child sexual exploitation.
Arrangements to assess and support children in private fostering arrangements are
not robust enough and a small number of privately fostered children are living in
unassessed placements.
Managerial decision-making, supervision and oversight of casework are mostly good.
However, management oversight and decision-making within the children with
disabilities team, particularly where decisions change in relation to child protection
and child in need plans, are areas requiring improvement.


Inspection findings
Thames. Early help services are now an integral part of the locality teams and
family support and youth support workers work closely with schools, health
professionals and voluntary organisations to provide timely support to children
and their families. The role of childrens centres in early help, in supporting
parents and in preparing children for school is clearly defined and understood.
Childrens centre outreach workers target services to specific localities of high
need to encourage participation in centre activities. Childrens centres are
successful in ensuring 80% of eligible parents take up the offer for two-yearolds, which is improving childrens readiness for school.
their needs early and to secure appropriate support. This includes making
referrals to the locality teams for more targeted input and also routinely
attending and being active partners with early help meetings and plans. Locality
teams and childrens centres provide a wide range of parenting courses and
these are having a significant positive impact on parents ability to care for their
children. Parents who spoke to inspectors explained how these courses not only
helped them improve their parenting skills but also helped them make friends
and reduce isolation.
for helping those with the most complex needs as part of the troubled families
initiative. Data are used well to target families, assessments of need are
thorough and expected outcomes are clear. Almost two thirds of the families
worked with involve children and young people of school age who have
significant behavioural problems, have undergone fixed-term exclusions or have
been permanently excluded.
quick transfer of cases to the referral and assessment teams for further
assessment and intervention. Partner agency referrals are appropriate and
timely. Threshold application and management decision-making in the SPA are
robust, and address risk and need. Records demonstrate a clear rationale for
the decisions made in the large majority of cases. Timeliness of contacts and
referrals is good. Partner agencies have the opportunity to consult with social
workers before making a referral. Head teachers report positive improvements
in the response to their referrals to the SPA. Social workers and partner
agencies understand the need to seek parental consent. Referrers receive
consistent feedback on referrals made.
health services (CAMHS) joined the SPA in October 2014 and provide a
screening service for mental health referrals. The range of agencies involved in
the MASH, including health, police and probation, ensures a coordinated multi-


agency response, so that children and young people receive support and
protection at an early stage. Partner agencies share timely information about
children and families to inform assessment. Domestic abuse notifications from
the police are timely and effectively triaged in the MASH to ensure high-risk
cases are immediately progressed to the referral and assessment teams. Almost
all contacts that meet the threshold for a referral result in a single assessment
and intervention. The local authoritys data shows the re-referral rate for 201415 to be 19%. This is an improvement on the 21% of re-referrals in 2013-14,
which was slightly higher than statistical neighbours (20%) and is lower than
the national average (23%).
authorities, efficiently responds to concerns arising out of hours. An on-call
manager from the local authority is available. Cases sampled by inspectors
demonstrated timely decision-making, and communication with daytime
services is prompt and effective, ensuring activity is followed up.
and assessment teams ensures children, young people and their families get
the help and support they require at the right time. In the majority of cases
sampled by inspectors there were clear and effective arrangements for step-up
and step-down cases where risk and concern had either increased or
decreased.
oversight of casework. When assessments are not of an acceptable standard,
managers send them back for further work before authorisation. However,
evidence of management oversight and rationale for decision-making within the
children with disabilities team, particularly where decisions change in relation to
child protection and children in need (CIN) plans, remains an area requiring
improvement. No children were found to have been at risk because of this.
presenting and historical concerns, consider the effects on the child or young
person, and robustly evaluate risk and protective factors. When needs are
identified, children and families do not have to wait for support until the
assessment is completed. Managers regularly review CIN plans to track
progress. Assessments thoroughly address issues of diversity. Inspectors saw
many good examples of the use of translators and interpreters to help parents
and carers understand and participate fully in meetings. Assessments where no
further involvement is required as either child protection or CIN are
appropriately stepped down using the team around the child process. This
ensures continuity of support for children and their families and smooth transfer
to locality team workers.
trusting relationships. A particular strength of the local authority is its
resourceful use of direct work with children and young people to enable them


to express their views and inform assessments and intervention plans.
Inspectors saw many excellent examples of effective and creative work with
children and young people, including the use of mobile technology to help
young people understand the risks of child sexual exploitation.
police and social care. This means that other agencies are not fully involved in
decision-making and the planning of child protection enquiries.
and overseen effectively by managers. Initial and review conferences are timely
(94% in 201415) with good multi-agency attendance, although GP attendance
is low and this limits the extent to which their information contributes to
decision-making and planning. The LSCB is reviewing this and actions are in
progress to ensure participation is improved. Child protection conference chairs
provide effective scrutiny and challenge where child protection planning is not
driving change to ensure alternative actions are progressed. Social work reports
are of good quality but parents and carers do not always receive reports in time
to enable them to prepare and participate fully in conferences.
months or longer is low. However, the number of children who are subject to a
child protection plan for a second or subsequent time has increased from 13%
in 201314 to 22% in 201415. The local authority is aware of this and further
analysis has shown that families with large groups of brothers and sisters have
influenced the number of repeat plans. Inspectors saw no examples where
children and young people were subject to unnecessary child protection
processes.
conferences. An advocacy service is in place to support children and young
people who cannot present their views, wishes and feelings themselves. An
opt-in model is used for all children over the age of 11 years to ensure they
contribute to or attend their child protection conference. To date, 60% of
children and young people have attended with an advocate, their social worker
or another trusted adult. Every child has the opportunity to complete individual
questionnaires and an electronic survey supported by a participation officer.
These are then used as a part of the individuals child protection process.
Collated data are used more broadly for quality assurance, evaluation and
service planning. A successful pilot of child-friendly child protection plans is
helping children to understand concerns and these will now be implemented for
all children.
needing protection. At the time of the inspection, 133 children were subject to
child protection plans. Emotional abuse featured in 49% of plans, neglect 38%,
physical abuse 6% and sexual abuse 5%. Multiple categories were used in 2%
of cases. Domestic abuse and parental mental health (43%) are the most


commonly recorded risk factors, with substance misuse and alcohol misuse
featured in 23%.
in households where domestic abuse is a risk. Extensive awareness-raising,
training, review and a process change have resulted in a significant and
appropriate increase of referrals to MARAC. A domestic violence strategy and
supporting work plan is in place. Progress to date has included the
establishment of a domestic violence hub, access to a specialist domestic
violence perpetrator programme, direct work with children and young people
who have experienced domestic violence, and an increase in the number of
independent domestic violence advisers from two to four. A young persons
violence adviser based at the Basement One Stop Shop works with young
people aged 16 to 18 years.
missing from home, care and education. The monthly multi-agency missing
children (MISPER) group, chaired by the head of safeguarding, tracks and
cross-references all children missing from home, care and education and
identifies those at risk of child sexual exploitation. Children are offered return
interviews with the advice and guidance service, their allocated social worker or
an independent reviewing officer (IRO) following an episode of being missing.
There were 99 missing from home episodes involving 77 children during 2014
received letters signposting to relevant support services. The quality of the
recording of interviews is inconsistent; half sampled by inspectors did not
contain sufficient detail. Nevertheless, where risks to children escalate, social
workers and managers consistently recognise this and take appropriate action.
The local authority does not collate information from return interviews to gather
intelligence and identify themes. This is a missed opportunity to inform service
delivery.
the monthly multi-agency child sexual exploitation (MASE) meeting chaired by
the police. A risk matrix is used to identify children at risk and a MASE planning
meeting is held as required. MASE has considered 19 children since January
children demonstrated reduced risk on exit from MASE. Children at risk of
sexual exploitation are prioritised for immediate support from a commissioned
service. Young peoples feedback is that this service is helping them to make
better decisions. Awareness-raising, coordinated by the police and LSCB, has
taken place with taxi firms and licensed premises about the possible warning
signs to look for with young people who may be at risk of sexual exploitation.
Staff spoken to demonstrated awareness of the warning signs and associated
risks of child sexual exploitation. The local authority acknowledges that a
number of cases presented to the MASE do not have any risks of child sexual
exploitation. They plan to do more work to distinguish between young people


who are at risk of and experiencing child sexual exploitation and those who
present with multiple and complex needs who require specialist services, to
ensure young people receive the correct service at the earliest opportunity.
education and maintains an up-to-date register. The children missing education
group, comprising the heads of all relevant services, reviews the register
regularly to ensure responses to pupils needs are appropriate and improving
outcomes. Almost half of the 48 children on the register have medical
conditions that preclude them from participating in 25 hours of education a
week, although the hours provided are appropriate. Children and young people
attending alternative provision receive full-time education with good levels of
attendance. A lead service works with each child on the children missing
education register. Four excluded pupils are tutored for less than 25 hours a
week as part of a re-integration plan or while an appropriate educational
placement is being identified for September 2015. A small number of pupils
with significant additional needs are tutored for six to eight hours while
awaiting an appropriate placement next academic year. The education welfare
service works closely with schools where the attendance of pupils is of concern,
and overall attendance in the borough is well above the national average. The
education welfare service tracks any children who have left school whose
destination is unknown and the number of such occurrences annually in
Kingston upon Thames is low.
people are withdrawn from school by parents who intend to educate their
children at home, offering help, guidance and mediation with the school where
appropriate. They engage well with parents, 95% of whom opt for a meeting
with officers. Education welfare officers contact families every six months
offering support, for example to enable children and young people to sit
examinations or to explore post-16 options. All families are cross-referenced to
early help and social care records.
trafficking and gang violence ensures children are protected. However, the
majority of referrals in relation to female genital mutilation are from schools.
The team manager of the SPA appropriately recognised the low number of
referrals and has raised this with partner agencies to ensure referrals are made
and children are protected.
Inspectors saw appropriate actions and consideration through assessment and
strategy meetings. Appropriate arrangements are in place for multi-agency
Channel meetings to be convened where appropriate and to consider and
share information to inform risk assessment, planning and prevention.
arrangements and received prompt assessment and regular monitoring visits.


Inspectors identified a further two cases where private fostering arrangements
had not been properly assessed, due to an over-reliance on the carers seeking
legal orders. This leaves children and young people vulnerable to risk. The local
authority has taken action to raise awareness of private fostering, for example
with independent schools and the Korean community, to raise the profile of
private fostering but this has not resulted in any new notifications.
help for homeless 1617-year-olds, jointly operated with the housing
department. The Children in Care Council (CiCC) was involved in developing
leaflets that accompany the protocol to ensure young people have a good
understanding about the difference between section 17 and section 20
accommodation. Assessments in these circumstances are of good quality,
evidencing risk and resilience factors for the young people with timely
management oversight and decision-making. A young persons multi-agency
accommodation panel regularly reviews cases to ensure placements and
planning meet the needs of individual young people.
with children and young people are managed effectively. Extensive awarenessraising of the role of the local authority designated officer within the local
authority and with partner agencies has resulted in a significant increase in the
number of referrals to the local authority designated officer from 61 in 201314
to 121 in 201415.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Decisions about whether children need to become looked after are timely,
appropriate and based on sound assessments of need. Practice before and during
care proceedings is consistently good. Placement decision-making for some children
who enter care in an emergency needs to be more clearly evidenced, although no
children were judged to be in inappropriate placements because of this.
The local authority is working in a focused manner to provide sufficient placement
choice for children and young people, although ongoing challenges remain. Carers
are carefully assessed and well supported in their role.
Children are visited regularly by their social workers, who work productively with
carers and with colleagues from partner agencies to support children. Children and
the key adults in their lives contribute well to plans for their futures.
The monitoring and reviews of childrens plans are robust and timely and led by an
effective independent reviewing service. Risks to children are well managed, but the
quality of return home interviews with children who go missing needs to be more
consistent.
Most children looked after are settled and live with caring and skilled foster families
close to Kingston upon Thames. Some aspects of permanence planning are not
consistently good for all children. This means that a small number of children
experience some delay before living in their permanent home. The virtual school
tracks the progress of children looked after carefully. Children are enrolled at good or
better schools and the attainment gap with their local peers is narrowing. The very
large majority of children and young people make good progress in their learning.
Their attainment is improving at all key stages. The Children in Care Council (CiCC) is
an active and effective group and is positively influencing change in the borough.
Adoption is considered for all children, including those with complex needs. This is a
key strength and results in older children, disabled children, brothers and sisters, and
children from ethnic minority groups being adopted. Good, wide-ranging support is
provided to those affected by adoption.
Care leavers are effectively supported in their transitions to adulthood. They have a
good choice of accommodation that meets a variety of individual needs. Young
people leaving care are encouraged to live in permanent, independent
accommodation at a time that suits them. They are supported into education,
employment and training; however, the range of post-16 provision available to care
leavers, including apprenticeships and mentoring programmes, requires
development.


Inspection findings
looked after 122 children. This represents a slight increase over the last 12
months. The rate of children looked after is broadly in line with similar local
authorities. Decisions to look after children are timely and appropriate to the
level of need and the risk. In almost all cases seen, decisions were underpinned
by robust and comprehensive assessments. Social workers understand the
thresholds for care. Plans and support for children who return home from care
are robust, with clear contingency plans and the appropriate level of continuing
involvement.
decision-making and legal status of emergency placements of children with
connected persons. Viability assessments were carried out promptly, children
seen and risks suitably addressed. However, senior management overview of
these placements, to ensure that all children are suitably protected and their
progress tracked closely as soon as they enter care, is not sufficiently robust.
high-risk cases and track its use closely. Letters before proceedings clearly
articulate concerns and possible actions. Legal planning meetings are
constructive and lead to clear, timely actions. Care applications, court
assessments and evidence provided during care proceedings are of consistently
good quality. The productive relationships that Kingston upon Thames has with
neighbouring local authorities, the Children and Family Court Advisory and
Support Service (Cafcass) and the judiciary through the Public Law Performance
Group and the London Family Justice Board have enabled it to identify
emerging practice issues and plan further relevant improvements. The average
length of time for care proceedings has reduced significantly and is close to the
national target of 26 weeks. In quarter three of 201415 the average was 25
weeks while in quarter four it increased slightly to 29 weeks.
placed outside the borough. Young people living at a distance from the borough
and carers were positive when they spoke to inspectors about the care and
support provided by the local authority. Local agencies are notified promptly
when children move outside the area. Inspectors saw examples of flexible and
effective work to support young peoples educational progress, including good
liaison with local schools. Appropriate plans were in place to address young
peoples wide-ranging health needs, including their emotional well-being.
Previous delays in accessing CAMHS support in a small number of cases have
been addressed. Social workers visit children placed at a distance from the
borough placements regularly.
promptly through a suitable range of options. Inspectors saw evidence of some
determined and persistent practice to tackle historical delays for children. Early


planning for children includes the appropriate consideration of special
guardianship, and this is reflected in increased take-up. During 201415, six
special guardianships orders have been made with a further nine cases in
process at the time of the inspection.
IROs, had addressed previous shortfalls. Practice to secure permanence is not,
however, consistently robust and this has contributed to varying levels of delay
for a minority of children. Family finding was not always undertaken with the
necessary swiftness. The regular multi-agency permanence planning meetings,
although demonstrating a clear commitment to tracking progress for children,
could be more consistently challenging and focused.
placements. In recent years, only a few children have experienced multiple
moves while in care and this has dropped further to a very small number of
children (three out of 199) in during 2014-15. There has been a sustained
improvement in long-term placement stability. This performance comfortably
exceeds similar local authorities and the national data. There has also been a
drop in the percentage of children looked after living more than 20 miles from
Kingston upon Thames, and the figure compares favourably with comparators.
people is thoughtful, well recorded and appropriately focused on meeting their
individual needs. Reasons for not pursuing possible placements are explained
clearly. The local authority is committed to enabling brothers and sisters to live
together when it is in their best interests, and this commitment is reflected in
the priority given to recruiting carers who are able to look after brothers and
sisters together.
childrens plans. A small number of care plans could be more specific but most
seen were of a good standard. Childrens, families and carers views are an
integral part of planning, although a small number of parents felt that the
sharing of information about their childs progress could be improved. The use
of an online consultation tool has contributed to a good level of childrens
participation in planning.
workers are regular and often more frequent than statutory requirements. The
visits are purposeful and social workers know children well.
missing and sexual exploitation, are identified and managed effectively and help
to keep children safe. In 201415, eight children went missing from care on a
total of 23 occasions; in the year to date, three children have been missing
from care seven times. There were no children missing from care at the time of
this inspection. The childs IRO routinely provides return interviews, although


these are of variable quality and information arising from the interviews is not
always shared appropriately. Specific risks to children and young people were
recorded clearly and required actions understood and applied by all those
involved in the care of children. Contingency plans were in place. Foster carers
are able to access appropriate support and guidance from the emergency duty
service outside office hours, including when children go missing.
children are enhanced by the available support of co-located key professionals,
such as the CAMHS therapist, a designated nurse for children looked after, and
the virtual school. The CAMHS therapist provides one-to-one support to children
as necessary (nine children at the time of the inspection) as well as advice and
support to carers and social workers. The timeliness of health assessments and
dental checks deteriorated recently for a five-month period, due to a vacancy
for a children looked after nurse post. This post has now been filled and the
local authority recognises the priority that needs to be given to this work in
order to return to the previously very good performance.
and individual needs. For example, interpreting and translation services are
available when necessary. The communication needs of disabled children are
addressed imaginatively and carefully. Inspectors saw several good examples of
effective life story work to help children understand their earlier experiences,
although this work is not always undertaken in a timely manner, especially for
older children.
Inspectors saw several examples of persistent, productive efforts by social
workers and carers to help children keep in touch with family members despite
many challenges, such as an ongoing fragility of relationships or the
considerable geographical distance between children and their family members.
advocacy service. IROs and social workers actively promote the service and
initially low take-up by children and young people is increasing. However, only
one child currently sees an independent visitor. During the inspection, the local
authority acknowledged that it should review its arrangements to make sure
that this important and distinct service for vulnerable children and young people
is available to all who need it.
expected educational progress against their individual targets and make good
progress overall in their learning. The virtual school tracks the attainment and
progress of children and young people carefully, including those in registered
alternative provision, and challenges schools appropriately when pupils are not
making expected progress to achieve their targets. Although the numbers of
children and young people are small, attainment since 2012 has improved at
Key Stage 2 and Key Stage 4, including their progress in reading, writing and


mathematics at Key Stage 2 and English and mathematics at Key Stage 4. The
attainment gaps between children looked after and their peers are narrowing.
people with complex needs and challenging behaviour to re-integrate them into
mainstream education wherever possible. Four children looked after were
receiving 25 hours of education at the time of the inspection, including
specialist one-to-one tuition, although one young person had not engaged with
the service.
The virtual school receives regular attendance data and is alerted promptly
when there are concerns about individual pupils. Personal education plans
(PEPs) consistently address childrens emotional well-being and behaviour
where they present a barrier to learning and identify targets and actions for
improvement. The specialist education psychologist prioritises work with those
at risk of exclusion. Fixed-term exclusion rates are consequently low and there
have been no recent permanent exclusions.
inspection, eight children and young people were attending schools requiring
improvement as a result of their most recent Ofsted inspection. The virtual
school is monitoring the attainment and progress of these pupils carefully and
ensures that provision is appropriate to the needs of individual pupils.
aged 1618, have up-to-date PEPs, which are reviewed twice annually. Targets
within the plans are mostly clear, measurable and relevant to childrens needs.
Although all PEPs provide information about the use of pupil premium funding,
they are not always clear about the intended impact. Routine monitoring of all
PEPs by the virtual school is improving quality, as is the training provided for
social workers and designated teachers. Social workers and teachers are able to
access advice surgeries prior to PEP meetings and this too is improving quality.
virtual school staff and settings are successful in supporting most 16-year-olds
in their education, training or employment. There are no young people
undertaking apprenticeships, and the local authority has acknowledged the
need to need to broaden young peoples horizons and increase the
opportunities they have post-16.
to local leisure facilities at a reduced cost, although this is not easily available to
children living away from Kingston upon Thames. Overall, plans for children,
including those living at a distance from their home area, pay good attention to
leisure opportunities.


of professional practice and its impact. Line management oversight of casework
is robust and considered, leading to clear expectations and specific actions for
social workers and others involved in the care of children.
the full range of their responsibilities to monitor and review plans effectively.
IROs see children between reviews if it is necessary and work well to make sure
that children are able to participate in their reviews. A small number of young
people have been supported to chair their meetings. IROs usually challenge
weak practice effectively and promptly, although inspectors saw a small number
of exceptions to this. Appropriate escalation by IROs to senior managers leads
to early resolution of concerns.
weaknesses and plans for improvement, such as through effective case audits
between review meetings, but there remains scope for IROs to develop further
their role in driving overall improvement. For example, the annual IRO service
report could be a more effective vehicle for helping corporate parents, children,
carers and parents understand the services impact on outcomes for children
and for informing future priorities for the wider service.
receive from their supervising social workers. Some had specific concerns,
echoed by some parents, about the varying quality of communication from
childrens social workers. Training that foster carers receive is suitably wideranging and challenging. The direct support to placements from specialist
workers within services for children looked after is welcomed and productive,
although delay in accessing support from the wider CAMHS service is an
ongoing and particular concern. Foster carers assessments and reviews are of
consistently good quality. The voices of children, including birth children, and
carers are well represented. The fostering panels scrutiny of reviews is suitably
challenging. Foster carers records are uniformly clear and consistent with
regulatory requirements.
inspectors had a good understanding of the level of services that they should
be receiving. The pledge to children looked after and care leavers incorporates
references to significant entitlements and was developed in close partnership
with an active and enthusiastic CiCC. The CiCC has begun a further consultation
and review to evaluate the pledges impact and continuing relevance.
meetings and have also made confident presentations to Members of
Parliament. The Director of Childrens Services, his senior team and the lead
member meet CiCC members regularly and know the children well. The CiCCs
notable achievements include their involvement in organising a wide range of
successful social events for groups of children looked after of all ages and the


establishment of a youth club at a well-equipped venue where care leavers
provide support to young people. Each term the CiCC produces a newsletter. It
has also produced two DVDs to help explain the challenges faced by children
and young people in care. To build on these achievements, the CiCC has
identified the need to extend its reach to a wider and more representative
group of children who are looked after and who are care leavers. The CiCC
therefore secured a budget of 10,000 from the CPP to support its work and
this has provided a good opportunity for the young people to learn the
importance of accountability through the targets they negotiated for continued
funding.
the local authority aims to include children living in distant placements
whenever possible. Foster carers also welcome the celebration events, attended
by senior leaders, which recognise the impact of the care they provide to
children and young people.

The graded judgment for adoption performance is that it is good
adoption is identified as being in a childs best interest. This results in children,
including older children, disabled children, brothers and sisters, and children
from minority ethnic groups, securing legal permanence through adoption.
This helps reduce the time for most children between coming into the care of
the local authority and being placed with their adoptive family.
Thames waited an average of 530 days between entering care and being
placed for adoption. This is 17 days better than the national target of 547, 98
days better than the England average, and 101 days better than statistical
neighbours. The average performance during 2014 and 2015 at 531 days is
within threshold.
during 2011 to 2014 was 150 days. This was better than the England average
at 217 days and statistical neighbours at 200 days. While a significant number
of children with a placement order were matched within 150 days during 2014
to 2015, the average time children waited was 246 days. This is a deterioration
on the previous three years average performance. Children who waited longer
were usually children with complex needs, including children with profound
disabilities, children with severe health problems and sibling groups of up to
three children. Notwithstanding the sustained efforts made to ensure timely


adoptions, the local authority recognises the need to reduce delay for these
vulnerable groups of children.
children are placed for adoption, including a sibling group of three children and
two sibling groups of two children. Two children have been matched but not
placed for adoption. Active family finding is taking place for the remaining
children through child appreciation days, the use of the Adoption Consortium
and Adoption Register. However, inspectors did find some instances where the
use of parallel planning was not fully considered early enough in the planning
for permanence. This is a missed opportunity to match and place children
earlier with suitable adopters.
children, ensuring that a childs ethnicity does not result in delay and that
contact with birth parents is fully assessed and supported when it is safe and in
the interest of the child. The complexity of childrens needs does not act as a
barrier to the local authority giving every child the opportunity to secure
permanence through adoption. Appropriate use is made of together or apart
assessments when looking at the needs of brothers and sisters, and in the
preparation and support for families taking sibling groups. This, coupled with
rigorous family finding, has meant that a number of children with complex
needs, and brothers and sisters placed together, secure legal permanence
through adoption. This is a strength of the adoption service.
families helps ensure that children and families are supported to manage the
changes. There have been no pre-order adoption disruptions during 2014 to
demonstrates suitable matching and support arrangements and promotes good
outcomes for children who settle well into their new homes. Between 2011 and
permanency. This is significantly better than statistical neighbours (20%) and
the England average (12%) and reflects the local authoritys success in securing
adoption for all children who require it.
Richmond local authority areas and joint working includes the recruitment,
assessment and matching of children and adopters. This enables resources to
be pooled effectively and increases the choice of approved adopters across the
two boroughs.
embed recent organisational changes around joint adoption practice in Kingston
upon Thames and Richmond, including strengthening recruitment practices and
strategies, but it is too early to demonstrate impact. During 201415 there
were 147 adoption enquiries and 13 applications to become adopters. At the
time of the inspection, there were nine approved adoptive parents and a further


stage 2.
groups are accessible, support understanding of the adoption process and
highlight the needs of children who are waiting to be matched. Inspectors
found some delay in the progression of stage 1 of the assessment process. In a
small number of cases, this was adopter led but in other cases, the reasons
were less clear. Stage 2 of the assessment process is timely and provides for a
streamlined approval process in line with government timescales.
of applicants. They reflected good preparation and engagement with adopters.
Adopters who spoke with inspectors were very positive about their experience
of the adoption process, including the extensive range of training provided and
the opportunity to meet with other adopters. The support provided by the
assessing social worker was also highly valued by adopters. Ongoing support is
provided to those adopters who have not yet been matched. This helps
adopters update their skills and allows for the reviewing of matching
considerations where appropriate.
of Richmond and this meets monthly. The administration of the panel is good
and panel papers are distributed in advance, which supports the efficient
running of panel work. Membership is established and the joint central list of
panel members is regularly reviewed to ensure that panel members have the
requisite knowledge and experience, including some personal experience of
adoption. This helps panel members understand the users of the service.
for a detailed breakdown of adoption work in Kingston upon Thames. This
enables effective monitoring of adoption activity. The quality of assessments
presented to the panel, including child permanence and prospective adopter
reports, are robustly scrutinised. This drives improvement by identifying good
practice and learning.
chairs latest report to the local authority provides an overview of the joint
adoption panel. However, the report lacks detail and does not provide sufficient
qualitative analysis of the impact of the panels work in Kingston upon Thames.
For example, the adoption panel minutes appropriately highlight the variable
quality of some child permanence reports. However, it is not clear, from the
report, to what extent the prevalence of this practice relates to Kingston upon
Thames child permanence reports. This means that the local authority cannot
currently analyse Kingston upon Thames practice sufficiently.
considered and endorsed as appropriate by the agency decision-maker (ADM).


The ADM proactively highlights issues early to inform learning and to ensure
delay is avoided. The ADM scrutinises the functioning of the panel through
observation of its meetings and holds regular meetings with the panel chair and
legal adviser to ensure timely and effective decision-making.
established. Between 2014 and 2015 there were 54 enquiries made to the
Kingston upon Thames post-adoption support service and an offer of support
was made in all cases. Support provided includes bespoke support to families,
adults and children, an education drop-in facilitated by an educational
psychologist, adoption counselling sessions offered by a child and adolescent
psychotherapist and theraplay sessions. Importance is attached to this work
and the range of activity available recognises the lifelong nature of adoption
and the challenges faced by some adoptive families.
families, in particular those who are under pressure and potentially at risk of
breakdown. The local authority is also part of the South West London PostAdoption Network, which provides a single point of contact to facilitate the
effective exchange of information. South West London Adoption Counselling
Services provide independent support to birth parents.
with children, birth parents and carers. The presentation was attractive and the
content sensitively set out the childs life experiences, explaining difficult and
often painful histories. Life story work provides children with knowledge to help
them understand their early lives. The quality of this work supports completion
of the later life letter and lays down a firm foundation and understanding for
adoptive parents and children to build upon. This is a notable strength.

The graded judgment about the experience and progress of care leavers is
that it is good
receive a service from the leaving care and unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children team. This dual-role team provides a good service to care leavers,
which includes a specialist service to the 45 care leavers who are former
unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
ensure young people becoming care leavers receive a seamless service. The
majority of pathway plans seen were of a good quality, clearly detailing the
young persons assessed needs and describing how these will be met. Risk,
including offending, drug or alcohol misuse and sexual exploitation, is identified
and assessed appropriately in most cases. The need for appropriate housing is


addressed clearly in pathway plans. Young people are involved in developing
and reviewing their pathway plans which are, in the majority of cases, up to
date and reviewed on a six-monthly basis. This means that short-term progress
is well documented but it can be difficult to see longer-term objectives for
young people because goals are re-set every six months. Consequently, young
people are not being guided to think clearly about their long-term aspirations or
to put plans in place for their future.
pride about the achievements of the young people they work with and these
are celebrated at an annual event, organised by the young people on the CiCC.
The celebrations focus on a full range of achievements, including, for example,
creative, sports and lifestyle achievements, as well as educational
achievements.
re-establish contact with those who have lost touch with services. In one case,
a worker had persevered in establishing and maintaining contact with a young
person who refused contact with other professionals. This meant that when the
young person encountered a recent crisis she had a stable person she could
turn to for support. The local authority is in touch with 83% of care leavers.
Some of those with whom it has lost contact are unaccompanied asylumseekers who have exhausted their right of appeal and do not want to disclose
their whereabouts. Cases where the local authority has lost touch are kept open
and young people are encouraged to access the support of the team when they
feel they need it. For some young people, the leaving care worker is their only
familiar long-term contact so this open door approach is important to offer
them continuity when they need it. Care leavers are encouraged to take
responsibility for their actions and understand the consequences of their
choices.
were unaccompanied asylum-seeking children well. Workers within the leaving
care team have a wealth of knowledge about the needs and experiences of
unaccompanied asylum-seekers, including those who have suffered traumatic
experiences in their homeland and on their journey to the UK, and use this
effectively in their work with young people. AfC have recently commissioned a
specialist service offering counselling for unaccompanied asylum-seekers to
focus on the loss and trauma they may have experienced to enable them to
achieve their potential. This is a relatively new service and, although it is too
early to evidence impact for young people, it is being well received by
professionals.
said that they had a good relationship with their worker, with one describing
her social worker as absolutely wonderful. They said they felt safe and were
pleased with their accommodation and the choices of accommodation they had
been offered. Workers appropriately support young people into independence


through direct work, groups, training and workshops. The leaving care team
designs workshops to meet the identified needs of different cohorts of young
people. Topics covered include sexual exploitation, trafficking, female genital
mutilation and maintaining healthy relationships. Cook and eat courses help
young people to manage on a budget and eat a healthy, balanced diet. The
range of workshops has improved outcomes for many of the young people who
have attended and is valued by care leavers who spoke to inspectors.
were living in suitable accommodation. This is an improvement on 201314
when only 71.6% were living in suitable accommodation, which was below the
national average (77.8%) and statistical neighbours (81.3%). Houses in
multiple occupation are used when this is in the young persons best interests
and suits their wishes. These include, for example, supported semi-independent
accommodation, which is quality assured by the local authority, or halls of
residence. The living arrangements of almost all care leavers are well known to
the team and efforts are made to ensure that they live in accommodation that
meets their needs. For example, the local authority is currently paying to
reserve a bed in supported accommodation to ensure that one young person
has suitable accommodation when he leaves custody. Young people are
encouraged to live in permanent independent accommodation at a time that
suits their needs. Supported living arrangements are used as a temporary
measure, with tailored support to ensure that young people are prepared to live
independently. Commissioned providers offer emergency accommodation; bed
and breakfast is very rarely used, but when it is the only option, this is
appropriately risk-assessed and an alternative housing solution is identified
swiftly.
providers means that young people have a choice about their accommodation.
Care leavers attend a tenancy workshop prior to taking on a permanent
tenancy to ensure that they are prepared for the responsibility. The young
peoples accommodation panel oversees the allocation of accommodation and
ensures that support is provided to young people who may be experiencing
difficulties with their tenancy or where the tenancy is at risk of breakdown. The
panel also ensures that young people in temporary accommodation (such as
supported living or custody) have an exit strategy into permanent
accommodation. The needs of future care leavers are analysed to ensure that
there will be suitable accommodation available to them. The housing
department is proactive in looking at flexible solutions to meet the needs of
care leavers, such as redesigning an unused older persons supported housing
scheme for use by care leavers.
arrangements. Young people are encouraged to stay in their placement after
they reach the age of 18 where this is in their best interests. Inspectors saw
flexible use of foster care allowances to ensure that young people have a stable
home that supports them until a time when they were ready to move into


independent living. Foster placements have been maintained throughout a
young persons time at university to enable stability even when this extends
funding beyond the staying put requirement. Young people placed with
independent fostering providers can also access the staying put scheme, as can
those in kinship care arrangements where this will provide additional stability.
However, some foster carers told inspectors that practice regarding staying put
was not always clear or consistent.
health needs of young people through their pathway plan. They also undertake
work with young people to ensure that they are healthy, such as support with
their sexual health or encouraging them to access substance misuse or mental
health services. Most of the cases seen demonstrated appropriate intervention
from services such as CAMHS or adult community mental health teams where
this was identified as a need. However, in a small number of cases there had
been delay in accessing appropriate services. A transitions protocol with adult
providers is soon to be introduced to assist joint working in this area.
representatives to develop a health passport. This is currently in paper format
and is being piloted. Young people are keen to develop a mobile phone
application so that they can have their health and other information in an easily
accessible format. Currently, young people who wish to understand their health
history have either to keep all their pathway plans or ask the local authority for
a printout of their health information. This means that young people may not
easily possess all their relevant health information when accessing health
services.
when only 48% of care leavers were in education, employment or training,
which was similar to the national average (45%) but lower than statistical
neighbours (50%). Young people are encouraged to access education that
meets their identified needs, including pre-entry courses for unaccompanied
asylum-seekers who have little or no understanding of written English. Although
there are opportunities for vulnerable young people to access apprenticeships
within the council and AfC, these are not routinely considered for care leavers.
This is a missed opportunity to provide a route to employment and to develop
their skills. Two care leavers have recently secured employment following
apprenticeships within local businesses; however, there are no care leavers
currently in apprenticeships.
their rights and entitlements, although this is generic and not specific to the
local authority. Young people spoken to were not all aware of how they could
give their views about service developments to the council, despite there being
opportunities to do this, for example through the CiCC. The young people were,
however, all aware of their entitlements, including the right to complain.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Political and local authority leaders, the Director of Childrens Services, his senior
management team and partner agencies have successfully worked together to
transform services for children and their families in Kingston upon Thames since the
last inspection in 2013.
Services for children and families are commissioned by the local authority through
Achieving for Children (AfC), a community interest company owned by the Royal
Borough of Kingston upon Thames and the London Borough of Richmond. Robust
mechanisms have been implemented to monitor how effectively these are provided.
Clear governance arrangements are established between a wide range of strategic
bodies, including the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB), Childrens Services
Improvement Board (CSIB) and the councils Children, Youth and Leisure (CYL)
Committee, which enable close communication and avoid duplication of work.
Almost all areas that required improvement, identified through Ofsted inspections in
in particular strengthening children with disability services.
Strong performance management systems provide detailed data and analysis for
staff, leaders and partners to monitor and develop services effectively. This includes
those providing early help. In a few areas, monitoring needs to be strengthened.
Commissioning arrangements are now established and commissioned services are
routinely monitored and are being systematically reviewed to ensure that they meet
emerging needs. However, commissioning is not currently informed by a joint
strategic needs assessment that includes issues relevant to safeguarding children.
The needs of children and families are clearly identified and used to inform individual
case planning and the strategic development of services. Partners are well engaged,
both operationally and strategically, in identifying needs and developing services.
Relationships between agencies have significantly improved since the last inspection.
Management oversight, supervision and direction have significantly improved in the
past year and staff are well engaged in service development. Staff recruitment and
stability have improved over the past year, with social workers having manageable
caseloads and reporting positively about working for AfC.
The corporate parenting panel (CPP) effectively engages with children looked after
and care leavers, but panel members do not demonstrate a full knowledge of
services and issues affecting these children and young people in Kingston upon
Thames.


Inspection findings
Thames have been commissioned through AfC, a community interest company
jointly owned by Kingston upon Thames and Richmond councils. This has been
undertaken systematically and robust mechanisms have been established to
monitor the quality and impact of childrens services. Extensive performance
management information and analysis is routinely reported to Kingston upon
Thames local authority, which has enabled it to monitor compliance, develop
services commissioned through AfC and appropriately question and challenge.
Economies of scale have been positively achieved by combining some services
and roles across both councils, for example youth offending, adoption, a single
senior leadership team and the local authority designated officer role.
its services to a monthly operational commissioning group and a quarterly
strategic childrens commissioning board. These two groups provide strong
scrutiny and challenge about the quality of safeguarding practice and services
to children looked after and care leavers. Clear performance targets have been
agreed between the local authority and AfC. Where performance of services to
children deviates from these, AfC are held to account and required to provide
the local authority with a detailed explanation, identifying issues and plans to
bring performance back in line with the agreed target.
and looked after children services, has driven sustained improvement effectively
in services to children and their families, particularly since the last Ofsted
inspection in 2013. It has secured ongoing commitment to improving services
from senior managers, partners and political leaders, including cross-party
support through the membership of the oppositions shadow lead member.
Almost all issues from the last inspection have been tackled effectively,
although a few areas require further input, such as return home interviews for
children who go missing, private fostering assessments, take-up of advocacy
and oversight by the CPP.
been developed, which outlines key priority themes. These priorities are
addressed in a specific and measurable AfC business plan for 2014 to 2017.
Representatives on the children and young peoples strategic partnership are
sufficiently senior to represent their agencies and to exert oversight and
challenge. Clear links and governance arrangements with other strategic boards
are established. A detailed needs assessment was developed in mid-2014 and
this provides a detailed synopsis of the needs of children and young people in
Kingston upon Thames. However, the joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA),
which was reviewed in January 2015, contains few areas related to children and
the section on safeguarding has not been completed. This means that
commissioning arrangements are not informed by the JSNA and therefore may


not fully reflect all partners understanding of the key issues affecting childrens
safeguarding across Kingston upon Thames.
leader of the council, the lead member, the DCS and Director of Childrens
Social Care (DCSC), the LSCB, the CPP, the CYL Committee and the CSIB.
These arrangements ensure that the local authority, its partners and the LSCB
chair are held effectively to account for the delivery and improvement of
services for children and their families.
established lines of communication that enable them to maintain an active
oversight of the progress and quality of services to children and their families in
Kingston upon Thames. The councils chief executive, leader of the council and
lead member also make good use of independent expert advice from the chairs
of the CSIB and LSCB. They value their access to this independent professional
expertise and plan to continue this through commissioning an expert
professional when the CSIB is stood down, to ensure that they are supported
to effectively oversee the work of AfC.
duplicate the work of the individual boards, and to agree which board will take
the lead on work areas. This working style has enabled the LSCB to develop
partnerships and deliver against its statutory objectives while the CSIB remains
in place. The two boards also have a clear plan for transition at the point the
CSIB is stepped down by the Department for Education (DfE). However, the
protocol for joint working between the LSCB and Health and Wellbeing Board
(HWB) took many months to reach the point of sign off and it is too early to
see its impact. Leaders and managers acknowledge that further work is
required to ensure that childrens issues are better represented at the HWB.
collated and is available to managers and leaders at all levels. An extensive
range of relevant information is gathered which contains detailed analysis of
individual issues and trends. Managers routinely use performance information
to oversee the work of their teams and individual staff. Robust performance
information is regularly reported to senior managers, elected members and
strategic and operational boards. This enables them to intensively monitor and
analyse key issues and to take prompt action to address any shortfalls. As a
result, managers have a clear self-awareness and realistic understanding of the
strengths, areas requiring development and issues affecting children in the
area. Although data regarding children missing from home, care and education
is effectively drawn together and analysed, information on return interviews is
not collated and analysed sufficiently.
effectively used to identify themes for development and to improve practice.
Audits undertaken by managers on cases selected by inspectors were, overall,


robust and child-focused and appropriately identified good practice and areas
requiring improvement. Kingston upon Thames joined with three other local
authorities in 2014 to undertake a peer review of child sexual exploitation work.
The review involved a range of agencies senior managers and its findings and
related multi-agency audits have been systematically addressed. This has
resulted in robust monitoring, development of the child sexual exploitation
strategy and benchmarking between boroughs.
understand the views of children, young people and families and what is
happening at the front line. The DCS and DCSC regularly meet with
representatives from the CiCC; recently this included the DCSC attending the
final day of a weekend residential for the CiCC to progress their application for
a 10,000 grant. Inspectors observed that young people from the CiCC have
established positive relationships and easy communication with the DCS and
DCSC. The lead member sits on the CPP and also routinely visits front-line
teams to gain the views of front line workers. She visits schools on a regular
basis to promote partnership working and to secure feedback on the
effectiveness of relationships between schools and childrens services. Regular
analysis of childrens contributions via an electronic consultation tool has also
increased senior managers and corporate parents overall understanding of
some key issues in relation to vulnerable children.
training to all members. The councils chief executive chairs the CPP to ensure it
has a heightened status with elected members and senior managers. This
enables them to hear first-hand about the experiences and views of children
looked after and young people. The CPP is appropriately constituted, with
young people, political and local authority leaders, and partners. It also has a
broad range of priorities to oversee and develop quality services for children
looked after. A notable success of the CPP has been its partnership work with
housing services to increase the availability of suitable accommodation for care
leavers. However, panel members, who met with inspectors, were not able to
demonstrate that the panel had sufficient oversight of the work of the IRO
service; the effectiveness of services to reduce risk of children who go missing
from care; or the availability of employment and training opportunities for care
leavers, including apprenticeships and mentoring opportunities. Improving
oversight and scrutiny of these areas would further strengthen the local
authority as a champion of childrens progress.
support children and their families have significantly improved since the Ofsted
inspection of 2013. In particular, schools, health, police and voluntary sector
partners report that relationships between staff operationally and strategically
now work well. This has been enhanced through engagement with school staff
in vulnerable children conversations and also through engaging multi-agency
colleagues in case-specific discussions in scrutiny panels. Improved
relationships are evidenced in the high attendance and engagement of staff in


strategic, operational and working groups. Escalation procedures have been
established between AfC and partner agencies, which have progressively
reduced in usage over the past year, as relationships, understanding of each
others roles and responsibilities, and collaborative practices have strengthened,
for example through the work of the single point of access and the multiagency safeguarding hub. Cafcass and the local judiciary also report improved
working relationships and practices that have contributed to the significant
improvement in the timeliness of cases that progress through the courts.
recruitment and retention of staff. As a result, the use of agency staff has
significantly reduced (one team manager and seven social work staff at the
time of inspection) and now makes up around 15% of overall social work
staffing. Recruitment processes are now more robust to ensure that only staff
who meet high quality standards are appointed. New staff, particularly those
who are newly qualified, are well supported through an induction programme,
detailed staff handbook and ready access to managers and peers for
consultation and advice. Coaching and mentoring provision is being developed
for staff to support them in their work. Action taken to recruit and retain homegrown social workers has resulted in eight workers being supported through
training programmes and a further eight being identified for next year across
both boroughs in AfC.
developed and implemented over the past year. A wide range of core training
has effectively been designed, delivered and reviewed, alongside training
specifically tailored to services, teams and individual staff needs. Many
programmes provided are delivered on a multi-agency basis, which enhances
opportunities for shared learning and improved understanding of each others
roles and responsibilities. Overall, social workers have caseloads that are
manageable, and are allocated work proportional to their experience. This
enables staff to undertake good direct work with children and their families,
examples of which were seen in many cases sampled by inspectors.
delegate authority appropriately. For example, in the past two months, a staff
council has been established to develop consultation and feedback. Social
workers have been involved in bureaucracy-busting workshops and task
groups to improve operational practices, such as case recording and looked
after children and child protection processes. Staff surveys demonstrate an
improving level of satisfaction among the workforce. Social workers spoken to
by inspectors were positive about the changes in service structure and their
roles. They reported that managers are readily accessible and that senior
managers are visible and take direct interest in their work and in individual
children and families. This reflects findings from the independent chair of the
CSIB when seeking the views of staff over recent months. Social workers now
have a budget for each family on their caseload and the delegated authority to


spend this to meet assessed needs. This is an innovative development, but it is
too early to evidence impact.
of the quality of practice, which has resulted in extensive work to develop and
improve practice in areas such as reflective supervision, chronologies and use
of theory. Inspectors saw that these are increasingly being used in social work
practice. A practice adviser role, established in January 2015, is developing
mentoring and coaching for staff, group reflective supervision and support to
newly qualified workers in their assessed year of employment.
supervision and direction provided by operational managers and this has been
well received by social workers. Supervision, including reflective supervision, is
now regularly provided to staff and is well recorded on case files. Leadership
training has been developed and delivered to around 30 managers across AfC
in the past year. Alongside this, new leadership competencies for managers
have been introduced and are being incorporated into a revised managementtraining programme for 201516.
developed by AfC over the past year and are being systematically implemented.
All services previously commissioned by the local authority childrens services
have been reviewed since the establishment of AfC. Most have been maintained
until the next related commissioning cycle, to enable stability in a period of
transition and the establishment of the new commissioning and procurement
framework. Those coming up for renewal have been redeveloped to meet
emerging needs such as child sexual exploitation work to focus on prevention
as well as intervention. Early help services have been extensively reviewed and
expanded over the past two years, in collaboration with key agencies. A diverse
range of early help provision has been developed, provided by AfC, by other
statutory partners and through services commissioned through the private and
voluntary sector.
meet emerging needs. Services have now been commissioned in response, for
example domestic violence perpetrator programmes and bereavement support
for children. The review of CAMHS has resulted in decommissioning the
previous service and joint commissioning by the local authority and the clinical
commissioning group through AfC for a single point of access to CAMHS and
the redesign of tiers 2 and 3 provision. This has led to improved timeliness of
CAMHS assessments and access to treatment.
adequate range of placement provision available for children looked after. The
councils commitment to enabling care leavers to remain with their foster carers
whenever possible has placed an additional pressure on capacity. However, the
strategy to meet the sufficiency duty is coherent and thoughtful and is allied to


focused and targeted recruitment activity that is informed by a careful analysis
of need. AfC has secured innovation programme funding to develop a project to
support young people both in and on the edge of care across both boroughs.
The scheme will include the development of specialist fostering services for
young people who would otherwise be likely to live in residential care. This is
designed to reduce the already low reliance on residential care for children
looked after. The commissioning of independent placement provision for
children requires all providers to meet the quality standards set by the SouthWest London commissioning group.
workers and IROs to promote the use of advocates. The reasons for this are
not well understood. Where advocacy is used, it is of high quality and is valued
by young people.
line with preceding years. Few complaints are received from children, although
the complaints process is actively promoted to children and young people. A
theme during the year was that confidential information had been
inappropriately shared by social workers because of staff errors and IT
problems. This has subsequently been addressed. In two cases, complaints in
relation to the accuracy of social work assessments were upheld. These
occurred after managers had introduced a policy that all assessments should be
sent to parents, and are attributed to agency workers who were not familiar
with the policy.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
good.

Executive summary
The last inspection of child protection services in 2013 found that there was a
culture of appropriate challenge within the Local Safeguarding Children Board
(LSCB) but that rigour was lacking. Since then, through strong multi-agency
commitment and robust partnership arrangements, the LSCB is now fulfilling its
statutory duties and is demonstrating effectiveness in all key areas of its business.
Governance arrangements are effective. Key partner agencies are engaged and have
membership at an appropriately senior level to ensure the influence and
effectiveness of the LSCB. There is a culture of effective challenge and scrutiny. The
relationship between the Childrens Services Improvement Board (CSIB) and the
LSCB is one of constructive challenge and support. Engagement with local young
people is creative and purposeful.
The effectiveness of local practice to safeguard children is analysed and understood
by using robust performance information, section 11 audits, serious case reviews and
case audits. This leads to clear actions that have influenced leaders in partner
agencies to improve services. However, further oversight of multi-agency strategy
discussions is required to ensure all key professionals contribute to decision-making
for children. The rigorous tracking of progress against actions gives a firm message
about the need for sustained improvement. The learning and development
framework supports the culture of improvement; this includes a systematic approach
to the provision of high quality training. Almost all policies and procedures are up to
date and accessible.
The LSCBs priorities are aligned with key local strategic plans and it routinely
reviews these. Most of the areas identified for improvement through this inspection
are already identified in the draft 201516 business plan.
Strategic oversight of arrangements to safeguard children who are at risk of sexual
exploitation or who go missing is robust, with clear processes in place and
comprehensive training and awareness-raising activities undertaken. The quality and
analysis of data relating to return interviews needs greater attention. Specialist
training for professionals who work with young people who go missing and those
assessing risk within families where a child has a disability is yet to be commissioned.
E-safety awareness raising is comprehensive and highly valued by partners.


Recommendations
strategy meetings (paragraph 132).
monitor its implementation (paragraph 143).
that strategic groups analyse intelligence and themes from these interviews to
inform their ongoing understanding of local issues (paragraph 144).
is specifically focused on practice relating to children who go missing, and on
identifying risk within families where a child has a disability (paragraphs 141,

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
and the London Borough of Richmond work together through separate
safeguarding boards to fulfil their duty to coordinate and scrutinise local
safeguarding arrangements. During 201314, the Kingston upon Thames LSCB
underwent a review of its structure and governance. Sub-groups have been
working under revised arrangements since March 2014. The board meets four
times a year, with an additional two joint meetings. The roles and
responsibilities of many partner agencies are common to both boroughs, with
benefits in sharing some work streams, protocols and priorities. For instance,
through the missing and child sexual exploitation sub-group the boroughs work
together to understand the local prevalence of child sexual exploitation. The
missing arrangements identified this joint approach as a strength. Separate
quality assurance and serious case review sub-groups promote a sharp focus on
practice and performance specific to Kingston upon Thames.
challenge and support. The boards are clear about their respective
responsibilities. The chair of the LSCB is an active member of the CSIB,
submitting monthly reports outlining progress towards priorities. Political and
senior leaders engage well with the LSCB, and meet regularly between board
meetings. The Director of Childrens Services links well with LSCB chair. The
chair is held to account by the Kingston upon Thames chief executive. This
promotes independent scrutiny of the LSCBs performance. The LSCB has
forged links with the Health and Wellbeing Board (HWB) and with the Safer
Kingston Partnership, providing briefings about child sexual exploitation and


local serious case reviews. However, a formal partnership arrangement
between the LSCB and the HWB took too long to finalise.
chair where attendance needs to improve. Board members are sufficiently
senior to represent their agencies and to exert challenge and influence. In
their roles and responsibilities. The voluntary sector is well represented and
makes a helpful contribution. The board values the involvement of three lay
members. They understand priorities and demonstrate a keen interest in
improving the effectiveness of local safeguarding arrangements. The chair uses
member appraisals to further scrutinise and strengthen engagement,
considering partnership issues and analysing the boards effectiveness. Through
appraisal and separate discussions with the clinical commissioning group (CCG)
and HWB, the chair reviewed and obtained increased capacity for the
designated doctor for safeguarding.
that rigour was lacking. Partners see this as a significant improvement, and
describe the current approach as questioning, challenging and supportive,
but wont let things go. The chair leads the way in maintaining this culture, for
example through undertaking challenge and improvement visits to senior
leaders and partners.
those areas that most need attention. The board identifies its priorities using a
range of sources including section 11 audits, case audits, serious case reviews
(SCRs) and detailed multi-agency performance data. The business plan flows
from these priorities, and is consistent with the children and young peoples
plan, AfC business plan and the improvement board. The LSCBs influence is
evident, for example in the sharper focus on improved engagement with the
local Korean community. This is linked to the learning from a recent SCR.
private fostering, young people who are not in education employment or
training (including care leavers), advocacy arrangements, culture and diversity,
children living with neglect, female genital mutilation and children who go
missing. Sub-group work plans demonstrate attention to detail in delivering on
these actions. The relationship between the board and Public Health colleagues
is increasingly effective, with greater commonality in priorities. In response to a
Public Health report on female genital mutilation (March 2015), the quality
assurance sub-group now plans to work with Public Health and CCG colleagues
to further analyse local prevalence and to consider how local partner agencies
should identify and prevent female genital mutilation.
through a robust multi-agency audit programme that includes practitioners and


managers. Audit activity is planned using information from a wide range of
sources. All key actions, once signed off, are passed to the quality assurance
sub-group to analyse and test the impact of practice changes. This process
works well. In May 2014, the quality assurance sub-group undertook a multiagency audit on adolescent risky behaviour as a follow-up to actions from the
SCR published in October 2013. The findings have informed ongoing
improvements in practice targeted at this group, including a sharper focus on
online safety as part of risky behaviour training.
IROs. This includes an analysis of the effectiveness of IRO challenge and
escalation of concerns about the progression of childrens plans. The board also
receives a good level of information relating to the work of the local authority
designated officer and this is reflected well in the annual report. The board
understands local challenges relating to the profile of private fostering and the
relatively low number of local private fostering arrangements. As a result, a
private fostering working group has been established to strengthen the boards
scrutiny of work in this area.
audits to re-evaluate practice. For instance, in 2013 the multi-agency dataset
identified an increasing number of young people presenting to accident and
emergency (A&E) at Kingston Hospital after a self-harm incident. In November
for GPs to contact these young people two weeks after presentation and invite
them in for a consultation. A further audit in March 2015 re-evaluated the
experiences of young people, with a particular focus on GP follow-up. This cycle
of re-visiting practice evidences a strong commitment to sustained
improvement. The board has not analysed the effectiveness of multi-agency
engagement in child protection strategy meetings since 2013. Single agency
audits are routinely presented to the quality assurance sub-group for analysis
and consideration of learning, but the board acknowledges it needs to
strengthen its oversight and influence on these audits through a more
systematic approach.
framework. The SCR sub-group has developed into a well-functioning group
from a low base. It considers all local serious incidents and appropriately
applies the threshold laid down in statutory guidance when deciding on next
steps. The group has considered the two ongoing and as yet unpublished SCRs
in detail. A comprehensive and sensitive approach leads to appropriate
identification and dissemination of learning, and early practice changes, such as
reducing copying and pasting in social care records, which was leading to
confusion between current and previous events. The board has already
disseminated learning from the Child B SCR (unpublished at the time of this
inspection) through closed sessions with local authority members, the HWB,
Safer Kingston (Community Safety) and the Children, Youth and Leisure (CYL)
Committee.


including all the key issues identified through SCRs and learning reviews,
findings from peer reviews and multi-agency audits. Cross-agency themes,
including the quality of professional supervision, recognition of risk, working
with resistance, the value of gaining history and the voice of the child, assist
the board in planning future multi-agency training and audit activity.
Practitioners and managers are well aware of learning from local and national
SCRs, with information disseminated via newsletters, team workshops and wellattended multi-agency briefings. The childs story is told and the voice of family
members is heard. Improvements in practice were evidenced through this
inspection, such as the consistent application of child protection thresholds. The
serious incident notification protocol, introduced in December 2014, has led to
greater discussion among partners about what constitutes a serious incident.
Although professionals are now using the process, it is not yet fully embedded
and it is therefore too soon to analyse impact.
overview panel reviewed the deaths of seven Kingston upon Thames children in
deaths within the local authority, four of which are currently subject to serious
case reviews. The panel reviewed eight child deaths from Kingston upon
Thames during 201415. Learning is appropriately and swiftly shared with
relevant agencies. National trends are considered alongside local learning.
because they see that the tool is used to identify strengths and weaknesses.
Each audit is scrutinised and followed up with a letter from the chair, with
feedback about audit quality and areas for further scrutiny. For instance, the
Youth Offending Service audit prompted a request from the chair for more
detailed feedback from young people exiting the service. An online tool for
section 11 audits is accessible on the LSCB website. Agencies submitting audits
in 201415 included Kingston Hospital, Fulham Football Club, Your Healthcare,
Probation and CAMHS. There were 30 audits ongoing at the time of this
inspection, including the CCG and the local library service.
and evaluate performance. It includes robust performance information from the
local authority alongside key data from other agencies. It includes numbers of
drug users who live with children; offences relating to children including neglect
and child sexual abuse; and children attending A&E following a self-harm
incident. Helpful commentary enables partners to understand what the data
means for local children. Where information is missing, follow-up is robust. The
board has highlighted gaps in performance information relating to return
interviews undertaken, but this has not yet been addressed.
appropriate range of multi-agency safeguarding issues. The style of writing is
straightforward and is therefore accessible to the public. Levels of local need


are included alongside the progress of partners towards meeting these needs.
The report analyses how well the board has discharged its statutory functions
and delivered its priorities. There is an appropriate focus on vulnerable children,
including those experiencing or at risk of child sexual exploitation, children
affected by domestic abuse, children looked after placed away from their home
area and privately fostered children. Areas for learning and improvement are
clearly defined. The work of the local authority designated officer is
summarised well.
regularly reviewed. There is a clear cycle of need, design, implementation and
analysis of impact. For instance, in October 2014 the quality assurance subgroup undertook a multi-agency review of neglect involving health visitors,
schools, the voluntary sector and adult services. Incidence was explored, with a
particular focus on parents who do not attend medical appointments. The policy
and procedures sub-group then worked with another London borough to
develop a new tool for practitioners. A multi-agency audit, planned for 2015
within families.
where there are concerns about risk or harm. It distinguishes between different
levels of need and provides guidance about how these might present. Online
links enable practitioners to access tools relating to domestic abuse, child
sexual exploitation, trafficking, female genital mutilation, children who are
missing, gangs and forced marriage. The application of thresholds is actively
considered in all multi-agency audits, with appropriate scrutiny of relevant
performance data. Findings from this inspection confirm that professionals from
across the agencies are applying thresholds effectively in relation to childrens
needs and risks, resulting in appropriate and timely referrals being made.
strategy includes appropriate priorities relating to single and multi-agency
training. The multi-agency training programme is mostly comprehensive,
although the board is yet to commission a course specifically focused on
identifying risk within families where a child has a disability. This is a gap. The
board has undertaken a thorough review of the local multi-agency training
offer, linked to local priorities. The board also commissions additional courses
according to emerging need, such as specific child sexual exploitation briefings
for the children with disabilities service. Multi-agency attendance is good, with
proactive challenge where attendance declines. Practitioners who attend
training provide positive feedback on the quality of training events, but the
board does not understand the longer-term impact on practice because of the
poor response rate to follow-up evaluations. There are plans to review this
process in 201516 so the board can gain a greater understanding of how
training is influencing practice.


active and influential e-safety sub-group. A recent child sexual exploitation peer
challenge audit recognised the work of this group as a real strength. A wide
range of educational and awareness-raising activity is undertaken, with a focus
on risk groups such as disabled children, children looked after and care leavers.
E-safety training has been delivered to domestic abuse victims and their
children and to local schools in the past year, with 53 parents sessions and 47
childrens sessions across Kingston upon Thames and Richmond. Board
members, AfC staff and foster carers have also received e-safety training.
sexual exploitation and coordinates effective arrangements that reduce risk for
individual children. Partner agencies, particularly the police, demonstrate
considerable and sustained commitment to this area of work. The engagement
of partners from health, sexual health, early help, police and domestic abuse
services has been strong since the child sexual exploitation (CSE) and missing
sub-group started in May 2013. Links between operational and strategic groups
are well established, and representatives from the missing children and multiagency child sexual exploitation groups regularly attend the sub-group.
Comprehensive child-level tracking tools are used well. Partners use the child
sexual exploitation data profile well to analyse local profile information and
prevalence, which leads to the board prioritising and targeting specific areas for
further input. The child sexual exploitation strategy (2013) underpins local
partnership arrangements and is being updated. The child sexual exploitation
action plan 201415 is up to date and comprehensive. The missing from home
and care protocol 2014 has not been updated to reflect current practice.
undertook an audit of six return interviews relating to children who went
missing during December 2014. The audit highlighted the variability in quality
of return interviews. Local authority partners on the board took note of this
weakness and took appropriate action to strengthen return home interview
arrangements; they also acknowledge there is further work to do. However,
ongoing board scrutiny of practice needs to be sharper and more persistent.
Although training relating to child sexual exploitation is comprehensive, to date
the board has not provided any multi-agency training with a specific focus on
practice relating to children who go missing. Work is now underway to
commission training in this area.
coordinates a comprehensive programme of activity. All local schools have
received child sexual exploitation materials and key groups, such as council
members, have attended relevant training. During March 2015, in a successful
and wide-reaching police campaign, Operation Make Safe, visits were made to
and taxi firms with leaflets and posters. Awareness raising continues to be a
key priority for the LSCB.


and improve their ability to keep themselves safe. This is resulting in greater
engagement, increased awareness and improved services. In 2014, the LSCB
asked a group of local young people to undertake some peer research into
awareness of child sexual exploitation, domestic abuse and online safety. This
led to 12 Youth Council members working with LSCB on a high profile and
successful campaign, Safe From, in which 170 local young people attended an
awareness-raising event, hosted by the young people themselves. The wider
campaign reached 380 young people via workshops and presentations. Young
people said that the campaign increased their understanding about the signs of
an abusive relationship and what child exploitation means. Following the
campaign, the Basement One Stop Shop was launched, offering information,
advice and guidance to young people who may be engaged in risk-taking
behaviour.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Jansy Kelly HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Pietro Battista HMI
Team inspectors: Linda Steele HMI, Stephanie Murray HMI, Matthew Brazier HMI,
Mary Candlin HMI, Anji Parker HMI, Kenneth Jones HMI and Tara Geere HMI.
Senior data analyst: Patrick Thomson
Quality assurance manager: Nicholas McMullen Senior Her Majestys Inspector.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


