Leeds City Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 20 January 2015  11 February 2015
Report published: 27 March 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services are good
The local authority leads effective services that meet the requirements for good.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.2

The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Good

permanence

Good


Good


Good



Outstanding

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.

Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Areas for improvement


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Areas for improvement


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Leeds are good because:

Leadership and management
 Childrens services in Leeds benefit from outstanding, inspirational and confident
operational and political leadership. The Child Friendly Leeds ambition has crossparty political support, reflected in ongoing investment in Childrens Services
despite the challenging financial context.
 The local authority has taken a thoughtful and methodical approach to
improvement and has followed the childs journey. Firm foundations underpin the
effectiveness of services. Leeds has placed a considerable emphasis on creating
an environment where good quality social work can flourish. Further work is now
needed to ensure consistency and quality in practice across the city.

Quality of practice
 There have been significant improvements in every part of the local authoritys
arrangements for safeguarding children and young people. Risk and harm are
responded to in a timely, assured and well-coordinated way. There are extensive
early and targeted help services available to families at the first emergence of a
problem, delivered by knowledgeable, confident and well-trained practitioners.
 Assessments are informed by direct work with children, young people and their
families, with good analysis of their circumstances. The authority and
professionals across the city put children and young people at the heart of their
work, and children are seen and spoken to as appropriate.
 There is a robust and well-coordinated response to children who are missing
and/or at risk of experiencing child sexual exploitation.
 Decisions made to look after children and young people are appropriate. Robust
assessments and innovative support methods with strong management oversight
ensure that delay is avoided if childrens circumstances do not improve. Children
and young people live in safe, stable and appropriate homes and have sustained
relationships with social workers and carers who know them well.
 Adoption as a permanency option is considered early for children where care
proceedings are being initiated. The local authority has substantially reduced the
number of children waiting to be adopted, with 112 children adopted in the last
year.
 Services for care leavers are good. Strong multi-agency partnerships have
improved outcomes in education, employment and training. Care leavers have
access to a wide range of suitable and supported accommodation and are well
supported by tenacious staff.


What does the local authority need to improve?
There are no priority or immediate actions.
Areas for improvement

Leadership, Management and Governance

Extend the reach of the outcomes-based accountability approach, so that
outcomes are clearly identified in all childrens written plans to improve
childrens and families lives and inform service development.


Ensure that all frontline managers and staff fully understand the capability of
the electronic recording system, in order that they can produce reports that
help them to effectively understand their performance and further drive
improvements in the quality of services offered to children and their families.


Further embed the culture of continuous professional development by ensuring
that managers agree challenging learning goals with social workers as part of
the appraisal cycle, and reinforce this through regular, reflective supervision.

Help and protection

Ensure that assessments, plans and formal meetings consistently give attention
to the individual characteristics of children and their families, for example,
ethnicity, culture, faith, gender.


Improve agency attendance at all initial child protection meetings to improve
the identification of risk, and plans to ensure childrens safety; in particular,
that of police, general practitioners and mainstream midwifery services.


Improve access and waiting times for CAMHS for children in need of help and
protection.

Looked After children

Ensure that findings from return home interviews are collated and analysed at
a strategic level in order to understand the reasons why young people go
missing, and any emerging trends and themes that can inform future service
planning.


Ensure that all foster carers have access to training in child sexual exploitation.


Ensure that schools are held to account for their use of the pupil premium in
optimising the attainment of children looked after.


long-term goals for children and young people, and enhance their ability to
understand what is happening to them.
which can be used to drive sustained improvement in pupils performance.

Adoption
based.
easily understood.

Care leavers
specific targets and outcomes for young people.
and about their entitlements.

The local authoritys strengths
is articulated in the councils ambition to be recognised as one of the worlds
first Child Friendly Cities. Safeguarding children and young people is a key
priority within this strategy and the Leeds approach is underpinned by strong
governance arrangements and committed city-wide partnerships.
local authority and the partnership, all of which are evidencing improved
outcomes for children and young people. The three obsessions are to safely
reduce the number of children and young people becoming looked after, to
improve young peoples life chances through better attendance at school, and
to improve the provision of education, employment and training opportunities
for all young people.
services which have evolved into a new early help service, underpinned by the
Best Start strategy. Multi-agency, locality cluster arrangements ensure that
good and effective use is made of local partnerships  particularly childrens
centres and learning settings.


transformational impact on culture and professional practice across both the
social work service and the Childrens Partnership. This places children, young
people and their families at the heart of the decisions which affect them. It is
based on the theory that positive outcomes are more likely to be achieved
when those in authority do things with children and families, rather than to
them or for them. It is successfully challenging traditional social work
approaches and is supporting families own capacity to respond to identified
concerns themselves. During the inspection, the authority secured government
innovation funding to expand its restorative approach, predicated on the Family
Group Conferencing (FGC) model.
safeguarding arrangements underpinned by a comprehensive use of research
and intelligence-led action learning. A large-scale restructuring of social work
services into a locality model, based around 25 multi-agency clusters, is
steadily improving the recruitment, retention and professional development of
good quality social work staff. A clear career structure and a comprehensive
workforce development programme have reduced dependency on agency and
temporary staff and raised the status of social work across the city.
helped by a service and partnership-wide commitment to the use of Outcomes
Based Accountability (OBA). Multi-Systemic Therapy (MST) has developed from
an early pilot to three area teams covering the city. In 2013, Leeds established
two additional MST teams, one focusing on child abuse and neglect and the
other offering services to young people leaving care or custody.
approach and strong multi-agency partnerships, to create a single plan for a
family with a clearly-allocated lead practitioner. Inspectors have seen evidence
of a positive impact on school attendance, crime reduction and employment.
which provides intensive, time-limited support for families with a number of
additional needs. This includes where there is violence in the family, parental
mental health issues, parental substance misuse, and/or childrens poor school
attendance. Practitioners are offering a range of practical support to parents
and families, including access to parenting classes, individual work to address
specific needs and vulnerabilities and help with establishing effective routines
in the home, for example at bedtimes or to get children ready for school.
Parents who spoke to inspectors feel that this help is effective and has made a
difference to their lives.


Quality Mark and has recently won two national awards for its innovative work
with girls and young women. A pioneering programme works with adolescent
perpetrators of domestic violence. The YOS hosts the resettlement consortium
in South and West Yorkshire, a key part of the Governments Transforming
Youth Custody programme.

Progress since the last inspection
arrangements found that Leeds Childrens Services did not adequately
safeguard children. In January 2010, inspection of Safeguarding and Looked
After Childrens services found safeguarding inadequate. Services to children
looked after were adequate. In March 2010, a Government Improvement
Notice was placed on Leeds and an Improvement Board was established. A
wholesale service restructure began. A new Senior Leadership Team was
appointed and a clear strategic vision for childrens services in the city was
developed: Child Friendly Leeds.
the introduction of a new electronic information system. A dedicated voice and
influence team was created to work alongside the social work service, which
has strengthened the voices of children, young people and their families in
decisions which affect them. In the autumn of 2011, the implementation of
Early Start Teams began integrating childrens centre and health practitioners.
December 2011 and the Improvement Board was dissolved. The Chairs final
letter to the Under Secretary of State said that Leeds has placed Childrens
Services right at the top of its priorities. Since then, the development of a
clear and ambitious vision has fostered a relentless focus on continuous
improvement.
services for children and families has been implemented. Together with the
considerable strengthening of management practice, this is creating a culture
of high support and high challenge across the service. The local authority has
firmly embedded a culture of learning and improvement in strategic planning
and operational thinking.
development, and has established clear career pathways for social workers and
increased capacity. This has resulted in improved workforce stability and
strengthened relationships between social workers, children and their families.


framework, Journey to Better Outcomes, is now in place. Partners across the
city demonstrate an increasing understanding of the issues affecting specific
families and communities, and their responsibilities to contribute to improving
outcomes for children and young people.
together children looked after, care leavers, fostering and adoption services
under one head of service. The single pathway planning team was replaced by
six specialist teams for looked after children age 13 and above. This increased
the capacity of the service, but also brought social workers and personal
advisors together which has given additional priority to the needs of looked
after children. Since then, three additional teams have been created to reduce
caseloads and improve outcomes for looked after children and care leavers.
Services to foster carers have been significantly enhanced, and there has been
considerable investment in services for care leavers.
three years ago provided opportunities to reconfigure and develop services to
raise aspirations of looked after children and care leavers, and to ensure better
outcomes for them. This included the creation of a dedicated looked after
childrens service and a head teacher of a virtual school to ensure a tight focus
on driving improvements in services for looked after children. Actions taken,
together with the development of partnerships with school leaders and
targeted services, are making their mark, as can be seen in the improvements
in attendance and achievements of primary school pupils. There has also been
an improvement in GCSE results and in the number of care leavers moving on
successfully into education, training or employment.
launched. In February 2014, the local authority budget confirmed continuing
investment in early intervention through an ongoing commitment to keep all
childrens centres open and to invest in FGC. The Duty and Advice Team has
been further enhanced to bring a new approach to contact and referral,
encouraging conversations between qualified and experienced practitioners
and callers who have concerns about a child. This approach focuses on
discussions to determine the best course of action, and explores appropriate
prevention and support if a social work service is not required.


sexual exploitation (CSE). Practitioner awareness training has been rolled out
across the partnership. A CSE risk and identification tool, together with a
vulnerability risk management plan, supports social workers to analyse a childs
vulnerability and risk of sexual exploitation. In 2013 a Child Sexual Exploitation
and Missing Coordinator was appointed, based within the Integrated
Safeguarding Unit. A CSE project worker was also appointed to work
extensively with looked after children and care leavers, providing a clear focus,
together with advocacy, access and assertive outreach. This is providing clear
support pathways for children and young people identified as being at risk of,
or experiencing sexual exploitation.


Summary for children and young people
 When children and young people need help to be safe, there is lots of support
available. Social workers, teachers, police, health workers and staff in childrens
centres now work together in groups across the city called Clusters. This means
that families now get help very quickly and that small problems can usually be
sorted out before they become big problems.
 People working with children say that when they are worried about a child or
young person, they can telephone people in the City Council who listen carefully
and give them good advice. They say that staff take the right action quickly when
there is a risk of a child being unsafe.
 Senior leaders and councillors have a passion to get things right for all children.
This is making a positive difference to young peoples safety, to their lives at
home and to their achievements in school, especially primary schools. Children
and young people are spending more days in school, with attendance improving
every year.
 Children and young people benefit from social workers who know them well, are
committed and skilled and who do not give up on them.
 Children and young people who live with foster carers or live in childrens homes
are looked after well. If young people want to stay with their foster carers when
they reach 18, they are helped to do so if this is what they and their carers want.
 When children need to be adopted this happens quickly. Children are adopted
with their brothers and sisters wherever this is possible.
 Social workers and personal advisers for care leavers develop good relationships
with children and young people; they listen well and get the right help quickly,
but they do not always make it clear in childrens and young peoples care plans
what they are doing to help or how long it will take. Inspectors have asked the
council to make sure that they do this better.
 At important meetings about children and their families, social workers always
attend, but sometimes the words they use do not help children and their parents
to understand what is happening or what they need to do.
 Care leavers are helped to stay where they live until they are ready to move on,
and they get good support when they set up home or go to university. Personal
advisors help prepare young people to live independently, and help them to plan
their education or training or to gain work. Care leavers do not all know what
help they can get and do not always have the information they need about their
health histories.


Information about this local authority area
Children living in this area
 Approximately 158,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Leeds City. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 22% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 20% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 17% (the national average is 15%)
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 23% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Pakistani and Black African.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language :
 in primary schools is 18% (the national average is 19%).
 in secondary schools is 13% (the national average is 14%).
 Leeds is a vibrant, diverse and growing city, it covers a mix of large urban and
rural areas with the inner city areas typified by a more dense and diverse, and
faster-growing population. Leeds has a greater-than-national proportion of areas
in the lowest 3, 10 and 20% most deprived areas in the country. Mid-year 2013
Leeds population was approximately 764,000. The overall population has
increased by 5.1 per cent since the 2001 Census. The annual number of births in
Leeds has increased by a third; from 7,500 in 2000/01 to 10,000 or more for
each of the last five years. The make-up of the child population is changing with
increases in those eligible for free school meals; those with English as an
additional language; and those of black and minority ethnic heritage. There has
been an increase in the number of residents that were born overseas.
Child protection in this area
 At the end of December 2014, 5,610 children had been identified through
assessment as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a
reduction from 6,974 at the end of March 2014.
 At the end of December 2014, 642 children and young people were the subject
of a child protection plan. This is a reduction from 983 at the end of March 2013.
 At end of November 2014, 31 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from 17 at end of March 2014.


Children looked after in this area
 At 20th January 2015, 1,294 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 82 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 1,340 at the
end of March 2014. Of this number:
authority area
authority area
members; 23% live out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 112 adoptions
returned to be looked after
to independent living between April 2014 up to the end of December
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates 10 childrens homes. Six were judged to be good or
outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection and four adequate. Other
information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since September 2010.
 The Chair of the Local Safeguarding Childrens Board has been in post since July


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Good

Summary

The local authority and key partner agencies have, in recent years, reviewed and
improved every part of the arrangements for safeguarding children and promoting
their well-being. The strategies, structures and approaches to working with families
have resulted in service responses that deliver the widest range of support while
strengthening the focus on the protection needs of all children.
Considerable, sustained investment ensures active and well-coordinated help at a
local level from the earliest point of need. A well-considered, family-centred
approach is supporting many families and engaging family and social networks in
achieving safe solutions for children. There is clear evidence of a robust, assertive
approach where children are not able to receive sufficient or safe parenting even
within the wider family.
Children and their families are increasingly being offered a wide range of services.
When need becomes more complex, or concerns for the protection of children arise,
there is a clear arrangement for direct contact with an experienced social worker or
manager. Thresholds of concern are generally well understood, with direct access
and professional conversations readily available to explore any worries for a child.
The extent of adult domestic violence, mental health issues and substance misuse is
also well understood, and met when necessary with well co-ordinated and extensive
range of services.
Risk and harm are responded to in a timely, assured and well-coordinated way.
There is a robust and well-coordinated response to children who are missing and/or
at risk of experiencing child sexual exploitation. This is informed by an effective
sharing of information and intelligence between all key agencies. When concerns
reduce, support is effective in sustaining the changes made.
Children are at the heart of child protection enquiries as well as all assessments and
plans. They are seen and spoken to or observed where appropriate. There is a
developing advocacy service and a revised toolkit for gaining their wishes and
feelings. Protection and other plans identify risks and concerns well. When change
does not take place, decisive action is then taken to ensure a safe upbringing for
children.


the city. Social workers are persistent in seeking to engage children. They
know the children well, seeing them alone where appropriate, and assessing
their experiences within their family. A well-coordinated locality and cluster
approach results in early identification and extensive work with families
according to need.
and agreed across agencies within the area, and well supported by the LSCB,
provides open access for all to discuss concerns, and especially for agencies to
engage in a professional conversation to explore their worries. This has led to
a marked increase in the use of the Common Assessment Framework (CAF),
with 500 additional assessments in 2013-14. This represented a 32% increase
on the 201213 performance. Early help assessments and plans are mostly
clear and continue to improve, with families being engaged well throughout. It
is acknowledged that further improvement is needed in the quality of
assessments, in particular in relation to the need for clearer timescales within
plans.
along with coordination at a very local level, is a cornerstone of the public
service approach across the area. Adopting a restorative approach, extensive
and effective use is made of family group conferencing (FGC), multi-systemic
therapy (MST) and family intervention services (FIS) to achieve early support,
early change and early improvement. These services are well-established and
delivered by confident, knowledgeable, well-trained and supported
practitioners. Parents who spoke to inspectors feel that this help is effective
and has made a difference to their lives.
for families; 319 where children were aged five or under, including unborn
babies, and 248 for children and young people between the ages of 6 and 17.
In this period, 249 children were safely and appropriately supported to remain
within their families. There is clear evidence of continuous strengthening of
partnerships between schools, police, health and the voluntary sector,
supported by the childrens social work service. The targeted services are
aligned, along with locality social work teams and early help clusters (25) and
childrens centres (56), with considerable individual and shared commitment to
providing help and support. Variation in the performance of localities and
clusters, inevitable in areas with different rates of social mobility, is understood
and closely monitored by senior managers.
funding from their designated schools grant. The police also provide active
support at the locality level through 23 safer schools officers based on-site
across a range of secondary schools and specifically named community support
officers across all primary schools.


integrated Childrens Health and Disability (CHAD) specialist teams.
Assessments benefit from the involvement of experienced workers. When there
are dual issues of child protection and complex disabilities, while risk is
appropriately identified, social workers are less able to demonstrate evidencebased practice informing assessments and plans. The needs of the disabled
child are not, however, allowed to mask safeguarding and child protection
concerns. Integrated working means that there is a shared understanding of
the individual child, enabling all agencies to fulfil their safeguarding
responsibilities and to help distinguish between disability and child protection
issues. Transfer to continuing care with adult care services is managed through
a dedicated, social work-led Transitions team. Leeds successfully implemented
the SEND reforms by September 2014, and the DfE gave Leeds a green rating
for its local offer.
generally effective and leading to positive improvements. The local authority
obsession with school attendance has, for example, improved performance
from 88.6% to 94.6% in the last year. There has also been an 11% reduction
in children entering the care system overall, with the number of under-fives
becoming looked after reducing by one quarter.
with all agencies welcoming the offer by Childrens Social Work Services
(CSWS) to engage in professional conversation with any agency that is
concerned about a child. Experienced social work practitioners and managers
provide this capacity. This openness and assured professional response
supports their current work and next steps with other early or targeted help
services. It enhances the confidence of these agencies in working with families,
significantly reducing any barriers between professional boundaries. Families
also welcome the often seamless provision of services as levels of need
change.
responds in a timely way, particularly to those immediately or most at risk of
harm. The social worker practitioner base has become considerably more
stable and able over the last two years. All social workers undertaking child
protection work are suitably qualified and experienced. Management oversight
is robust and well recorded.
child protection enquiries. Thresholds applied to child protection enquiries are
mostly appropriate, though a small number of enquiries are undertaken when
there is not, or not yet, sufficient reason.


assessments. Information sharing with the out-of-hours service is good;
however, this is based on electronic communication, despite the team being colocated with the Duty and Advice Team. This is a missed opportunity for direct
face-to-face discussion and handover.
with the robust focus on early help and protection The younger the child is, the
greater the likelihood of a child protection plan following enquiries, with those
unborn or under one year accounting for 12.4% (98) of enquiries, with 47%
resulting in a plan. For those under school age, the overall proportions are also
high, with 319 subject to enquiries (40.5% of the total) and 47% (150)
becoming subject to plans. There is clear evidence of a growing understanding
and focus on identifying and responding to poor parenting at the earliest
opportunity.
information, analysis and intelligence sharing between agencies. The police and
CSWS are at the heart of this approach, with additional resources and an
extensive range of agencies involved. There is a clear understanding of the
need to work alongside parents, involving matters of consent from the outset
where appropriate. However not all multi-agency professionals understand the
issue of consent and more work needs to be done to ensure consistency of
approach across the partnership.
profile that domestic violence has been given across the partnership has led to
an understandable increase in domestic violence notifications and enquiries,
and the success of the interventions has resulted in a reducing rate of repeat
episodes. Domestic violence still constitutes 28.8% of all referrals to CSWS, but
re-referrals to CSWS continue to fall (from 35.8% in 2012), and at 22.5% they
are below the national average.
years old and vulnerable to homelessness benefit from rapid inter-agency
assessments and coordinated actions, particularly with the dedicated officer
within the housing authority. The local authority does not use bed and
breakfast for these vulnerable young people, and has not done so for some
years. There is also additional accommodation being developed, providing
carer-based accommodation for those young people in crisis, aimed at
preventing overnight detention in police cells, remands to local authority
accommodation and other urgent responses to meet immediate need. While
these are not large in number, the provision of up to six beds is a welcome
addition to capacity.


working day. Managers within the Duty and Advice Team, or the receiving
locality or CHAD team, clearly determine the actions to be taken. Consistency
and continuity is a particular strength, with the same allocated social worker
continuing to work with the child and family from the identification of need
through to risk reduction or an alternative plan for permanence. The
commitment to a restorative approach is welcomed by most parents and
agencies, building on strengths and capacity rather than adopting an
immediately adversarial approach. Joint and co-working between social workers
supports this.
being removed through urgent use of statutory powers; five were subject to
emergency protection orders in the past year. All such cases evidence
managerial oversight and determination, including at senior levels. Child
protection enquiries, findings and consequent actions are conducted within
timescales for the child and statutory expectations. Where risk or harm is
evident there is a clear progression to Initial Child Protection Conference
(ICPC), where children appropriately become the subject of a child protection
plan.
each having an individual target for completion according to risk. Assessments
are holistic, with a strong focus on significant family history, social and family
networks (including using purposeful chronologies and genograms), and
substantial consideration of the individual circumstances of each child in the
family. For children at risk of child sexual exploitation, there is clear
consideration of history and impact, childs voice, and assessment of interagency activity. In the past twelve months the quality of assessments has
considerably improved. Those cases seen that showed earlier delay have more
recently evidenced a clearer and more focused pace.
or core groups, often after consideration by a manager or a significant change
for the child. It is acknowledged that some children have not previously
benefited from thorough assessments and plans, and a minority still present
with limited analysis or evaluation of the childs experience. In some cases it is
not evident that the ethnicity, cultural or religious characteristics of the child
and family are suitably considered or factored into the assessment or the
planned intervention. In others, however, childrens unique characteristics are
considered sensitively. In some cases, the often extensive work undertaken by
practitioners with the child and family is not always fully reflected in the
records.


number of children with a child protection plan is reducing, from 983 in March
in those with a second or subsequent plan. Many children who are the subject
of a second plan become so as a result of circumstances where change had not
been sustained and, for others, similar difficulties within new circumstances,
mostly as a result of exposure to domestic abuse.
high levels of attendance from most agencies. However, the police, general
practitioners, and mainstream midwifery, whilst always providing a report, do
not consistently attend. This means conferences do not always benefit from a
wider multi-agency discussion to evaluate the level of risk and contribute to the
development of safety plans. Escalation of this concern by conference chairs
and representation to police by senior leaders and the LSCB is so far without
impact. Reports are routinely provided by all agencies, but are not consistently
shared with or understood by parents in advance. Those children not seen as
requiring a child protection plan most often benefit from a child in need plan or
a targeted early help plan.
reducing by a quarter and, consequently, these are now manageable.
Timeliness of conferences and reviews has been at or above national averages,
at over 95%. The voice of the child is increasingly heard, with 15% directly
contributing to conferences, including through a formal independent advocacy
service, and a large proportion otherwise having their views clearly represented
by professionals who know them well and spend time with them, gaining their
trust and confidence. The recently-revised consultation toolkit for children is
actively used by practitioners, with the advocacy service being fully
commissioned following a successful evaluation of a pilot scheme which
provided 30 advocate supporters.
strengths with the family and its networks. They are, however, often task and
activity focused. This makes it difficult to measure progress against the plan,
and a lack of timescales for actions means parents and professionals are not
clear about when things need to change over the long term. Action plans are
carried through to core group considerations effectively, again with a high level
of universal and targeted service collaboration. There are relatively high
proportions of families transferring in and out of the local authority area,
accounting for most children ceasing plans at three months (19.5%, still below
the national average), with a typical period for being on a child protection plan
of between six and 15 months.


categories (72%) centres around emotional harm and neglect as a
consequence of domestic abuse. Further developments to domestic abuse
services are in progress, with substantial additional capacity and further
integration imminent from across partner agencies; for example, a 750k
investment for perpetrator programmes and the extension of a dedicated childfocused police contact point.
valued by families (for example, FGC, MST, FIS), and provide intensive support
where there are concerns about violence in the family, parental mental health
issues, and/or parental substance or alcohol misuse. The Leeds Think Family,
Work Family joint safeguarding protocol specifically focuses on responding to
the needs of families where these issues are evident. There is a sufficiently
robust push from CSWS for families to cooperate with activities within a set
timeframe. These are further supported by the recently-agreed Best Start Plan,
designed to extend improvements for the safety and well-being of children.
There is a city-wide MST Child Abuse and Neglect team and a robust package
of training to support social workers in their understanding of neglect and their
work with children and families.
required change. Where parents fail to respond or to address concerns or
where they show disguised or non-compliance, action is now being
appropriately taken. There are a number of families where multiple or longstanding plans have not been effective. In cases seen, robust action plans are
regularly reviewed by senior managers.
and Resource (HOSDAR) panel to discuss thresholds for possible court action,
which are active and decisive in many cases where insufficient change has
taken place over a lengthy period. Over the last year there has been a large
increase ,in children moving into the Public Law Outline (PLO), and then
through to family court proceedings. There have been many (39) outcomes of
supervision or other orders to enforce change within a specified period. The
local authority is clear that the use of these orders has been a necessary step
with some families where there had been a persistent or repeated lack of
sufficient change.
more than two years. At 31 March 2014 there were 13 children with a child
protection plan for two years or more, this represented 1.7%, below the
national level of 2.6%. At 31 March 2012 there were 4.2% (37 children) of
children with a child protection plan for two years or more. This is a decrease
of 65% form 31 March 2012 to 31 March 2014.


subsequent plans within the last year from 20.1% in 2013-14 to 16.9% (at the
time of the inspection) which is positive. This is now almost at the national
average for 201314 which is 15.8%.
significant issues of harm by adults are well understood with formal settings,
such as Multi Agency Risk Assessment Conference (MARAC) and Multi Agency
Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA). The joint approach to domestic
abuse is active, robust and well connected to points of service delivery. Almost
all cases seen with MAPPA consideration had robust, clear, well-coordinated
plans in place. In relation to MARAC, there is strong evidence of effective
partnership working and use of resources to support plans involving, for
example, Barnardos, Caring Dads and the Leeds Domestic Abuse Service. This
service was being substantially expanded in role and increased in capacity
during the inspection. This aims to extend its role to real time support and
intervention, with no delays.
the ante natal period and robust approaches through Youth Engagement
Services (YOS), all target previously identified areas of complex or crossgenerational need. A sustained fall in statutory interventions for offending has
been achieved (27% reduction over the past 12 months), including reductions
in remands and the use of custody for young people. This is well supported by
the recently approved over-arching Best Start strategy, designed to further
extend efforts to break the cycle of harmful parenting. Mental health services
for children have been the subject of review, particularly in the light of rising
presentation of self-harm by young people. It is recognised that changes are
needed to the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service (CAMHS) provision,
with actions currently underway, actively promoted through the LSCB and the
Health and Wellbeing Board.
who go missing, from home, care or education are identified and supported.
Responses to children who go missing from school now have extensive and
assured arrangements for identification, tracking and monitoring, and there has
been a considerable reduction in the number of children missing education.
The number of pupils in offsite provision has fallen from 1,800 to 1,100 in the
past year, and all these pupils attend alternative provision that has been quality
assured by childrens services to ensure that they attend and make progress
and access their entitlement to 25 hours of education a week.


a single data base ensures that where children and young people are missing
education, they can be identified, flagged and followed up meticulously.
Referral rates have increased because of better cross-agency processes to
identify children missing from education and more robust recording systems.
The percentage of cases closed because whereabouts are found has been 92%
in the past year as a result of more robust monitoring and tracking. Numbers
are affected by the fact that Leeds is a receiving city for migrants and asylum
seeking children.
pupils at risk of exclusion and missing from education. This includes effective
partnership working between inclusion, attendance and targeted services. It is
these diligent efforts which have resulted in the 39% reduction in those
identified as outside mainstream education in the last year, and the 92%
closure rate for effective return to education since March 2014. The use of
restorative techniques with families and schools has also helped to resolve
fractured relationships between schools and parents. More than 120 children
have made transitions back into school over the last four terms.
respond to children and young people vulnerable to, or experiencing, CSE. A
coordinator has been appointed who provides a strategic and professional lead
for children who are missing or at risk of experiencing sexual exploitation. The
coordinator has an overview of all incidences of children running away from
home or care, updates the missing data base and sits alongside the police
coordinator to identify children and young people who are vulnerable to
exploitation.
CSE through targeted training. A risk identification tool is used in all cases
where child sexual exploitation is suspected and in all return home interviews.
Return home interviews seen during the inspection (22) were undertaken in a
timely way and in accordance with the level of assessed risk and complexity. All
had a return home conversation with a professional to ascertain if they are safe
and well.


exploitation has more than doubled in the last year (153 at the time of
inspection). This indicates an improved focus in this area rather than more
children at risk of harm. While most (89%) are female, it is recognised that
further efforts are needed in relation to young males. Identification and risk
assessment through intelligence sharing and joint agency tasking in response
to identified need are taking place and continuing to improve as capacity is
added. All vulnerability and risk plans seen by inspectors (26) had a clear,
robust risk assessment and suitable plans in addition to other, child in need,
protection or looked after, plans in place.
for practitioners working with those vulnerable to, or having experienced child
sexual exploitation, providing support through specialist knowledge and skills.
Services and coordination across the area is planned, from April 2015, to be
provided through the additional capacity of a dedicated, specialist multi-agency
team of social workers and police officers. The aim is to coordinate planning,
training, development and intelligence and link with targeted support hubs that
include trained practitioners from youth services, health, youth offending,
parenting support and the police.
and ISIS (a Leeds-based group) are providing counselling and support services
to children and their families exposed to child sexual exploitation. Inspectors
spoke to one young person receiving services who said she now feels safe and
knows staff care about her.
approach is planned to bring greater coordination of effort, linking with the
specialist social workers and intelligence team. There have been nine
prosecutions in the last year; however, there has been limited use of child
abduction notices. Police are aware of this issue and have an action plan in
place. Prevention and disruption activities are also proceeding, with evidence of
a number of operations being undertaken across the area.
identification, assessment and approval of children in private fostering
situations. This is considerably improved, from being judged inadequate in
now better than the national average. Specialist workers are proactive and
tenacious, maintaining compliance with regulations. Assessments seen are at
least satisfactory and some are good. Effective partnership working was seen
between the local authority and immigration authorities in considering the
potential for trafficking or other forms of exploitation.


designated officer (LADO) are welcomed by key agencies (with particularly
positive regard by the head teachers who spoke to inspectors), as are the
clarity and focus of activity in the monitoring and oversight of incidents and
their resolution. Most referrals are made by schools, residential childrens
homes and the fostering service. There is a timely response and follow up by
the two officers involved.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Good

Summary

Decisions made to look after children and young people are robust, with effective
systems that ensure that thresholds are applied appropriately and that delay is
avoided. Childrens and young peoples views are heard and the professionals who
work with them know them well.
Children and young people are cared for within their immediate or extended family
wherever possible, and a range of innovative methods are used to support this.
Court orders are used to secure good outcomes and are often used to support care
within a childs or young persons extended family. Placement stability has improved
over recent years and is now good. Clear consideration is given to the needs of
individual children and whether they should live with their brothers and sisters.
Where this is not possible, arrangements are in place to facilitate appropriate levels
of contact.
Stringent efforts are made to maintain a young person within their school placement
even when the home placement breaks down. Looked after young people do not all
attend good or better schools. All looked after children and young people have a
Personal Education Plan (PEP) which is regularly reviewed, although the content and
quality of PEPs is inconsistent.
Adoption as a permanency option is considered early for children where care
proceedings are being initiated. The local authority has substantially reduced the
number of children waiting to be adopted, with 128 children adopted in the last
year. Leeds is ranked equal 16th of all authorities for the percentage of children
adopted, and had more children from Black and minority ethnic backgrounds
adopted (11%) than the national average (8%).
Services for care leavers are good. Strong multi-agency partnerships have
significantly improved outcomes in education, employment and training.
Accommodation with former foster carers or in independent living is suitable and
safe. They are well supported by tenacious staff. Care leavers are not always
provided with sufficient information regarding their health history or entitlements.


care unless it is necessary. Extensive interventions are made to ensure that
children and young people remain in their families where it is safe to do so.
There are appropriate mechanisms in place to ensure that decision making and
thresholds are applied appropriately and, for the most part, delay is avoided.
when this is in their best interests. Placements under Section 20 Children Act
appropriately applied. Family Group Conferences are used extensively to try to
ensure that, wherever possible, children are looked after within their extended
families. MST is used effectively with families where children are on the edge of
care, and this has been successful in preventing children being taken into care
unnecessarily, with 95% of young people remaining with their families.
workers, managers and Independent Reviewing Officers (IROs). For the period
March to May 2014, 91% of children had a clear permanence plan by their four
month review, and the plan was progressing in 95% of cases.
described as the best performing local authority in West Yorkshire by the
judiciary, who note significant improvements in the quality of care applications
and evidence-based decision making, all of which is leading to more timely
legal permanence for children. In cases where there has been delay, the
causes have been analysed to assist with future improvements.
Court Advisory and Support Service (CAFCASS) has strengthened processes
and consolidated thresholds. This means that there is increased confidence in
the reports from childrens social care and, therefore, fewer independent
assessments required, thus reducing delay. The judiciary speak very highly of
the authority and have supported Leeds bid for a Family Drug and Alcohol
Court and the authoritys successful innovation bid to expand restorative family
group decision making. There are already improved outcomes for children in
terms of earlier identification of kinship carers.
appropriate families. There is evidence of innovative methods of family finding
being used to ensure that children and young people, especially those who are
harder to place, are matched with a suitable carer. This has included profiling
events where children can be matched to potential carers. When matching
children to carers, the wishes and feelings of the child are given clear
consideration.


average. In 201314 the number of looked after children with three or more
placements was 8%, with Leeds ranking 16th in the country for this measure,
and first in the country for young people staying with foster carers post-16.
The majority of carers, including foster carers and kinship carers, are positive
about the support that they receive to enable them to meet the needs of the
children they are caring for.
know them well. Social workers visit children in a timely way and spend time
with them getting to know their likes and dislikes. Social workers talked
animatedly, and with pride, about the children they were working with. Whilst
they describe high aspirations for children, this is not always reflected in the
written records. Where professionals have built up a close relationship with a
young person, in order to provide continuity they have maintained contact
when the young person has been placed away from home, even if the child has
been transferred to another social work team within the authority.
their work with children. Every child and young person has a care plan which is
updated prior to every review, and clearly links to assessed need however
issues relating to their identity are not always fully explored. The current care
planning format, however, does not make it easy for social workers to evidence
the overarching plan for the child and, importantly, to show the long-term
goals. This makes it difficult for children and young people to understand their
future journey. The authority recognises that it now needs to move away from
a model of compliance and focus on the quality of plans, as this varies across
the city.
disability accessing short breaks contain outcome-focused actions which clearly
link to identified needs. All assessments seen have been updated within the last
year and all demonstrate consideration of brothers and sisters, some to a great
degree and with good analysis of the impact of the childs disability on other
family members as well as on themselves. Parental needs and childrens needs
are balanced, as are potential risk factors, and the purpose of accessing short
breaks in terms of family and child needs is well considered.
experienced historic instability, changes of social worker and placement moves.
This has improved significantly in the past 12 months, with children
experiencing greater stability and living in placements that are appropriate and
meeting their needs. Some cases were seen where this historic instability has
been well considered in terms of current emotional well-being, with appropriate
plans in place to respond to young peoples current and emerging needs,
although this is still not yet consistent.


the needs of individual children and brothers and sisters when deciding on an
appropriate placement. The siblings together or apart assessments are strong
and show consideration for the needs of individual children and how these will
best be met. One example was seen of a group of six siblings who are placed
together. There are good arrangements which ensure that children maintain
safe and appropriate contact with their families and friends.
consider the needs of the child and the potential risks. None was seen where
this was not an appropriate decision, and management oversight of the
decision was always clearly recorded. Support is offered to enable the
placement to succeed, and reviews are regular. The local authority plans to
introduce a pilot MST project aimed at helping young people with complex
needs to return to their homes. Staff in childrens homes have already received
training in order to provide an intensive therapeutic environment for young
people with challenging behaviour. The aim is to work with the young people
for two months whilst a therapist works with the family. The plan is that young
people will then be returned home and a standard 20-week MST intervention
will assist the reunification. This pilot is due to start in the next couple of
months and preparations are well underway.
of 1,340) at the end of March 2014 had experienced three or more placements
during 201314, compared to an England average of 11%. Efforts to increase
the offer and support to foster carers have resulted in several foster carers
moving to Leeds from Independent Fostering Agencies. There has been a
recent drop in applications to foster, but this is due to targeting recruitment
specifically at carers who are able to care for teenagers and young people with
more complex needs, in order to meet the changing profile of the local looked
after population.
months with the local authority to feed back any issues and to ensure a
consistent approach across the city. Panel chairs are sufficiently well trained
and committed to maintaining good standards of practice. In the first six
months of 201415 there has been a net gain of 14 foster carers. Out of 40 deregistrations during the period March to September 2014, 18 were due to
positive outcomes for children. This included 14 young people where the carer
continued to care for the child under a Special Guardianship Order, two where
the child returned to live with parents and two where the young person
reached 18 and began living independently.


can access independent support and advice, which they see as beneficial.
Foster carers are positive about the support they receive and clearly enjoy their
role. They feel that their views are listened to, as are those of the children for
whom they care. They feel a part of the professional team supporting the child.
Foster carers spoke positively about the training they received, although few
had accessed training in relation to child sexual exploitation, which is a gap. A
number of foster carers responding to the services on line fostering survey
have commented on the need to improve training opportunities particularly
where siblings in placements have different levels of need.
Decisions to place young people out of the area are based on a thorough
assessment of risk and needs and how these will be addressed. Two children
placed out of area were seen by inspectors and both spoke positively about the
places where they lived and the support that they received. Their care plans
evidenced good consideration of their needs and appropriate arrangements in
place prior to placement to meet health and education needs.
spend time getting to know them. They often chair reviews for brothers and
sisters, even when they are not living together, to ensure stability and
consistency. Reviews are timely and caseloads are manageable. This is despite
IROs having taken on the responsibility to chair the first review after a
Supervision Order has been granted, and to chair three reviews for care leavers
following their 18th birthday. Many examples have been seen of appropriate
challenge by the IRO, and escalation to senior managers where care plans
have not been sufficiently robust or where actions had not been followed up.
The Quality Assurance Process effectively monitors compliance and there has
been an improvement in many areas.
interview which appropriately addresses presenting issues. All interviews seen
by inspectors (22) were undertaken in a timely way and according to the level
of perceived risk and complexity. There was consideration of push and pull
factors in all cases and the child sexual exploitation risk matrix was undertaken
where appropriate. There have been 141 return home interviews undertaken,
which amounts to 77.5%. The local authority is aware in all cases where return
home interviews are not undertaken and robust follow-up is undertaken by the
Missing Coordinator. While information from return home interviews is collated,
it is not yet being analysed sufficiently to inform preventative work and identify
emerging patterns and trends.


cases and robustly address childrens and young peoples holistic needs,
including the need for sexual health services, substance misuse services or
therapeutic assistance. There has been some detailed analysis of the overall
health needs of looked after children, which is assisting with commissioning
arrangements. Leeds is proactive in undertaking assessments for all children
who live within 80 miles of the city. This ensures swift access to health services
and assists with consistency for children regardless of where they live. Clear
contracting and commissioning arrangements mean that inspectors saw no
child who was placed out of the Leeds area who did not have education and
health provision in place.
assessments, (average wait 9.6 weeks), although looked after children can be
fast-tracked to a child psychiatrist if this is felt to be necessary. Counselling
services are available through a commissioned service, and the local authority
also offers an in-house social work therapeutic service. This is well-received by
carers, and has made a demonstrable difference to children as well as
supporting carers to effectively care for children with complex and challenging
needs.
Referrals have increased over the last few years due to systematic
improvements in care pathways. This service is being re-commissioned so that
services can be provided for young people up to the age of 25, as the current
service only provides for young people of 19 or under.
who are placed within their extended family, including the use of kinship
carers, supervision orders and special guardianship orders. Supervision orders
are sometimes used to support kinship carers in the initial stages of a
placement. This work has meant that 48% of children and young people in
care are placed with their extended family. There are opportunities for further
analysis of pre-proceedings work, which might assist with future service
planning. For example, looking at those cases which did, and those which did
not, end in proceedings and drawing out themes.


and attainment of primary-aged looked after pupils. In 2014 results in reading,
writing and mathematics were above the national average for similar pupils,
and the gap between looked after pupils achievements and other pupils in
Leeds is narrower than that found nationally for similar groups. In 2014, the
average point score gap between Year 6 looked after pupils in Leeds and other
pupils was around a year, whilst the gap between similar groups nationally was
over a year and a term. Year 11 looked after students results in 2013 were
well above similar pupils nationally and the gap between their achievements
and other pupils in Leeds was narrower than that found for similar groups
nationally. In 2014 the proportion achieving five good GCSEs including English
and maths, dipped, as it did nationally, and at 13% performance was slightly
above that of similar pupils. Nevertheless, this placed the local authority in
the top 24 of all authorities for looked after students achievements, and the
gap between looked after students achievements and other Leeds students
continues to be narrower than that found nationally for like groups.
the strengthening of partnership working and accountability within the 25
clusters in Leeds is driving improvement effectively. The virtual school head
teacher tracks pupils attendance weekly and achievements termly. Current
information indicates that over 80% of primary school-aged pupils are making
at least expected progress and over 60% better than expected progress in their
learning. Around a quarter of Key Stage 4 looked after students are on track to
achieve grade A to C in their English and mathematics GCSEs this year, an
improvement on last year.
and the way that they are increasingly held to account individually, collectively
for the attainment and achievement of looked after children in Leeds. The
virtual school is providing strong leadership, valuable training and support.
Cluster arrangements are effective at identifying needs and offering timely
early help to pupils.
enough for the use or impact of additional government funding for looked after
pupils (the pupil premium) on their achievements in school. The virtual school
head has very recently put in place new arrangements for the payment of the
Pupil Premium to provide more accountability, but it is too soon to see the
impact of this in Personal Education Plans (PEPs).
She is working with school leaders, designated looked after teachers and social
workers to improve the content and quality of the plans, including sharper,
specific and measurable targets to ensure that aspirational targets are set,
checked and achieved.


number of pupils excluded or at risk of exclusion. All staff work well to
encourage positive behaviour and motivate pupils. As a result of this approach,
only one looked after pupil has been permanently excluded in the past three
years and the proportion excluded for fixed periods has been continually below
that of similar pupils nationally. The current rate is 7.2%, compared to 9.8%
nationally.
to ensure that all looked after children access their full entitlement to
education. Staff support a small number of pupils (22) at risk of exclusion
effectively through the citys pupil referral units, which were judged good at the
time of the last published inspection report. An additional 26 pupils are in
alternative provision in schools locally. This provision has been quality assured
by childrens services to ensure that pupils are safe, provided with a suitable
education and attend regularly. Staff ensure that looked after children missing
education attend regularly and are protected from harm. As a result, none are
open on the missing children register. The virtual school head teacher keeps a
very close watch on pupils at risk of child sexual exploitation, and takes
decisive action to reduce risks through careful determination of a suitable
school place where needed and multi-agency support.
schools, which is similar to that of all pupils in Leeds and slightly above the
average for all pupils nationally. The picture is not as positive at secondary age
pupils, where the proportion is 63% compared to the national average of 71%
and Leeds average of 65%. Meticulous work is carried out to ensure that pupils
are in provision that meets their needs. Rigorous commissioning procedures
are in place to ensure that pupils placed in provision out of the city are in good
or better provision, and educational professionals visit schools regularly to
ensure that the provision is appropriate and that pupils are making good
progress. Head teachers reported positively on the direct work that is
undertaken to ensure stability of school placement when home placements
break down.
that looked after children and their carers have access to a range of social and
leisure activities. Work in partnership with the Child Friendly Leeds initiative has
ensured that a range of benefits and discounts are available, which are
provided by local and national businesses. Looked after children, care leavers
and the families who care for them have access to free sports facilities and
reduced price entry to several leisure attractions.


performance and effectiveness, with an increase in both the number of people
coming forward as independent visitors and in the number of young people
matched to IVs. The scheme has undergone a rebranding, with a new
newsletter and leaflet, which is contributing to the increased interest. The
overall number of children and young people currently matched has increased
since the end of March last year, from 25 to 97. Of 60 young people waiting for
an Independent Visitor, 19 are currently being matched. On average, children
and young people are matched within three months of a request for an
Independent Visitor. Child Friendly Leeds has been promoting the Independent
Visitors scheme; it has run stalls and staff engagement events in major
retailers in the city, where they have talked informally to staff about what
being an independent visitor involves.
after, including some who live out of the local authority area. Council members
have influenced policy developments, attended local authority meetings, been
involved in training and recruitment, and in the development of the passport to
independence, which is used to help prepare young people for leaving care.
This is a new initiative and not all young people are yet aware of it. Council
members have helped to rewrite the local authoritys pledge, which was relaunched in 2014 as the Promise, and have produced a colourful and
informative newsletter. Looked after young peoples achievements are
celebrated at the STARS awards events, with awards being tailored to the
individuals interests; young people are supported to arrange the events with
dedicated participation workers. Looked after children understand how to
complain, but they are not always clear about their entitlements.
which has strategic responsibility for developing services and practice in
relation to looked after children. There is strong partner agency commitment,
with over 90 partners represented across the sub-groups; for example, care
leavers, education and training, 05 entering care, health and well-being, and
the Enjoy sub-group, which is also working to reduce the offending behaviour
of looked after young people. This has resulted in close partnership working
with the police to divert young people away from the criminal justice system.
The number of looked after children offending has declined year on year from
ensure that children are protected from bullying, homophobic behaviour and
hate crimes.


The graded judgement for adoption is good

work. Adoption as a permanency option is considered at the earliest
opportunity for all children where care proceedings are being initiated. The
service is represented at HOSDAR panel, which decides whether to initiate the
Public Law Outline. This ensures that the service is aware of children whose
ultimate care plan may result in adoption, and enables effective means of
profiling adopters to match childrens needs.
be adopted, with 128 children adopted in the last year. Leeds is ranked equal
children from Black and minority ethnic backgrounds adopted (11%) than the
national average (8%).
scorecard shows an increasing trajectory of improvement in performance. The
period from a child entering care to moving in with their adoptive family is 564
days for the three-year average period 201114. This is 64 days fewer and
therefore better than the England three year average, and better than
statistical neighbours, but is 17 days away from the national decreasing target.
the local authority deciding a match to an adoptive family is 239 days, which is
neighbours, though 87 days away from the national decreasing target.
Yorkshire and Humber adoption consortiums Early Permanency Project
(fostering to adopt). The authority currently has nine such adopters approved
and six children in fostering to adopt placements, which allows for the children
to have placement stability and an opportunity to form primary attachments
without subsequent placement moves.
adoption team being established 18 months ago by utilising funds from the
Adoption Reform Grant. This is having a positive impact upon childrens
placement stability, security and permanency into adulthood, with the number
of children exiting care through adoption increasing.


plans being pursued, which in one case included a child who had experienced
an adoption disruption. Children do not experience unnecessary delay. The
recruitment team has particularly focused on recruiting early permanency
placement carers for babies and children aged 0-2, who can foster a baby
during care proceedings and will go on to adopt should the placement order be
granted. There has also been a significant focus on recruiting adopters for
sibling groups between the ages of three and six years, and children over the
age of two years who show signs of developmental delay or whose future is
uncertain. Children do not experience multiple moves, and therefore are
provided with stability whilst waiting to be found a suitable match. Overall, the
local authority is showing improvement in the two key time indicators for the
adoption process. Whilst timescales continue to be above the thresholds set,
the local authority performed better against its statistical neighbours.
the inspection. Of the 50 children waiting, seven have been matched to
adoptive families awaiting a panel decision, 10 have been linked to adopters
and 11 have foster carers currently being assessed who have expressed an
interest in adoption. There are three cases where parents are contesting
placement orders and a further three children for whom family finding is
appropriately on hold. The authority is actively family finding for 15 children,
most of whom are sibling groups. One child is about to be placed with siblings
through early permanence. Where adoption is the plan for children, the service
will endeavour to find the most appropriate match for the child in a timely way.
groups. This helped them to maintain close bonds, and no children were
separated where it was assessed that they should remain together.
child is 63%, which is higher than the national average of 58%, and an area
that needs more attention. However, the local authority matched over 78% of
adopters within six months in 201314 and increased the number of adopters
during the same period (75 in 201213 and 83 in 201314). Currently the
service has 28 adopters waiting to be matched: seven are booked onto panel,
three have had links identified, 13 have been referred to the adoption register
and five have been approved in less than three months.
of media is utilised, some of which are innovative; for example, using Google
pay adverts with a link to the local authoritys adoption team web pages, which
provide detailed information about the adoption process and mock profiles of
children requiring adoptive homes. The service has a dedicated website,
Adopt4Leeds.


adopters. Adverts are informed by research and are inclusive in nature to
attract a diverse profile of adopters. More recently, since October 2014,
targeted recruitment is being undertaken in an effort to match children with
particular needs more swiftly, with assessments being prioritised to this end. A
broad range of means are used to find adoptive families for children, for
example: 21 children recently attended activity days (resulting in 5 matches);
professionally produced DVDs profile children to adopters; and the recent use
of an online family finding resource available to adoption agencies and
adopters. All of these are successfully contributing to reducing the number of
children awaiting adoptive homes.
children and adopters are referred to the Yorkshire and Humber Consortium
and National Register. Where children are identified as likely to be more
challenging to place (e.g. sibling groups, older children or children with
complex needs) they are referred immediately, in order to prevent delay in
finding suitable adopters. Some adopters prefer to wait to be found a match by
their local agency. Timescales for completing assessments of prospective
adopters have recently improved; 72% of the last 33 households to be
approved were completed within the Stage 1 and Stage 2 timescales. Where
assessments are delayed there is good reason, for example potential adopters
not ready to progress to the next stage and the service prioritising assessments
where children are waiting to be matched.
regional conference for approved adopters who are yet to be matched due to
their profile being for a match to the 02 age range; this was an effort to
include children who are waiting, such as children with different ethnicities and
those with disabilities and/or additional needs.
approving and matching children, and this has recently reduced to three to
reflect current levels of work within the service. The adoption panels have
independent chairs who are effectively fulfilling their roles, for example,
completing performance reports on the quality of reports presented to panel.
Minutes are of a good standard, with the vast majority clearly stating reasons
for recommendations made. Six-monthly meetings are held with the Agency
Decision Maker (ADM) to reflect on performance regarding the quality of
reports and operational issues relating to panel matters, and panel chairs feels
empowered to raise issues outside meetings should the need arise.


provide a clear account of the childs history and the analysis provides evidence
as to why adoption is being pursued. Permanence reports are updated to take
account of childrens developments to support family finding efforts.
Prospective adopter reports are well written, and some seen include
attachment style interviews to assess the prospective adopters emotional
resilience, which is considered in decision making when identifying an
appropriate match.
authoritys adoption service, from the point of attending an adoption
information session, through the assessment process and on to the child being
placed.
account of their histories, although they could be enhanced by ensuring that
they only include information that is relevant and positive for the child. One
book seen included a lovely letter from the foster carer, which was heartening
to see and will be endearing for the child to read. Later in life letters seen are
of a satisfactory standard and include key information and events, although
they would benefit from being more personal.
from a member of the virtual school team to ensure that adoptive children
access appropriate education and support in schools. The Adoption Reform
Grant was used to fund two additional staff to provide more capacity in the
team in an effort to ensure that the increasing number of children being
adopted receive timely and effective post-adoption support.
workers unnecessarily lengthy timescales over which to undertake adoption
support. This is making adherence to timescales difficult to achieve and is
ineffective, as children and adopters are receiving support throughout the
assessment process. Adoption support plans are well written and provide
evidence of robust support packages provided to children and adopters. Plans
would be further strengthened if they contained measurable targets and
outcomes, which is a missed opportunity to gauge progress and ensure that
the support provided is effective.
weeks at the time of inspection. Adoption support is being provided to 49
adults, of whom 16 are birth parents. The number of pre-order cases receiving
individual support from the Adoption Support Team is six.


Examples of services provided include: participation in a pilot parenting
programme based on neuroscience, social learning theory and attachment
theory; therapy courses, which promote therapeutic styles of play to support
children to develop attachments to their adopters; and workshops on contact,
adolescents and education, and training on the safe use of social networks.
Barnardos Futures for adopted children aged 12 to 14 years to cook and do
play/craft activities, and a group for adopted adolescents who are receiving a
service from CAMHS. The services are highly valued by adopters and help to
promote childrens self-esteem and identities as adopted children. The number
of placements disruptions is low, with four disruptions during 2013-14
compared to 5 in 2012/13). All four disruptions related to placements made
outside of the local authority and not assessed by Leeds staff. The low number
of disruptions is positive in the context of the increasing number of children
adopted. Lessons are being learned with analysis taking place and shared with
staff and panel members. Support to birth parents is provided for as long as it
is needed by an independent agency, through counselling and intermediary
services. Birth parents receive information of their entitlement to receive an
assessment of their support needs. Letterbox contact is assisted by the
adoption support team, which facilitated 1,000 exchanges in the last year. All
adopters spoken with during the inspection rated the service highly and would
recommend it; they were particularly complimentary about the support
available after an adoption order.

The graded judgement for care leavers is good

either with family and friends, in assured short-hold tenancies, student
accommodation or local authority tenancies. The authority is in touch with 85%
of care leavers on a regular basis, which rises to 92% when the yearly birthday
contact is included for all care leavers aged over 19. Tenacious staff make
every effort to contact care leavers.
them, which has had positive results. Care leavers experience staff who are
persistent in their attempts to engage with them and in providing support.
Outcomes for care leavers in their education, employment and training, for
example, are above national figures and continuing to improve. The most
recent data indicate that 289 (57%) of care leavers are in education,
employment and training, which remains well above average for this group
(45%) and is a slight improvement on the previous years performance.


and training (NEET), and there are currently 187 such young people. Ten of
these are in custody, 32 are pregnant or parenting and 18 have a disability, all
of which means the young person is not in a position to access employment or
training. Robust attempts are made to engage the remaining 127 young
people, which include specifically targeted work groups with Connexions and
personal advisors, regular events held across the city around employment
opportunities and training and a specific MALAP sub-group with a focus on EET.
Pathway plans are independently reviewed by IROs, where specific plans for a
young persons education are discussed, and all staff in the six teams have
recently had training to equip them with information and advice to support
young people to access EET opportunities.
or to access training, and has a strategy to ensure that more care leavers can
access apprenticeships within the authority as well as elsewhere locally. There
are 20 care leavers currently in local authority apprenticeships, which
demonstrate the authoritys commitment to, and effectiveness in raising the
aspirations of young people, and their profile within the city.
that care leavers are supported in their placements has improved outcomes
over the past year and reduced the number of young people leaving courses
prematurely. There has been a significant improvement in the proportion of
care leavers moving on to higher education. Whilst none made a successful
transition to university in 2013, this year 52 care leavers (11%) have done so
and are settled in their courses, a higher proportion than for care leavers
nationally. The package of practical and emotional support provided to care
leavers once in university is good, for instance in ensuring that they are visited
and can return to foster carers in vacations where this is appropriate. Young
people attending university are given a range of financial support above and
beyond the expected national entitlements.
vulnerable young people. This has ensured that there is a good range of
accommodation available to meet the needs of care leavers. For those care
leavers who wish to remain with their current foster carers after their 18th
birthday, the local authoritys staying put policy is encouraging them to do so
where foster carers also wish it. The policy is clear and foster carers are
positive about the scheme, which is having a significant impact in providing
more continuity for care leavers. Nineteen per cent of care leavers are currently
with their former foster carers in these arrangements, but amongst those who
have left care recently, this figure rises to 36%.


living is right for them. A wide range of emotional and practical support is
provided. Personal advisors, floating support and commissioned services
promote independent living skills and support young people to develop
emotional resilience and the confidence to make safe and appropriate
transitions into adulthood. Inspectors saw no cases where the timing of the
move towards independent living was inappropriate.
(60%) of care leavers are living in independent accommodation. Strong
partnership arrangements ensure that care leavers are given priority by the
local authority and partners for permanent tenancies. The range of
accommodation is wide, and young people have options of long-term
supported housing. The location of care leavers housing is suitable and
affordable and they feel safe. Inspectors visited accommodation in one
supported housing provision in a residential area, where the furnishings and
equipment were of a good standard and the dcor was attractive. Care leavers
decorate their accommodation to their own taste. Care leavers spoke
favourably to inspectors about this provision: its like our home.
accommodation is unsuitable, swift action is taken to support the young person
into alternative provision. Weekly housing meetings of key agencies effectively
look at incoming demand, applications and those care leavers experiencing
difficulties in current placements. As a result, there are no care leavers placed
in multi-occupancy housing or homeless, and there have been no care leavers
in bed and breakfast for several years. Only six care leavers have been placed
in hostel accommodation in the past year, and five of these moved within the
local authority target of seven days. In the past year, 25 care leavers have
been placed in emergency accommodation, of whom 16 moved on within the
planned timescale of 28 days. Since establishing the weekly housing meeting,
no care leavers have stayed beyond this 28 day target.
custody there are appropriate arrangements for their discharge and support
arrangements to reintegrate them into the community and, where possible,
manage safe relationships and behaviour.
waiting for their first welfare benefits payments they are financially supported
over during that period. Leaving care entitlements include appropriate basic
grants, but with the option of a number of additional payments which, overall,
make a substantial package. However, some care leavers are not given
sufficient information to know about and consistently access their entitlements.
The online Youth Information Hub, which is replacing written information for
care leavers, does not yet contain sufficient information on those entitlements.


persistence in encouraging care leavers to access health services, such as
dental checks and more specialised services, including for sexual health. Care
leavers almost always have their NHS cards. However, their health history is
not being consistently shared with them. Inspectors saw examples where the
emotional well-being of care leavers is being well addressed, for instance
regarding child sexual exploitation. In other examples, care leavers were not
engaging with services or their needs had not been identified rigorously
through the pathway plan. Where young people have a disability, close
relationships with adult social care ensures that a transitions worker is allocated
to co-work with personal advisors, which supports a good understanding of the
young persons needs and creates an opportunity for trusting relationships to
develop and transfer into adult services.
and advice through direct interventions or by securing support from other
services to meet either substance misuse, drugs or alcohol problems. Services
such which provide support to young people misusing substances and alcohol
are appropriately prioritised for care leavers. Care leavers at risk of sexual
exploitation are appropriately safeguarded. The local authority has appointed a
project worker to work extensively with looked after children and care leavers,
providing advocacy, attention, access and assertive outreach.
appropriate challenge. Plans address appropriate areas, such as whether the
care leaver has a passport and bank account. Care leavers views are gathered
well regarding their plan and inspectors saw examples of cultural and religious
needs being carefully addressed. For care leavers in supported lodgings, the
living together arrangement provides the necessary level of detail regarding
which areas of independence the care leaver needs most help with. However,
other pathway plans often lack the necessary detail about individual targets for
the care leavers to enhance their independence and development, including
budgeting. This makes it difficult to accurately measure the extent of their
progress.
and they appreciate these efforts; they dont give up on you, one said. There
is a strong emphasis on providing continuity of social worker, and care leavers
are confident that they will continue to receive support into adulthood.
Personal advisers have a good understanding of the needs of their care leavers
and the risks to their safety locally.


when they are made. However, care leavers meet with social workers and
personal advisors in locality offices, which are often not suitable for this
purpose, in terms of access. The local authority has already identified this issue
and has suitably ambitious plans to improve care leavers access to services.
Care leavers have good access to free leisure activities.
Star Awards. Care leavers and children who are looked after arrange the
awards with the support of participation workers. Events to celebrate
achievements are regular and include senior managers, elected members and
local celebrities. Care leavers who have received these awards value them.
There has been a steady development of the role of the Care Leavers Council
in ensuring that the voice of care leavers is better heard. For instance, a
member of the Care Leavers Council co-chairs the meetings which monitor care
leaver services. Care leavers have been involved in developing services such as
the Passport to Independence and in recruiting staff.
services and drive improvements, such as weekly meetings with housing
providers to problem solve and explore demand. The authority acknowledges
that in implementing a new computer system some management information
regarding care leavers is not yet sufficiently accessible to establish a strategic
overview.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Outstanding

Summary
Strong governance arrangements comply with statutory guidance. Effective
communication and a shared ambition for children mean that the Chief Executive,
Director of Childrens Services, Lead Member and senior management team share a
comprehensive knowledge of what is happening on the front line. They are
ambitious and influential in changing the lives of local children, young people and
families. The local authority has further invested in childrens services and continues
to do so. This financial commitment, together with long-term coherent, strategic
planning, is ensuring a sustainable service for children and families, with a
substantial investment in a restorative approach at the core of social work practice.
There are effective and accountable arrangements in place for the oversight of the
LSCB, and partners work effectively together to safeguard children and young
people. Senior leaders and partners have high aspirations and share a vision on
behalf of children and families, for Leeds to be the best city for children to grow up
in, and to become a centre of excellence for social work. The authoritys priority for
Leeds to be a child friendly city is well reflected both in strategic planning and
operationally, with children at the heart of any action undertaken.
Much work has been completed by the authority since 2009 to strengthen service
provision and to ensure that children are safeguarded. A well-planned restructure of
childrens services in 2012 that was fully informed by research, has provided firm
foundations underpinning effective and timely provision of early, targeted and
specialist support services for children and families in need of help and protection.
A culture of learning and continuous professional development is well established
and continues to develop. Stability and the increasing expertise of the workforce,
together with strengthened managerial oversight, is improving the quality of social
work practice. However, there is more to do to if the authority is to meet its
ambition of providing outstanding services for children, including: embedding
outcome focused planning; improving learning from case audits; helping managers
to use performance data confidently; and ensuring that managers agree challenging
learning goals with social workers and reinforce this through reflective supervision.


of what is happening at the front line and provides effective and ambitious
leadership. Collectively, the leadership team has a very accurate view of its
strengths and of things that need to be better, and leaders are taking robust
action to improve those areas in partnership with schools, targeted and early
help services.
Executive and Lead Member appropriately hold the LSCB Chair to account for
the effective working of the LSCB.
information sharing across the city and at a local level. Further improvement
work is identified and well underway, including for example, the extrapolation
of performance data from the electronic recording system to further promote
frontline managers and social workers understanding of their performance and
how it can be improved.
used to inform members, leaders, operational managers and the partnership of
trends and dips in performance. The application of the outcomes based
accountability approach to performance is facilitating a shared understanding of
priorities for children, and the local authority is embedding a culture of high
support and high challenge across the service. Managers, practitioners and
partners are able to make sense of their contribution to tackling the three
obsessions through the provision of regular visual updates, well known across
the partnership as the thing of beauty. This shared commitment and
understanding is increasing shared ownership of, and responsibility for,
improving outcomes for children.
is developing because of this approach, although it is not yet fully embedded.
Performance is improving in a sustained way across a range of measures, for
example, referral/re-referral rates, children subject to child protection plans
and in the reduction in the number of looked after children.
are firmly in place to move away from a focus on compliance, now that this is
assured, and to further embed the quality of social work practice to ensure
consistency and consistently positive outcomes for children across the city.
Good management oversight of practice at an operational level is embedded
and is helping to further improve the quality of social work practice. This is
ensuring that children are provided with the right help at the right time
through, for example, operational measures such as regular case supervision,
threshold panels, case audits, and strategically through practice improvement
meetings.


reflect the experiences of children and to help social workers to focus on areas
identified for practice improvement, such as the quality of planning. At an
operational level, these are not yet used consistently well to draw out key
themes for learning for individual social workers, or to inform focus of further
learning at a service level. There is a tendency to focus on compliance issues,
and there are missed opportunities to reflect fully on what worked well and
why, and what needs to happen next to further improve outcomes for children.
Peoples Plan and driven by an active Childrens Trust. Priorities are
strategically aligned with the overall local authority plan, the Health and
Wellbeing Strategy, and the Safer Communities Strategy. Cross-cutting
priorities and the three obsessions are facilitating a shared ambition for
children across the city and providing a sharp focus for strategic and
operational thinking. This has been resolutely delivered and is helping to
improve the parity between service provision for children and adults health,
well-being, and safety. Equal prioritisation is being given to children and adults
within the Community Safety Partnership and Health and Wellbeing Board,
which are often adult focused. Both are adopting a think family approach
within their strategies and joint commission arrangements.
provided at an earlier stage, and more children are safely remaining with their
families. Young peoples life chances are improving through better attendance
at school and improved provision of education, employment and training
opportunities. These outcomes form the basis of the three obsessions, which
have become the main focus for improvement across the local authority and
partnership.
prioritisation and a comprehensive understanding of the needs of children,
young people and their families. Robust challenge is achieved through a range
of pertinent inquiries and a strong corporate parenting ethos that extends
beyond looked after children.
take a keen interest in looked after children and are well informed about their
progress through the corporate parenting board. Success and achievement is
celebrated by the authority, and there is good evidence of childrens and young
peoples influence on political decision making, for example, in raising care
leavers entitlements, and improving placement choice for looked after children.


wide range of services. For example: strengthened partnerships at a cluster
level now provide locality-based services to meet children and families needs;
private fostering arrangements are enhanced and strengthened; accountability
is improved within private childrens homes; and school attendance, particularly
at primary school level, now exceeds comparators.
framework and there is an appropriate focus on emotional health and wellbeing, children with complex needs, early help through the best start in life
agenda, family support, and transitions into adulthood. The Joint Strategic
Needs Assessment (JSNA) is currently being refreshed to align with the Think
Families approach adopted by the partnership.
identify the needs of children, young people and families across the city and
within the clusters. For example: research undertaken to understand the high
number of children looked after under two years old; an audit of the health
needs of looked after children; and a thematic case file audit of the prevalence
of parental domestic violence, mental ill-health and substance misuse. An
online observatory has been established to facilitate sharing multi-agency
information, and there is a whole system approach to ensure that children and
families effectively influence commissioning arrangements. This approach is
leading to the planning and provision of more targeted services in line with
children and families needs locally. For example, the Think Family approach
has been embedded within the drug and alcohol strategy, resulting in further
services being commissioned for perpetrators of domestic abuse, for substance
misuse, and maternity provision.
support children and families emotional health and well-being, and to make
services more accessible to families at a local level. This includes targeted
mental health provision being rolled out in schools and ensuring clearer referral
pathways. Partnership arrangements between the local authority and voluntary
sector have been strengthened, and are leading to improved and appropriatelytargeted support for children and families, such as the innovative approach to
addressing domestic abuse in partnership with Leeds Rhinos rugby league club.
services for children and families has been implemented, but is not yet fully
embedded in planning. Commissioning arrangements are currently focused on
compliance, so it is difficult to measure the impact of interventions and achieve
consistently good outcomes for children across the city. This is replicated in
plans developed for individual children and young people and, now that
compliance is assured, the local authority is appropriately currently focused on
embedding outcome focused planning.


commissioning strategy. The placement needs of looked after children are well
understood and met. Sound placement commissioning processes are firmly in
place, with Leeds acting as a hub and centre of excellence for a regional
purchasing consortium. This has achieved improved placement stability. Many
examples were seen of child-focused procurement that wrapped around the
needs of the individual child, for example, mother and baby foster placements,
the provision of Police and Criminal evidence Act (PACE) beds, emergency
foster care provision and placements for young people vulnerable to child
sexual exploitation. Transition to adult services is appropriately planned for and
a jointly-funded Transitions team is managed from Adult services. This
arrangement ensures a timely assessment of young peoples needs as adults
and the identification of the suitable provision available to them.
Justice Board and Cafcass and this is ensuring that children and young people
benefit from efficient and effective progression through legal proceedings. The
Public Law Outline is well understood and embedded, with court timescales
currently standing at 26 weeks; the best performance locally. The appointment
of a case manager has significantly improved communication and has had a
positive impact both in the reduction in Emergency Protection Orders and the
improved effectiveness of returning children home to live safely with their
parents.
and passion to improve the attendance and achievements of looked after
children, and ensure that outcomes are the best that they can be. In the last
speak with authority about how they are increasingly and effectively challenged
and supported to improve outcomes for the children in their school.
for meeting pupils needs early through the multi-agency cluster arrangements
across the city, are helping to drive improvements in all pupils attendance at
school, and in particular the attendance rates of looked after pupils. Current
tracking of looked after pupils by the virtual school shows that children in the
primary and secondary sectors are making better progress this year.
delivery, although there is more to do to ensure that research is consistently
well used to inform individual assessments. The local authority is outward
facing and invites challenge through sector-led improvement, external audits by
academics, and peer review. This learning has been used to focus service
direction, including restructuring of the front door and the strengthening of
cluster arrangements. Appropriate learning is drawn from Serious Case Reviews
locally, though the application of learning from national Serious Case Reviews
is less well embedded.


court processes and the placement procurement consortium, and this approach
has helped to secure substantial funding from the Innovation Council towards
transforming the whole childrens social care system in the city, implementing a
restorative, family-centred model. The strategic partnerships are committed to
this approach.
in strategic planning and operational thinking. A refreshed workforce strategy
strongly focuses on continual professional development and has established
clear career pathways for social workers and increased capacity. This has
resulted in improved workforce stability and strengthened relationships
between social workers, children and their families. For example, there has
been:
 a significant fall in the number of agency staff used, from 40 to 26 (August
to Nov 2014)
 improvement in the number of social workers with less than 2 years
experience, from 57% in Nov 2013 to 26% in Nov 2014
 improved career progression, through the creation of an Advanced
Practitioner role and increasing the number of senior social work posts (from
 reduced turnover of staff, from 27% 201314 to 13.5% now
 lower levels of absence; currently 8.28 days are lost per employee, the
lowest across all Leeds Council departments.
clear offer of continuous professional development at all levels of the
organisation, which is linked to the professional capabilities framework. This
includes good levels of support for newly qualified social workers in their first
year of social work practice, including: action learning sets; academic learning;
mentoring; the provision of an aspiring managers programme and leadership
development programmes; and improved support for social workers by senior
social workers and advanced practitioners. Grow your own and step up to
social work schemes are successfully contributing to workforce stability.
between 20 and 25 children, and appropriate prioritisation is being given to
further reducing caseloads to between 15 and 20. Social workers say that their
workloads are manageable, and this is assisted by joint, co-working of cases
and flexibility in workload allocation between teams. The role of Advanced
Practitioner is supporting operational demands well. Responsive action is taken
to ensure that caseloads remain at an acceptable level, such as creation of an
additional team in an area of the city where the referral rate is higher.


appropriately focusing on its impact on the quality of practice. This is
responsive, and effectively links with workforce needs through practice
improvement meetings attended by senior managers and representatives from
human resources. Social workers and managers spoken to are committed,
bright and confident. They feel well supported through management
supervision. Some models of supervision seen are innovative and effective, but
in many instances casework supervision rather than outcome-focused planning
was driving plans for children forward.
objectives based on strategic priorities. Objectives set in the previous year have
been concentrated on ensuring compliance, and the accompanying narrative
demonstrates the extent to which this has been achieved. However, there is
inconsistency in relation to the extent in which individuals reflect on the impact
of their practice and training, and what they could do to further develop.
Supervision does not consistently evidence reflective practice, and there is
limited connection made to personal objectives identified through the annual
appraisal system. This reduces the focus on continuous improvement.
listened to and are influential in informing service delivery. This is being
assisted by the authority-wide vision to ensure that Leeds is a child friendly city
with, for example, 300 city-wide ambassadors across the public, private and
voluntary sectors signed up to convey this message across the city. Childrens
contribution to service delivery is consistently elicited through both
commissioning and workforce development, with young people being involved
in training and recruitment of staff. A notable commitment places children at
the heart of any activity, and this is embedded in social work practice.
dealt with at the earliest possible stage. Where complaints are escalated,
investigations are undertaken by a private provider commissioned to perform
this service, and this ensures independence. Generally, learning from
complaints is underpinned by a comprehensive Annual Report and is leading to
an improvement in services to children. This includes children influencing the
direction of both individual cases and service provision.
commissioned from a national charity, and includes the provision of advocacy
for children with individual communication needs. This has recently been recommissioned and formally extended to provide additional services to children
with a disability and subject to child protection plans.
process, and children are provided with an empathetic service by trained and
experienced professionals who are well-attuned to their specific needs.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
good

Summary of findings
The LSCB is good because:
The LSCB is good because it fulfils all of its statutory responsibilities and capably
coordinates the work of all key statutory partners by scrutinising, analysing and
improving the effectiveness of multi-agency safeguarding practice in Leeds.
The Board has effective leadership and has active support from the Director of
Childrens Services, the Chief Executive and Lead Member. The Chair is particularly
influential in holding partners to account for their contribution to the safety and
protection of children and young people in Leeds, including those children living
away from their home area. The Boards leadership has been instrumental in
developing a strong support and challenge culture, and this is valued by all senior
partners.
Robust performance management and quality assurance arrangements ensure that
the Board knows its strengths and its weaknesses. The Boards priorities are
carefully derived from the findings of multi-agency audits and other intelligence. The
Boards priorities are closely aligned with other key strategic bodies so that it both
effectively influences them and holds them to account. The business plan contains
detailed actions that can be clearly measured and monitored by the Board.
The Board has been influential through its strong leadership in ensuring a strong
focus on child sexual exploitation and children missing from home and care. The
Board has also been instrumental in influencing the rebalancing of the statutory
childrens multi-agency framework to a Think Family-Work Family model, featuring
restorative approaches and improvements to the Front Door arrangements.
There is a strong focus on the voice and influence of children and young people
through an innovative Student LSCB, which has been operational for over a year.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
There are no priority actions.

Areas for improvement
performance management datasets in order that all safeguarding activity is
measured and evaluated in addition to childrens social care.
inform child sexual exploitation intelligence and analysis.
to inform disruption efforts.
safeguarding in some harder to reach religious settings and Black and minority
ethnic, third and community sector groups engaging with children, with
particular awareness of the possibility of radicalisation in some religious and
cultural settings.
ensure that the criteria are well understood and effectively in operation.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
of strategic partnerships in Leeds. The Chair is particularly influential in holding
partners to account for their contribution to the safety and protection of
children and young people in Leeds, including those children living away from
their home area.
a child friendly city. A primary aim of the strategy is an earlier offer of help to
children, whilst ensuring that children who require immediate safeguarding are
consistently identified. The Board strongly influences the strategic priorities of
the Children and Families Trust. Strong partnerships are demonstrated by
examples of operational arrangements that are jointly resourced and staffed.


derived from the findings of quality assurance activities. The Board has joint
funded external research, and this has critically evaluated operational and
practice arrangements. Evaluations have appropriately included the Front Door
arrangements and children and young people who are subject to repeated child
protection plans. External academic evaluations are an integral feature of the
Boards impact measurement and improvement tools.
descriptive. A continual refrain is how the Board can learn more and increase
the effectiveness of its challenge and scrutiny. Key LSCB priorities are reflected
in the Children and Families Trust strategic plan, which is currently being
refreshed.
childrens multi-agency framework to a Think Family-Work Family model
featuring restorative approaches. Particularly prominent in the model is the
extensive use of Family Group Conferences.
representatives. An executive group meets bi-monthly and this maintains
momentum. The Boards sub-groups are supported by Business Unit Managers
and have clear work programmes to drive forward their business plans.
plan. The plan has sufficient flexibility to allow priorities to be re-ordered in
accordance with emerging intelligence from quality assurance and audit
programmes. Current priorities are well informed and include improving the
care leaver service, evaluating the quality of child protection and children in
need plans and assessing the quality and consistency of early help assessments
and interventions across the 25 clusters.
evaluating multi-agency frontline safeguarding practice. The Board exercises
careful scrutiny of the transition from a traditional threshold management
model to one where referrals receive considered conversations and responses
based on the needs of children, rather than establishing whether a threshold
has been met.
quarterly performance scorecards, with aggregated findings synthesised in an
annual performance report. An evaluative, questioning approach pervades the
Boards style, in which the pace of progress is measured then recalibrated in
the light of the emergence of new challenges; for example, the better
identification of adolescent self-harm, forced marriage and child sexual
exploitation.


arrangements of the Board meetings. This features small working groups,
where members routinely challenge partners whose statutory responsibilities
are different from their own to ensure a comprehensive safeguarding service.
For instance, the Boards Police representative was robustly challenged over a
recent HMIC report which featured some critical judgements of police
safeguarding activities although actions taken to robustly challenge the lack of
police, GP and mainstream midwifery attendance at child protection
conferences is yet to show any impact.
careful and thorough. Section 175 returns from schools achieve a 100%
completion rate. The Board then establishes common themes, leading for
example, to the implementation of improved supervision arrangements for
designated safeguarding leads in schools. Section 11 audits also have high
completion rates and are subject to a peer challenge process, also identifying
salient themes and learning. The Boards budget is secure, comprising annual
contribution from partner agencies, which ensures that the Boards priorities
can be effectively addressed.
providing core curriculum introductory safeguarding programmes. The Boards
Learning and Improvement Framework is developed collaboratively with
partner agencies and features regular reviews of the impact of learning on
improved practice, multi-agency working and enhanced outcomes for children
and young people.
attended by most partners. The programme is firmly rooted in learning
priorities, comprising core safeguarding training and additional specialist
courses reflecting learning needs identified from quality assurance and
performance analysis. Head teachers spoke positively about the range of high
quality LSCB safeguarding training provided for schools and all social workers
spoken to had recently attended an LSCB course.
between training and development inputs and improved outcomes for children.
It therefore purposefully evaluates the impact of its training programmes
through Section 11 returns, partner agency reports to the Board and
effectiveness evaluations at three months after training. A variety of
mechanisms are deployed to disseminate learning in addition to structured
courses, including light bites, one minuteguides (OMGs) and regular ebulletins. Practitioner surveys report favourably on the availability and content
of training and learning opportunities.


there have been three Learning Lesson Reviews (LLRs). The Child Y SCR,
initiated in 2013, was published at the end of January 2015. Lessons from LLRs
are effectively pinpointed and incorporated into both the Learning and
Development cycle and the performance management dataset to ensure that
lessons are learned. This has included a review of the Leaving Care Service and
developing a more cohesive partnership approach to adolescent self-harming
and suicidal presentations. Child Y and Child V SCRs have successfully
informed learning and development activities concerning chronic neglect and
better identification of adolescents with significant emotional difficulties,
particularly in the two secure institutions located within Leeds.
notifications from major partner agencies in the last year. The decision making
process about whether or not to initiate an SCR is reported as robust. However,
the fact that the SCR sub-group has not received any serious incident
notifications over the last year requires further scrutiny.
are in place across the five member authorities. These are methodically and
promptly updated as new regulation and guidance emerges. The LSCB website
contains clear, accessible links to the electronic procedures The LSCB website is
an accessible and navigable tool through which multi-agency practitioners can
readily access safeguarding procedures.
system to one where more help is offered earlier across the 25 clusters,
underpinned by comprehensive policies, procedures and quality assurance
initiatives to ensure that children who require a statutory safeguarding
response are identified quickly. Board partners, particularly schools (who are
the biggest referrers), describe a discernible culture change from rigid
threshold discussions with the front door, to one in which productive
conversations are held, with growing confidence that the early help offer in
clusters is providing reliable, robust and appropriate alternatives based on need
and risk.
the achievement of consistently effective management of referrals and high
quality assessments across all the clusters. Careful monitoring identifies that
some clusters are developing effective practices more quickly than others. The
Board has plans to closely monitor standards and outcomes over the next year
to identify, support and challenge any clusters that are lagging behind.


reveals a substantial decline in all child deaths including accidental deaths over
the last six years. The CDOP has focused particularly on reducing child deaths
in the most deprived areas of the city, to narrow the gap with more affluent
districts using evidence-based public health approaches. CDOP has reviewed
resulting from child deaths are reviewed quarterly to ensure that prevention
campaigns and targeted public health campaigns are effective.
a read across to the Best Start Programme to instil safer parenting
behaviours, especially over the dangers of co-sleeping and smoking with
infants. Childrens public health priorities feature in H&WB plans. The LSCB
recognises, however, that more effective commissioning of services needs to
gather pace in these areas.
cases identified over the last two years. The CSE sub-group was set up in 2012
and has improved multi-agency responses at strategic and operational levels
through an effective, multi-layered strategy and action plan. The LSCB website
houses clear referral pathways for the multi-agency management of risk and
assessment. Vulnerability and Risk Management meetings are held to develop
multi-agency safeguarding plans for young people assessed as medium and
higher risk. A coordinator has been recruited by the council, and a suitable plan
is firmly in place to build consistent, robust operational responses across the
partnership by developing both a multi-agency hub and a multi-agency team in
overlapping risks to young people. Missing episodes evaluated by inspectors
indicate that the majority are effectively managed and return interviews
routinely held. The Board reported an increase of missing incidents in 201314.
However, there is no performance data which captures statutory childrens
services completion rates and the intelligence gathered from return home
interviews, and this diminishes the sub-groups capacity to identify both
patterns and hotspots and to target disruption activity. The CSE and Missing
Sub-group has identified young people at high and medium risk, but
acknowledges that further work is required to respond better to young people
at the lower end of the risk spectrum.
programmes of multi-agency audits. These are well targeted at areas requiring
improvement that have been identified through the performance reporting
cycle. Careful feedback of audits to staff entails findings being incorporated into
additional courses in the Learning and Development Offer.


quarterly and annual reporting. The content is predominantly drawn from
childrens social care. There are emerging efforts to develop further multiagency performance data sets, but these are in their infancy. A specialist post
has been recruited to further develop reporting of multi-agency quantitative
and qualitative data in 2015. However, partner agency data is considered and
understanding the story beneath the data is a prominent feature of the
performance sub-group. For example, Accident and Emergency admission data
has recently been evaluated by Health representatives to examine trends and
responses concerning young people presenting with self-harm or suicidal
episodes.
services for children, primarily through the intelligence analysed from its audits
and performance management reporting. For example, there is a
comprehensive range of targeted and universal approaches for families
affected by domestic abuse. Repeat referrals have reduced by 20% whilst
notifications have increased, indicating effective interventions and awareness
raising programmes. There has been an unusually high spike in the number of
domestic homicides in Leeds. Ten reviews (initiated between April 2012 and
July 2014) are currently ongoing. It was reported that only two of the ten
households had children living in the families concerned, and in both of these
the children had been removed before the murders were committed.
Leeds, has been operational for over a year. It exercises both a strong
influence upon and effective scrutiny of the main Board. For example, the
Student LSCB has decisively informed service development in an effective
awareness campaign for young people about on-line grooming, and in
facilitating more accessible complaints procedures for young people. The
Student LSCB is encouraging all partner agencies to develop a young peoples
advisory group to increase the voice of young people in their agencys plans
and priorities.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk
of harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails
to identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who have
needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and young people
who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and starting their lives as
young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives of
children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how professional staff
works with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness of help and care given to
children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked to children, young people and
their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to understand what the local authority
knows about how well it is performing, how well it is doing and what difference it is making
for the people who it is trying to help, protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the Education and
Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section 15A of
the Children Act 2004.
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the review of
the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in accordance with
section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and Additional
Inspectors (AI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Tracey Metcalfe
Deputy lead inspector: Sarah Urding
Team inspectors: Brendan Parkinson, Anji Parker, Ty Yousaf (AI), Dick OBrien, Margaret
Farrow, Nick Stacey (AI) and Ian Young
Quality assurance manager: Paul Armitage


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners
of all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children
and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
work based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


