Lincolnshire County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 22 October 2014  12 November 2014
Report published: 6 January 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services are good
The local authority leads effective services that meet the requirements for good.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.2
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Good

permanence

Good


Outstanding


Good


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?4
The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection 7
Summary for children and young people 9
Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) 42
What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority 47
The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Lincolnshire are good because:
Leadership and management
 Governance in Lincolnshire is effective and partnership arrangements are robust.
The local authority has developed a sound infrastructure across the county that
supports vulnerable children well.
 The local authority has a good understanding of its strengths and weaknesses. It
is a learning organisation and is strong in many areas of performance
management. A greater focus on quality assurance process to assess the impact
of practice on outcomes for children, would strengthen this further.
 A strong approach to corporate parenting is evidenced by the far-reaching
developments promoted for children looked after and care leavers. This could be
further strengthened by an increased focus on the educational attainments of
children looked after and outcomes for care leavers.
 An effective early help strategy, supported by considerable investment and joint
commissioning arrangements, means that families are being offered the right
help at the right time. The quality and organisation of early help services ensures
that families are receiving highly effective support.
 The views of Lincolnshire children and young people feature strongly in the
planning of service improvement.
 A comprehensive workforce strategy ensures that practitioners have access to
good quality training and supervision. A recent investment in additional social
work posts is helping to assure manageable caseloads.
 A child sexual exploitation (CSE) strategy and action plan has only recently been
developed. It is based on a thorough analysis of the prevalence and nature of
CSE in Lincolnshire. This has led to increased awareness-raising activity and the
establishment of a multi-agency team who share intelligence about perpetrators,
provide advice to other practitioners and work with young people most at risk. It
is too soon to evaluate the impact of this strategy.

Adoption
 High priority is given to children achieving timely permanence through adoption,
with 68 Lincolnshire children being adopted during the past 12 months. Children
are well prepared for their new families and offered effective adoption support.


Social work practice
 The voice and involvement of children in Lincolnshire has been enhanced by the
introduction of the Signs of Safety model and communication tools. There is
good engagement in case work, child protection conferences and statutory
reviews.
 Thresholds are understood and appropriately applied at each stage of the childs
journey. Most children receive timely, good quality assessments, and when they
are the subject of court proceedings these usually conclude within 26 weeks. A
small minority of children looked after do not have their assessment updated
when their circumstances change and so do not have plans that accurately
reflects their needs.
 Children only become looked after when it is their best interests, and the
majority of children looked after are able to live with foster carers and within the
local authority boundary. Some services for children looked after are particularly
strong with innovative features, for example, Cafcass Plus and the Extended
Contact pilot.

Care leavers
 The Lincolnshire Leaving Care Service is highly effective in keeping in touch with
all care leavers. Personal Advisers maintain frequent contact with care leavers
who are unstable and exhibiting chaotic and risky behaviours. Pathway plans for
some care leavers do not ensure that all of their wide ranging needs are
addressed.
 There is a wide range of services, including mental and physical health,

employment and education workers and a parenting support worker, who work
in the service to improve the health and engagement of care leavers. Many
interventions reduce risks, gradually building engagements in services and
improving outcomes.

What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action


Cease the use of bed and breakfast accommodation for homeless 16 and 17
year-olds and young people leaving care, and ensure that there is suitable
accommodation for all care leavers.

Areas for improvement

Leadership and management



Undertake a review of quality assurance activity with regard to work with
individual children, and increase the emphasis of auditing activity on the impact
of practice on outcomes.


Improve the rate of progress and education outcomes for children looked after
by strengthening the quality of their personal education plans and maximise
the impact of pupil premium funding on raising achievement for both children
looked after and adopted.


Maximise learning from complaints made by children looked after by ensuring
that they are analysed to identify trends and inform service improvements.


Ensure that recent improvements in the work on child sexual exploitation
relating to both prevention and protection are subject to review and evaluation,
so that impact can be understood.


Ensure that all relevant staff working with children are able to identify the early
signs of sexual exploitation, and that they are confident in their use of relevant
risk assessment tools.

Social work practice

Review and strengthen the process and recording of child protection section 47
enquiries to ensure that: expectations for multi-agency checks are defined;
their findings are clearly recorded by social workers; summaries and
recommendations are explicitly linked to this information and to the
assessment undertaken; and management decision-making points are clearly
defined.


Ensure that where an assessment concerns the impact of domestic abuse it is
informed by the Domestic Abuse, Stalking and Harassment (DASH) risk
assessment undertaken by the police.


Ensure that robust assessment, planning and information sharing are in place
for all children looked after which is relevant to their current needs and
changing circumstances. This should include children who are returning home,
those where placement planning and identification are current issues, and
those moving to a new placement or leaving care.

reliably tells a childs story, so that social workers and managers are accurately
informed in their assessments and decision-making.
understand their entitlements and that, for those who do not remain with their
friends or families, their legal status is considered and clearly recorded in
assessments.


advance of child protection conferences and that all key reports are available
prior to childrens looked after review meetings.

Care Leavers
objectives with specific actions and timescales to measure progress and ensure
that their review benefits from meetings which are appropriately chaired.
leave care before they reach 18 years of age, the leaving care decision is
informed by the young persons readiness and preparation.
custodial sentence.

The local authoritys strengths
strong partnerships.
Childrens centres and schools play an active role in delivering services for
children.
has effectively engaged and turned around families involved with the service.
Strategy meetings lead to swift action. Initial child protection conferences are
held promptly and child protection conferences are mostly well attended by
agencies. Advocacy for children is used well throughout the child protection
process.
to improved engagement with children and parents.
authority are informing training programmes and are helping to shape social
work practice.
helped to improve the timeliness of care proceedings.
some innovative services, for example Cafcass Plus and the Extended Contact
pilot.


they feel listened to and have good relationships with them. Care plans are
regularly reviewed and permanency for children is considered early in the
planning process.
this is in their best interests, and children in Lincolnshire are adopted quicker
than the national average.
touch with young people who have left care and ensuring that they receive
good quality support services.
comprehensive package of training and support is offered for new social
workers. Multi-agency training is offered to social work staff and those in other
agencies who deliver the early help offer.

Progress since the last inspection
June 2010 when the local authority was judged to be outstanding for overall
effectiveness. That inspection was undertaken under a different framework and
focused on safeguarding processes rather than on outcomes for children.
since that time, a very solid foundation has been established to support
children in need of early help and protection, children looked after and care
leavers. The success of the local authority in ensuring that most children looked
after live in in-house placements has been extremely cost effective without
compromising on quality. This has contributed to funding being available for
workforce and service development, some of which is creative and innovative.
clear about its vision for vulnerable children who live in the county.
Performance management, though strong in many areas, could be further
improved by ensuring that quality assurance has an increased focus on
outcomes for children.
early help in Lincolnshire has continued to progress. This has meant that the
local authority has been able to continue to focus its specialist services on the
children who need them most. The integration and co-location of staff, and the
relatively new advisory and consultant roles, have further strengthened the
support provided to local families in need.


childrens services, and as a model that underpins early help, is beginning to
change thinking and practice, particularly in the prevalence of the voice of the
child in assessments. Implementation has been supported by a training
programme that has been widely taken up by staff across the childrens
partnership.
inspection of contact, referral and assessment services have been addressed.
However, the client record system, which was highlighted in the 2010 Ofsted
inspection as a problem, is acknowledged by the local authority as being no
longer fit for purpose, and there is a plan to replace it in April 2015.
improvements being made in the timeliness and quality of strategy discussions,
the quality of case supervision and the effectiveness of escalation processes.
The consistency and recording of multi-agency checks within child protection
enquiries, identified through the Family V serious case review, still needs
further attention to be good and so continues to be an area for improvement.
was in June 2010. The local authority was judged to be good. All the areas for
improvement identified in the last inspection have been addressed and good
progress has been made. There is a good range of support services available
for children.
exceptional; children are prepared well and most move to their families without
delay.
service for some years now, and it ensures that care leavers receive a good
service through a robust contract monitoring process.


Summary for children and young people
 Families receive help very quickly when they have problems. They often go to
their local childrens centre or get adults in school to help them. The people who
want to make things better for children organise meetings with families to plan
what needs to happen to help families with their problems.
 Social workers know children well. Some children may have a change of social
worker because they move jobs or leave the area but this does not affect too
many children. Social workers take the time to listen to children and their
families. This means that children can get the help they need quickly and they
understand what is planned for them.
 If children need to be cared for by Lincolnshire County Council, the social
workers make good plans for them. They ask children for their views and, for
most of them, the right decisions are made. Where children will live and with
whom is decided as quickly as possible. Social workers try very hard to keep
children with their brothers or sisters or other family members. If they need to
be adopted, this is done quickly and almost all children adopted find the right
family.
 If a child is in care there is a specific service to help them do well at school. Most
of them go to a good school, behave well and attend regularly. Some children
are not yet making enough progress or getting good enough results. The Council
has been asked to check the quality of childrens education plans and to make
sure that children and young people get all the support they need to succeed.
 As children grow older, many want to set up their own home. A participation
group has produced some creative tools to assist young people, such as a video
and a smartphone app. Personal advisers help young people to find good
accommodation and encourage them to continue to learn, train or get a job.
There are still some who are not working or in training and a few who get into
trouble. The staff need to improve pathway plans to make sure that all young
people leaving care are well prepared to lead successful lives.
 The Director of Childrens Services and politicians, as well as staff, really listen to
young people, and they are influencing decision-making. The Young Inspectors,
Voice4Choice and the Care Leavers Participation Group represent young people
and they challenge adults to make things better for children and young people.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area
 Approximately 140,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Lincolnshire. This is 19.5% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 17% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 13.8% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 11% (the national average is 15.7%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 10% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
White-Eastern European and Dual Heritage (School Census Jan 2014).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 8.2% (the national average is 18.7%)
 in secondary schools is 5.5% (the national average is 14.3%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31st March 2014, 3,724 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31st March 2014, 342 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 294 at 31st March 2013.
 At 31st March 2014, 22 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase from 6 at 31st March 2013.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31st March 2014, 606 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 43.4 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 585 (42.1 per
authority area

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local un-validated data where this was available.


authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 68 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates six childrens homes and one secure unit. Ofsted
judged six of them to be good or outstanding in their most recent inspection.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since March 2012.
 The Chair of the LSCB has been in post since October 2009.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Children and families in Lincolnshire are helped by the right services at the right
time. The organisation and quality of early help services, particularly childrens
centres, targeted youth support and Families Working Together (the Troubled
Families programme), are highly effective. Practitioners working in universal services
receive good advice and support from Early Help Consultants and Early Support Care
Co-ordination. They see supporting families as a shared responsibility and they
understand and apply thresholds appropriately. This has helped to maintain the
proportions of re-referrals to social care and of children who become the subject of
child protection processes below the national averages.
The recording of child protection enquiries requires improvement to become good,
and the absence of a useful chronology tool means that it is more difficult for those
who need to make a decision quickly to understand the important events in a childs
journey. The Domestic Abuse, Stalking and Harassment (DASH) risk assessment
undertaken by the police is not routinely shared and this potentially affects the
quality of information received and acted upon by social care.
Early help and social work assessments are strong and help is provided quickly
through the Team Around the Child, Child in Need and Child Protection planning and
review processes. Where necessary, timely strategy discussions take place and
always include the police, health and social care. Decisions made are safe and
appropriate. The introduction of the solution-focused Signs of Safety model has
enhanced the involvement of children in Lincolnshire, with good engagement with
children in direct work and in child protection conferences. The local authority has
demonstrated its commitment to learning from feedback by the way it is utilising the
Principal Child and Family Social Worker and the Munro Champions to work
alongside young people, to make sure that feedback drives improvement. Children
over 10 years old who are subject to a child protection conference are always
offered an advocate.
Through careful analysis, partners now understand the scale of the problem of
children going missing and sexual exploitation in Lincolnshire and services are good
overall. Good quality direct work is taking place with children who are at risk of
sexual exploitation. Though good progress has been made in educating professionals
in this area of practice, further sustained work is needed to ensure that this
knowledge is applied in identifying risk. Services to children who go missing or who
are at risk of sexual exploitation have previously been inconsistent; although the
current response has markedly improved through the establishment of dedicated


services, these developments are recent and their impact has not yet been
evaluated.
thresholds and provide highly effective support to local families. Early help
assessments have increased year-on-year since the process was introduced in
were undertaken that progressed to a Team Around the Child (TAC) plan of
support. Of these, 73 per cent were closed in the same period, because either
the needs of the child had been met (32%), or because they had reduced to
the point where they could be met by a single agency (41%). This is evidence
that a large majority of children had been successfully supported through this
process.
There is considerable multi-agency investment in a wide range of services to
provide prompt support to families. The joint financial contribution of schools,
through the schools forum, demonstrates a strong commitment to ensuring
that early help services make a positive difference to the lives and well-being of
children and families in Lincolnshire. Referrals to childrens social care are low
and reducing. The low rate of repeat referrals shows that support provided
through the TAC process is working well. Partners report significant
improvement, particularly over the past few months, and access to early help
services is simple and straightforward. The step up and down process works
well, resulting in families being provided with the right level of support at the
right time.
(FWT) services are central to ensuring effective provision and intervention.
Services are easily accessible and are improving outcomes for children, young
people and families who require additional support. Health visitors work
effectively with childrens centre staff to support vulnerable families with young
children. Health assessments at age two are used to identify issues as early as
possible. There is good sharing of data between health services and childrens
centres, including live-birth data, leading to prompt support for young parents.
Older young people have easy access to school-based nurses who offer drop-in
counselling sessions.


practitioners and schools, including training on child sexual exploitation. A
recent conference aimed at raising awareness was particularly successful, with
staff reporting increased confidence in identifying risks of sexual exploitation
among young people. Multi-agency training is offered to all schools and covers
issues such as E-safety, digital citizenship, crime and alcohol awareness. Some
powerful learning experiences, such as the play Chelseas Choice, reached
over 5,000 young people. Specific programmes of support are targeting young
people in special schools. These aim to address specific challenges encountered
by the most vulnerable young people, such as emotional well-being,
homophobic bullying, racism and, more generally, how to keep safe in their
day-to-day life in and out of school.
integrated practice. Inspectors saw many examples of highly effective early
help practice which prevented escalation to statutory services. There is good
access to services for children with a disability and special needs through the
Early Support Care Co-ordination (ESCO) service as well as specific support for
families from a diverse range of minority ethnic groups provided by the Ethnic
Minority & Travellers Education Group (EMTEG).
focused on improving and monitoring outcomes for children. The appointment
of early help consultants has been a significant development. Their work is
improving practice and ensuring consistency. The role and expertise of the
early help consultants (EHC) have been particularly welcomed by schools. The
EHCs are supporting lead professionals to ensure that assessments are clear
and that families understand them. They also check that practice is of high
quality and that staff in universal services receive timely advice and support.
Schools particularly welcome their offer of individual and group supervision,
and this is leading to more children being supported well at an early stage.


primary and secondary schools. Children and young people missing from school
are successfully tracked and located. In 2013/14 a total of 857 referrals were
made and 87% of cases were successfully closed. The register is not closed
until the child is found. A range of data from different sources, including from
the police, is used to track young people, and schools have guidance on the
actions to take following withdrawal of a child from school. About half (77 out
of 134) the children and young people who receive less than 25 hours of
education attend the hospital school. The others access a bespoke programme
with alternative providers who are quality assured by the local authority. The
authority maintains a list of children and young people who are electively home
educated, and monitors the quality of their education effectively, including
liaising with 11 to 16-year-olds from traveller families. In August this year, 443
young people were registered as home educated and all but one had suitable
provision. Additional risk assessments are undertaken for children who are
children in need or subject to a child protection plan, as well as those children
who are not seen or where families refuse visits.
supported well by the Families Working Together Youth Homeless Project, with
skilled mediation proving to be particularly effective in helping young people to
remain with their friends or family. Of the 125, 16 and 17 year-olds, referred to
the project between January and September 2014, 15% were referred for a
social work assessment because of the complexity of their needs. Where such
an assessment concludes that a young person is a child in need then they are
accommodated under section 20 of the Children Act 1989. Thirteen were
initially placed in bed and breakfast accommodation, for an aggregate total of
that their entitlement to be assessed under section 17 and section 20 of the
Children Act 1989 had been explained to them. This is a weakness.
receive a helpful and well-co-ordinated response from the Customer Service
Centre. Call advisors screen contacts and provide clear information and advice.
The need for consent is clearly explained. Early help advisors, who are qualified
social workers, screen referrals and provide good quality specialist consultation
to professionals with concerns. Time is taken to help the referrer decide how
the family can be supported. A head teacher told inspectors that, We are
never, ever turned away. Feedback is consistently provided to referrers, and
any disagreement about thresholds is resolved through discussion or escalation
processes. Referrals are quickly progressed to area teams for assessment.
Almost all contacts, which meet the threshold for referral, result in a social care
assessment, and almost all assessments result in an offer of help. Thresholds
for childrens social care are clear and are consistently and thoughtfully applied.


responded to by a social worker within 24 hours did not include situations
where a child is at risk of domestic abuse or because they have gone missing.
When identified by inspectors, the local authority took immediate action to
remedy this shortfall.
office hours is good. The team has access to appropriate training, and
opportunities to work alongside daytime colleagues, which helps to keep their
practice up to date.
and managers make clear and well-recorded decisions about what social
workers need to do next. Social care assessments are undertaken by qualified
social workers and are of good quality in a very large majority of cases. They
include family history, strengths and needs, and they explore the important
aspects of childrens lives. They are completed in a timescale that meets the
needs of the child.
enough following referral and, though this did not adversely affect the children
concerned, potentially it could have done. The local authority has taken
decisive action to strengthen their oversight of practice in this area.
families. As a result, they have a good understanding of childrens lives and
experiences. Case records demonstrate that they are exploring family homes
and are tuned into childrens feelings and worries. Social workers use Signs of
Safety three houses tools to help children to explain their worries and dreams
and this is helping them to understand children better. Social workers speak
warmly and confidently about the families they are working with and are rightly
proud when childrens lives improve. Inspectors were impressed with the direct
work being undertaken by the children with disabilities team, for example,
using iPads to communicate with disabled children.
Domestic Abuse, Stalking and Harassment (DASH) risk assessment and this
potentially affects the quality of information received and acted upon by social
care.


discussions and meetings are convened in good time in the very large majority
of cases, including out of office hours. These meetings always include health,
police and social care and records are comprehensive. This is an area of good
practice. For disabled children, specialist health representatives contribute to
these meetings, ensuring that the childs complex needs and histories are taken
into account. Discussions include consideration of past harm, and social
workers use danger statements to make clear to parents the things that
agencies are most worried about. Plans are safe and appropriate and decisions
are clear.
points are not always clear. In a small minority of assessments seen, a
coherent account of what information other agencies have shared, and how
this has contributed to the risk assessment, is missing. This potentially affects
the quality of the analysis and resultant plan.
assessment for this to be provided. The consideration of ethnicity is evident
and the views of children and parents are consistently included. Children in
need have a clear and useful plan outlining the help to be provided, and these
plans are regularly reviewed. Social workers in Family Assessment Support
Teams (FAST) work closely and creatively with co-located targeted support
teams to ensure that families get the help that is likely to make the most
difference to them.
many of the chronologies seen by inspectors. Social workers say that the
integrated childrens system (ICS) tool inhibits them in this task and this is
acknowledged by the local authority, which has taken steps to ensure that this
will be addressed when they implement their plan for a new client information
system in April 2015.
protection enquiry, these are undertaken in good time and children are
consistently seen alone. Decisions are taken appropriately to progress to a child
protection conference, and where they do not, the childs support needs are
fully considered including the need for an early help service, if the decision is
taken not to offer a social work service.
advocates help to ensure that their experience is positive. Conferences are well
chaired, discussions are detailed and risks and strengths are discussed, leading
to the right decisions being made.


conferences were not shared with parents in enough time for them to be read
and understood before the conference. This meant that parents were not
sufficiently prepared for the meeting.
are progressed. Where change is not achieved, parents are appropriately
challenged, particularly where there are concerns about neglect. Outcomes for
children have improved or are improving in the majority of cases.
summary of what needs to change and required actions. The limitations of the
local ICS system mean that the plan agreed during the conference is not
updated when the detailed plan is agreed, other than in the Core Group
minutes. The local authority is aware of this and the issue will be resolved
when their plan for a new client information system is implemented in April
social workers in the Barnardos Step-change service. Since the team was
established in June 2014, 390 missing episodes have been screened and 231
return interviews have been undertaken. The team, together with the police
missing persons coordinator, are carefully analysing missing and absent
episodes to ensure that children who need a return interview receive one. An
appropriate criterion that considers risk factors is used to determine priority.
Social workers in this team describe themselves as a bridge, enabling young
people and their families to receive the right help. Services for children at risk
of going missing or of CSE are planned to be further strengthened through the
co-location of the Step-change service with the multi- agency CSE team.
Barnardos Step-change service, reducing its initial effectiveness. In one case,
difficulties contacting a child led to a delay of 22 days in a return interview
being undertaken. This meant that the assessment of need was delayed. This
had been addressed by the local authority prior to the inspection, and the
capacity of this service has been enhanced to meet demand.


the very recently established multi-agency Safe team. The team includes staff
from the police, the youth offending service and childrens services (social care
and family support), and it oversees and engages with those young people in
Lincolnshire who are most at risk of sexual exploitation. Although it is too early
to see the full impact of this service, case work demonstrates that it is
beginning to make a difference. The creative tools developed by family support
workers have brought structure and focus to this work. Inspectors saw
examples where police action had disrupted the activities of alleged
perpetrators, for example through the use of abduction notices. The regular
Safe team tasking meeting identifies high risk cases and then tracks them,
shares intelligence and identifies themes; meeting membership also includes
the named nurse for vulnerable children and young people.
risk and impact of CSE early enough in their assessments and plans. All partner
agencies have identified CSE Champions, and a four-level training programme
is being delivered across the partnership, but it is acknowledged that the task
of educating and training all relevant professionals has been huge and that
there is still work to do to address what one manager described as pockets of
limited knowledge.
and accessible help being provided to victims and children, leading to positive
outcomes. Multi-agency risk assessment conference (MARAC) arrangements
are well-embedded, with good multi-agency attendance. Managers ensure that
actions are progressed within five days of the meeting.
robust criteria, effective communication between members and consistent
multi-agency attendance. The Stop Abuse initiative, where police can quickly
report an incident of concern relating to a child, has led to 800 notifications to
the public protection unit between January and September 2014.
child, the Local Authority Designated Officer (LADO) ensures that allegations
are investigated thoroughly. Risk is understood and appropriate action is taken.
The involvement of LADOs in training and auditing activity is further
strengthening this area of work.
These children receive a good service, with statutory visits by dedicated social
workers in the FAST teams taking place within timescales and assessments
reflecting childrens needs.


surveys. The Principal Child and Family Social Worker is working with Munro
champions, who represent locality teams, and with young people to ensure
that the learning from feedback is informing improvements in social work
practice. The Transition Board, which includes senior managers from Adults
Services, Childrens Services, Health, and Commissioning, is informed by
feedback from the Shadow Transition Board comprised of disabled young
people.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Good

Summary
Children looked after by Lincolnshire County Council benefit from a range of strong
and innovative services. They only become looked after when it is in their best
interests. A large majority of children looked after are able to live with foster carers
and within the local authority boundary.
The local authority effectively applies the Public Law Outline and has successfully
reduced the timescales by which care proceedings are concluded through the local
family courts. Permanence is secured for the majority of children without delay.
Social workers know the children they work with well and appropriately assess their
needs. They ensure that the views of children looked after inform planning decisions
taken during their review meetings, which they are encouraged to attend. Feedback
from children and their families is utilised to drive improvements in services.
For a small minority of children, assessments are not updated when their
circumstances change, particularly when they return home. This means that the care
plan does not always reflect their needs. Health assessments and social workers
reports are not always made available for childrens review meetings. This means
that the review is not always fully informed and able to plan for children effectively.
Many children looked after attend a good or better school. The very large majority
attend regularly and behave well. Education outcomes require further improvement,
particularly in writing for primary school pupils and in the proportion of young people
in secondary schools making the expected levels of progress in English and
mathematics. Children looked after have access to good support for their emotional
needs and have access to specialist services for substance or alcohol misuse, or if
they go missing, or are at risk of child sexual exploitation.
Adoption performance against national indicators exceeds good. Adoption for all
children is considered at the very earliest point in planning, and effective tracking
monitors their journey to permanence. Innovative and creative practice means that
very few children wait too long or have their plans changed from adoption.
Care leavers have stable and enduring relationships with their personal advisers and
the majority of care leavers are effectively prepared for their transition to adulthood.
Pathway plans do not always consider the full range of needs of care leavers and
and an insufficient choice of accommodation for care leavers means that a very
small number, often those in crisis, are living in bed and breakfast accommodation,


which is unacceptable. Currently 11 care leavers are in custody.

their needs, including their need for protection. Decisions are timely and
appropriately approved by managers.
time to build meaningful relationships and seek to fully understand their views;
this is an area of strong practice. Feedback from the majority of children
spoken with during the inspection was positive about their relationships with
their social workers, and indicated that they felt their views were sought and
taken into consideration.
children and families are effectively supported through pre-proceedings work.
This includes the use of clear pre-proceedings letters, family group conferences
and parallel planning to ensure that children are able to live in appropriate
placements that meet their needs, staying with their birth family were this is
possible. The majority of children who return home benefit from robust
assessment and planned support to ensure that their move home is safe and
successful. Timeliness of pre-proceedings work is ensured through good quality
professional relationships and oversight of case work. However, cases are not
tracked prior to an application being made to the court, which potentially could
lead to delay or drift.
fully updated prior to children returning home and plans do not all contain
sufficiently clear information regarding the services to support these re-formed
families.
they can build lasting relationships with their carers, there has been a drop in
performance in this area since 2010 when it was 72%. In 20122013, 69.8%
of children looked after remained in the same placement for more than two
years, which was still higher than the average for statistical neighbours (68%)
and England (67%). However, the local authoritys data for the first six months
of 201415 show stability to have fallen further to 64.4%. The local authority
has recently commissioned an independent consultant to research the reasons
for this decline in performance and, in the interim, resources have been
invested in improved psychological support to foster carers. Reviews of foster
carers caring for teenagers, the group most vulnerable to breakdown, are also
held more frequently to ensure that the right level of support is offered.


they can expect from their social workers and carers. The local authority has
been proactive in this area, and provides children with a coming into care pack
that explains what being looked after means, how to complain, and about the
children looked after pledge. The local authority is also currently developing a
phone app as an addition to this pack for children looked after to use on their
smartphones. It is a highly imaginative tool that allows a live link to their social
worker; provides locality information on health and leisure facilities; and
enables children to prepare information for their looked after child review and
provide feedback following the meeting. It includes a pen picture of their
allocated social worker and diary reminders of important events. All data on the
app is securely and automatically uploaded to ICS. This is a good practice
example.
decisions and actions are taken to enhance their lives. Their emotional health
needs are supported through the effective use of Strength and Difficulty
Questionnaires; a new dedicated looked after Child and Adolescent Mental
Health (CAMHS) team and access to the online counselling service known as
Kooth.
yet achieved for all children looked after, and the quality and timeliness of
some still require improvement. The local authority and health colleagues are
aware of this and have trained a pool of GPs to undertake the initial health
assessments. There is a system to quality assure and improve these
assessments and plans.
services to help them reduce risks associated with this. Safety plans are used
for children looked after to identify areas of risk while they are looked after.
These plans also include information about how professionals should respond
to critical events, such as going missing, and how to help children to minimise
risk.
total of 85 times. Return interviews were undertaken with children on 63
occasions. Children looked after who go missing are prioritised by the
Barnardos Step-change service. Information is shared with the childs social
worker in order to be able to better understand risks and patterns. Where a
risk of sexual exploitation is identified, the multi-agency Safe team provides
good quality support to looked after young people. Four looked after young
people are currently receiving targeted help from this service. Any incident of
bullying is dealt with by the school and as part of review meetings.


recent validated results (2013), for a small cohort of 43 pupils, show that 85%
of children looked after in primary schools made the expected progress in
reading, which was above the national figure for children looked after (77%).
In mathematics, 75% of pupils made the expected progress, in line with the
national average (74%). However, in writing, 75% of pupils made the expected
progress, which was below the national average of 81%. Only 22 children took
the tests in 2014. Un-validated results for 2014 show that in reading 67% of
pupils made the expected progress and just over half made the expected
progress in writing (52%) and in mathematics (57%). These results are well
below those for all pupils in Lincolnshire.
years, GCSE results compared favourably with those of similar authorities and
the national average. Progress was also comparable. The proportion of children
looked after achieving five good GCSEs including English and mathematics
(26%) was above average in 2012 but dropped to 16% in 2013 in line with the
national average for children looked after (15.3%). Of the 51 young people
who took their GCSEs in 2014, 17 entered care in Year 11 and over a third
attended a school for children with special needs. The attainment gap between
pupils who are looked after and their peers remains wide. In 2014, a small
proportion of looked after pupils made the expected progress in English (23%)
and mathematics (30%). Latest published results for 2014 show that in
Lincolnshire 15% of young people achieved five good GCSEs including English
and mathematics against the national average of 12%.
Learning Centre. Almost all receive the minimum requirement of 25 hours of
education each week, and those who do not are carefully tracked and
supported. They follow part-time and bespoke timetables to improve their
attendance and engagement in learning. A very small number of young people
only study for a few hours each week. Staff are relentless in trying to find
creative ways to support their learning. A good development is the catch-up
initiative in Year 12, specifically designed for looked after students who did not
achieve a GCSE in English and mathematics. All Year 11 looked after students
are encouraged to continue their education or training as part of the raising
participation age initiative. The majority of young people attend college or a
schools sixth form. A few follow work-based learning courses. The latest data
show that, of the cohort of 51 young people who left school in July 2013, six
young people were not in education, employment or training by May 2014.


members of the Virtual Schools Looked-After Children Education Service
(LACES). The LACES team and the recently appointed head of the virtual school
are increasingly effective in monitoring the impact of pupil premium funding to
ensure that children looked after are supported well and make better progress
in their learning. The very large majority (75%) of pupils attend good or better
schools. Pupils are not moved unnecessarily and, in the past academic year,
the small number of looked after pupils attending less than good schools made
similar progress to those in good schools. The LACES team frequently checks
the quality of personal education plans and challenges schools designated
teachers to improve these further.
emotional well-being. However, targets contained within personal education
plans (PEPs) for progress and attainment are often too general, and the impact
of pupil premium funding on raising achievement is not always clearly
demonstrated.
the LACES team. The Director of Childrens Services is informed promptly of
any exclusions. No looked after pupil placed in a Lincolnshire school was
permanently excluded in 2013/2014. Two pupils placed out of county were
permanently excluded that year. There are no permanent exclusions to date for
this academic year. Rates of fixed-term exclusions follow the national trend.
These are mostly due to persistent disruptive behaviour and serious incidents.
In the last academic year, a total of 59 young people placed in Lincolnshire
schools and 29 in out-of-county schools received at least one fixed-term
exclusion. Members of the LACES team monitor exclusions and attend reintegration meetings in schools to offer strategies and advice.
individual absence plan is completed for all pupils whose attendance falls below
Corporate Parenting Panel. Senior leaders and elected members have a good
oversight of childrens achievement.
activities. These include confidence-building events and cultural or sport
outings. Foster carers are clear about their delegated authority to organise
these activities for the children they care for. The Duke of Edinburgh
programme offers young people many volunteering opportunities and
challenging activities, and enhances their future potential and options though
completion of this nationally recognised award. Currently 9% of children looked
after are undertaking the award and the Corporate Parenting Panel is seeking
to promote these opportunities more widely.


arrangements. Children Looked After are provided with a range of
opportunities to participate effectively in meetings about them. This includes
the use of advocacy, pre-meetings with their IROs, participation forms, active
participation within meetings and letters to children who have chosen not to
attend certain meetings to update them of the discussion and outcomes.
Statutory reviews are chaired well in a style that ensures that all relevant
matters are considered whilst also delivering the meeting in a style that
supports and encourages input from the child, their family and carers, and
other professionals.
lack robust analysis of placement planning. Assessments are not consistently
updated when childrens needs, risks and circumstances significantly change,
especially when a decline is noted. Safety plans are not consistently reviewed
when the childs circumstances change. This means that current needs and
risks are not always being considered and planned for effectively to lead to a
reduction in risk for the child. Between April 2014 and September 2014, 26.3%
of social workers reports for the review and 30.9% of health assessments were
not available at the review meeting.
appropriately managed to ensure that children are able to maintain and build
relationships with their families that can be sustained over time where it is safe
to do so. Foster carers are often actively involved in the practical arrangements
to ensure that children have good contact with family members, including
providing transport and liaising with other foster carers to ensure that brothers
and sisters can stay in touch where this is agreed in their care plan.
were judged to be at least good by Ofsted. They have positive relationships
and regular visits with their social workers and have planned access to
appropriate health and education services to meet their needs. The local
authority has clear notifying arrangements to inform other local authorities
when children are placed outside Lincolnshire.
Lincolnshire and the majority of children looked after live in foster placements.
The local authoritys unvalidated September 2014 data records that 75.5% of
children looked after are living with foster carers. The use of external
placements is very low and this compares very well against other local
authorities performance. The use of external placements is primarily for
children with complex needs, and these placements are commissioned on an
individual basis to meet identified need.


process of recruiting both foster carers and adopters. The checks and
assessments of foster carers are completed within timescales and meet
statutory requirements. The assessments are analytical and identify the
strengths and areas for development. The supervision of carers is robust and
focuses on the needs of children in placements and how well the carers are
managing these needs. The majority of foster carers have completed the
required qualification, although the number of connected and kinship carers
completing this remains a challenge. The approval status of foster carers and
their progress is reviewed annually by their supervising social worker. Children
and young peoples views inform foster carers reviews, and examples of this
were seen. All reviews are signed by team managers to ensure management
oversight.
children looked after is not sufficiently timely in all cases to ensure that
childrens new carers fully understand the childs needs and experiences and
therefore how to provide them with safe and appropriate care.
permanence plan in 2013; plans for the majority of these children and young
people have now been progressed. For children and young people in long-term
foster placements, the option of permanence through special guardianship
orders (SGOs) has been explored. There are currently 174 children living with
their special guardian. The arrangements to support SGOs are well embedded
through assessing support needs and providing means-tested financial support.
SGOs are further strengthened through the use of supervision orders and child
in need services where this is relevant and in the best interests of children.
delay. The local authority has a range of creative initiatives to support children
in achieving permanence. This includes Cafcass Plus and the Extended Contact
fostering option. Children are prepared well for planned placement moves
through discussions and visits with their prospective carers prior to moving into
the placement.
making are carried out within clear timescales which meet the childs needs;
the conclusion of final proceedings meets or improves on the expected target
of 26 weeks. Excellent relationships have been developed between the local
authority, Cafcass and the judiciary and this is supporting the very strong
practice in securing swift action and shorter court timescales for the vast
majority of children. The local Judge reported there are terrific working
relationships  they present their concerns, have their independence, and
cooperate in the best interests of children.


the local judge has seen significant improvement in quality over the past 18
months and now rates them highly. This has been supported through the
seconded case manager from Cafcass working with legal services and
practitioners to drive improvements. The local authority recognised the success
of this seconded role and recently established it as a permanent post.
called Voices for Choices (V4C). There is an executive group of young people
that meets monthly and three area-based sub-groups that meet quarterly. All
four groups contribute to the local authoritys 'Big Conversation' programme,
which brings together young people, elected members and managers from
childrens services and Barnardos Leaving Care Service to develop and improve
the services that children and young people receive. Inspectors attended a
very positive meeting, with those young people present having a clear role in
participating and influencing service delivery to support other children looked
after and young people. The local authority is effectively accountable to V4C
and they routinely update and respond to issues raised by young people. V4C
is linked with the Corporate Parenting Panel and the children and young people
affirm that they are listened to and feel that they influence changes in the local
authority. For example, the recently redesigned ePEP and review forms have
been developed with young people and a coming into care smartphone app
has been designed with their input and there is a plan for this to be launched
imminently.
and endeavour to provide for their diverse cultural, ethical or religious needs.
Social workers are vigilant about children and young peoples understanding of
English, and translators are readily accessible. At school, children looked after
access one-to-one tuition funded through the pupil premium. This helps to
improve their speaking, reading and writing skills. Additional support and
advice is available through the Ethnic Minority and Traveller Education Team
(EMTET).
histories and early experiences requires improvement to ensure that all children
benefit from this important work. The local authority is aware of this and is
currently in the process of recruiting to two full-time posts which will focus on
this area of work.


Placement and Case Review (England) Regulations 2010, whilst significantly
improved over the past 12 months, is an area acknowledged by operational
managers to be an evolving picture. There remains a degree of confusion for a
small number of social workers about the correct use of the regulation that
concerns the temporary approval of a connected person and this is being
addressed by the local authority through the reinforcement of a recently issued
procedure.
changes of social worker. A small minority of children have experienced
frequent changes of social worker and this has hampered the development of
effective relationships with their social worker. This has resulted from a mixture
of staff promotion and sickness as well as from staff leaving the service.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is that it is outstanding
local authority effectively twin tracks childrens plans, and there is purposeful
drive to achieve timely outcomes for children to live with adopters. For children
with final care plans for adoption, dedicated childrens adoption workers focus
exclusively on developing their plans. There are excellent examples of potential
links made between prospective adopters and children during their assessment
due to close working in this team. This has resulted in panel considering
approvals and matches at the same panel, achieving timely permanence for
children.
in performance in 20122013, decisive action was taken to understand this
picture, commissioning a diagnostic report and a subsequent action plan. This
action plan has been well executed and has led to improvements in the
structure to support adoption work and redefine practice to achieve timely
outcomes. This is underpinned by robust adoption policy and a clear
understanding within childrens services of the shared aims for continued
adoption improvement.


the most recently available DfE data demonstrates that this authority performs
well against the expected national targets. The average time between a child
entering care and moving in with their adopted family is 393 days, which is
significantly better than the England figure of 546 days. The authority has
robustly analysed its performance on the timeliness of 232 days between
receiving court authority to place and achieving a match to an adoptive family.
This figure is slightly higher than the national average of 224 days. This
resulted from a slip in timeliness for a few children, which the authority has
now addressed. Current performance for the number of children adopted is on
an increasing trajectory, with 68 children adopted in the last 12 months.
matched with adopters is very low. Currently there are 26 children waiting for
an adoptive placement, and only seven of these have been waiting longer than
the expected timescale. These children are closely monitored by senior
managers to ensure that they do not experience drift and delay. There are
currently four children where the plan for adoption has not been achieved, and
for these children alternative permanence options are in progress. Where there
has been delay, there has been no adverse impact on the children.
last three years, from 30 adopters approved in 20112012 to 50 approved in
application and approval is 175 days, which compares favourably to the figure
for England of 217 days. Adopters report very positively on their experience
from initial contact through to being recommended for approval at panel.
those able to care for brothers and sisters and older children. In 20132014,
out of 53 groups of brothers and sisters assessed as needing placements
together, this has been achieved for the vast majority. Achieving permanence
through adoption for these children whilst placing them together remains a
focused priority for the dedicated recruitment team. There are fast-track,
priority processes to respond to such enquirers. There are currently 13
approved adopters waiting for a match, and activity is progressing with 10 of
these to explore links with specific children.


and create extra posts to enhance recruitment activity, progress adoptions and
strengthen adoption support. This includes a family finder coordinator, who is
integral to effectively monitoring and securing matches for children. This role
actively supports close links with the East Midlands Consortium, voluntary
adoption agencies and the National Adoption Register to progress timely wider
searches for adopters for children. Adoption activity days are proving successful
in securing adopter-led matches for some older children and those with
complex needs. There is regular scrutiny through weekly meetings of the
progress of all children who do not have a confirmed match within 12 weeks;
senior managers review their progress at a dedicated panel. This is a recent
addition to provide support and challenge to practice to find creative solutions
and avoid delay.
carers specifically recruited to foster to adopt, but no children have yet been
considered a suitable match for the fostering to adopt placements. Twelve
interested people attended a recent information day on fostering to adopt to
learn more, and it is the plan to continue developing this option as part of
securing permanency at an early stage and avoiding a second move for
children.
families. Social workers are skilled in direct work and use a variety of tools
which are meaningful to the child to help them transfer their attachments to
their new family. This helps children to settle quickly, and the very low
numbers of disruptions, only one child in 2012-13, shows that children are well
prepared and matched. There is effective scrutiny and challenge by an
experienced and well-established panel and agency decision-maker. The
analysis of adoption performance is captured within the annual report to inform
ongoing improvement.
adoption. These are individual and personal for each child and support children
sensitively to understand their family history and identity. Later life letters are
equally child-centred and provide children with a factual and sensitive account
of their life history.


and adoptive families do not experience delays in accessing or receiving
support as this support is not limited post adoption order. It is provided by a
discreet team of workers who are qualified and trained in therapy and
psychotherapy and offer direct short-term and long-term interventions for
children and adopters. There are many examples of highly effective work to
help children to make sense of their situations at key stages of their lives. For
adopters, this support equips them with theory and supportive strategies to
respond effectively to the child. This reduces stress in relationships and
supports stability. There are currently 29 children receiving adoption support.
and parents are increasingly using this service for support. Support for adopted
adults is timely, and the team responded to 91 requests for birth record
counselling during 20132014 in addition to 40 referrals from birth parents and
families, which means that some adopted children do not get the right support
in school.
The graded judgment about the experience and progress of care leavers is
that it is good

by the local authority is effective. This includes close and frequent scrutiny of
care leavers who are not in education, employment or training (NEET) or not in
suitable accommodation. Personal advisors receive regular supervision and
have manageable caseloads averaging 20 young people. This allows them to
spend sufficient time supporting young people. They work alongside transition
social workers in the children looked after teams, who hold statutory
responsibility for completing pathway plans of children looked after aged 16 to
enduring relationships from an early point with looked after young people
entitled to a leaving care service.
assessments are regularly updated in the majority of cases seen. The service is
effective in staying in touch with all care leavers, including a significant
minority who live outside the county. Staff have intensive levels of contact with
care leavers who are experiencing a chaotic period, using effective
relationships to stabilise behaviours.


improvement, with plans lacking specificity, particularly concerning
independence skills development. The quality of plans seen is generally better
when young people are in stable placements, particularly those who are
Staying Put. The plan format was designed by young people, and their views
are strongly evident. A scaling system allows young people to self-assess and
plot their progress on key outcomes with their personal advisers.
chaotic phases. It is recognised that engaging young people in structured
planning when they are in turbulent periods of their lives is challenging, but
careful, detailed, specific plans and timely reviews are particularly vital for this
group of care leavers. The Leaving Care Service does not have a policy
outlining how biannual Pathway Plan reviews for relevant and former relevant
young people will be chaired. Rectifying this would improve the quality of the
review and help to ensure that the delivery of the plan is effective.
majority of care leavers live in supported lodgings or housing schemes when
they reach 18 years of age. All care leavers spoken to by inspectors said that
their accommodation was safe and pleasant. Staff routinely complete a
property risk assessment to determine suitability. A dedicated supported
lodgings worker is increasing the supply of supported lodgings providers,
predominantly in family homes.
arrangements and there is a commitment to increase the number of Staying
Put and supported lodgings placements to allow more young people reaching
accommodation, which includes 11 young people in custody, are closely
monitored and tracked through the contract monitoring process.
small number of care leavers. It is recognised that these placements are
usually made when young people are presenting challenging, disruptive and
aggressive behaviours, though such provision is unlikely to meet their needs.
Two care leavers were in bed and bed accommodation at the time of the
inspection and one 17-year-old young woman was recently placed in bed and
breakfast accommodation for three months before an appropriate alternative
could be identified. Lincolnshire has recognised the need for more supported
lodging provision, particularly for care leavers with complex needs, and a
commissioning programme has commenced to attract suitable providers.


and commences with adult services at an early stage. Strategic and operational
arrangements for transition planning are comprehensive and integrated. Young
people with additional needs who do not meet the threshold for adult services
are also comprehensively supported through highly effective, integrated joint
transition planning.
supported to register with universal services and to attend their appointments.
A dedicated nurse works alongside personal advisers to signpost and support
care leavers engaging with-targeted and specialist health services. Care leavers
access contraception card schemes, pregnancy testing, chlamydia screening
and teenage pregnancy services through well designed service pathways. Good
engagement with the substance misuse service was a particularly prominent
feature in cases seen. Care leavers with identified mental or emotional ill health
are well supported by two CAMHS practitioners who engage solely with care
leavers. A health passport is not currently available to care leavers, though this
is currently under development.
approaches, to build their independence skills. A range of methods are used,
including individual work with personal advisors and preparation undertaken in
supported lodgings or housing settings. An accredited scheme for the
attainment of independence skills is being developed. Foster carers are being
encouraged to provide skills training for young people in their care aged 16
years and over.
additional support from a dedicated parenting support worker in the Leaving
Care Service, who works alongside personal advisers to ensure effective
intervention to develop and sustain good parenting skills.
or training (EET), which is close to statistical neighbour and national averages.
The local authority has invested in three dedicated posts in the Leaving Care
Service to work alongside personal advisers to increase participation levels in
good quality programmes, tailored to the needs of the young person. Care
Leavers who are NEET (not in education, employment or training) are closely
tracked and the reasons regularly reported and reviewed.


programme. An established care leaver apprenticeship scheme in Lincolnshire
has been operational since 2007. The preparation programme entails
placements with employers, with the objective of building skills and confidence
in order that dropout rates in subsequent apprenticeship programmes are
reduced. There are 45 young people on preparation programmes and 20 young
people on apprenticeship schemes. Apprenticeships are sought both with the
local authority and a range of employers across the county.
Care Leavers in both these schemes. Care Leavers on work preparation
programmes are incentivised with a 10 per day payment in addition to their
benefit payments. A Care To Work quality mark has been awarded to
Lincolnshire, demonstrating the high standards of service supporting care
leavers in their journeys towards employment.
education, training or employment (86%). Seventy per cent are attending
further education or sixth forms at schools. Six care leavers are in some form
of training. Fourteen per cent of 16 and 17 year-old care leavers are NEET.
There are 19 Care Leavers attending university, and they are supported by
bursaries and assistance with accommodation in holidays.
There is an effective range of services, some of which are co-located,
supporting this group of care leavers quickly into suitable accommodation,
education and employment. Care leavers spoke positively of the support they
receive. Unaccompanied asylum seeking care leavers are effectively supported
to engage in education, training and employment. Fifty-eight out of 64 Care
Leavers in this group are either working or attending college and three attend
university.
when they reach 18 years of age is significantly lower in Lincolnshire than in
other authorities. In March 2013 this was 49%, compared with statistical
neighbour and England averages of 66% and 68% respectively. There are
currently 24 young people who left care before their 18th birthday. The local
authority has yet to analyse the reasons for this and so does not know whether
young people are leaving care prematurely.


Service is good. An active participation group meets regularly and strongly
influences important aspects of service design and provision. Recent initiatives
have included the production of some highly innovative tools to assist their
peers in acquiring independence skills. This includes a video, and a
smartphone app, both of which will be launched imminently. Care leavers
themselves have developed the Care Leavers Pledge in Lincolnshire, and they
have also been involved in the redesign of the pathway plan and review forms.
Basic and more detailed written information is provided on care leaver rights
and entitlements and they are offered an independent advocacy service. Care
leavers achievements are celebrated at annual award ceremonies, which they
both value and enjoy.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
A strong senior leadership team ensures that the effective use of resources is
ensuring exceptional early help services. There is effective governance in
Lincolnshire and partnership arrangements are robust. A recent self-evaluation
shows elected members and senior managers have a good overall understanding of
the strengths and weaknesses in their work with local communities.
Regular meetings take place between the Chief Executive, the DCS and the Chair of
the LSCB. Links between the key strategic groups and boards are clearly evident and
are making a difference. The Corporate Parenting Panel is both active and
aspirational for children looked after and care leavers, though it has not yet
delivered improvements in all aspects of their lives.
Priorities are clearly identified, with safeguarding being a key local authority priority.
Progress is carefully tracked and monitored. Elected members on the Children and
Young People Scrutiny Committee are conscious of their role in improving services
and, through their task and finish groups, have developed a good understanding of
front line services.
A joint-commissioning process is in place and is effectively managed through the
Childrens Services Commissioning team. Commissioned services, such as the
Barnados Step-change and the Care Leavers Service, are meeting some challenging
targets as well as experiencing a rigorous contract monitoring process. Effective
performance management results in action being taken quickly when poor
performance is identified. Learning is taken from a range of sources and members
and senior managers enthusiastically promote the participation of children and
young people and ensure that their views are listened to and used to inform service
improvement. Whilst thematic audits have improved practice, the quality assurance
undertaken on the auditing of childrens case file records would be improved by an
increased focus on outcomes.
The Child Sexual Exploitation strategy and action plan is leading to positive service
developments, but these are too recent to evaluate impact.
The detailed workforce development strategy has included recent and ongoing
investment in social care and early help services. The strategy is putting a clear
emphasis on ensuring that practitioners have the right environment and support to
effectively carry out their roles. This is having a positive impact on safe practice and
ongoing professional development.


share a vision of strong and continually improving services. Safeguarding
children is a key priority for the authority and this is evidenced, for example, by
the ongoing investment in early help and social care services and by the
priority given to ensuring that tier 2 mental health services are available
to children and young people. The authority makes best use of limited
resources to ensure that vulnerable children are safeguarded.
local authority and strategic partners are strong and characterised by mutual
challenge. There is a well-established, experienced senior leadership team that
is committed to providing consistently high quality services. Links between the
Chief Executive, the Director of Childrens Services and the LSCB Independent
Chair are strong, with regular meetings taking place.
mental health, substance misuse and domestic abuse. The local authority is
seeking to further improve the quality of the data captured, and is being
proactive in consulting with service users to ascertain whether their needs
could have been better met by existing support services.
aligned with priorities of the Health and Wellbeing Board and the LSCB. The
Children and Young Peoples Strategic Partnership acts as the commissioning
arm of the Health and Wellbeing Board and joint commissioning arrangement
are robustly managed through the Childrens Services Commissioning Team.
The strategic partnership has worked on some key areas of improvement, such
as the Youth Housing Strategy, child poverty and the response to Child Sexual
Exploitation (CSE). The use of schools forum funding for early help has led to
an important shared understanding that early help is not just the responsibility
of local authority childrens services.
represented at the right level. It has good links with the LSCB. A Public
Protection Board brings together agencies that have responsibilities for
safeguarding in Lincolnshire, including the Adults Safeguarding Board and
MAPPA Safer Communities. The Lead Member for Children is a member of the
Health and Wellbeing Board, the LSCB and the Children and Young Peoples
Strategic Partnership Board. This all contributes to a high degree of coherence
between the different bodies involved in planning for children in Lincolnshire.


services for children and young people. Elected members on this committee
have good insight and knowledge of their communities and the issues faced by
childrens services. In June 2014, a Scrutiny Committee task and finish group
conducted a review of frontline social work and safeguarding services over a
six-month period using a rigorous methodology. The action plan established
from their recommendations is now monitored by the committee. Members visit
childrens homes and are involved with senior managers in quarterly
safeguarding assurance visits to locality teams, when they talk to staff and
sample case files. Senior managers are visible and undertake quarterly locality
roadshows.
well-established links between the Corporate Parenting Panel and the scrutiny
committee for childrens services, with the chair of the Corporate Parenting
Panel reporting to alternate committee meetings. The panel chair and members
seek to actively hear the voices of children and young people through
attendance at a variety of forums and events. The Corporate Parenting Panel
identified the need to raise the profile of the role of corporate parenting with
elected members, and the councillor development days held to address this are
excellent practice; the scrutiny committee is monitoring attendance to ensure
that all councillors attend.
improvements in all aspects of the lives of children looked after and care
leavers, particularly with regard to the use of bed and breakfast
accommodation, pathway planning for care leavers and the education
attainment of children looked after.
complain, the local authority does not currently analyse complaints from
children looked after as a separate issue within its annual report. This means it
cannot be sure that it understands the themes and issues prompting
complaints from this group of children.
understand and analyse the prevalence and nature of CSE in the county, and
this analysis has led to a robust action plan, which is monitored by the LCSB.
This has resulted in some positive service developments, which are too recent
to evaluate for impact.


analysis, serious case reviews (SCRs) and individual and thematic case file
audit findings (both internal and multi-agency), as well as by feedback from
service users. The learning from thematic audits is evident: for example, a
recent report on an internal audit concerning domestic abuse lead to a range of
improvements which has contributed to a better functioning MARAC.
process does not have sufficient focus on outcomes. Seventeen of the 30 case
audits tracked during this inspection were found to have over-optimistic
findings and were too focused on the process of practice rather than on how
the quality of practice is improving outcomes for children.
and Young Peoples Participation Strategy. The Voices for Choices group of
children looked after is particularly active and has been involved in the training
of social workers, contract tendering processes, designing a coming into care
app as well as interactive apps for the FAB! (fantastic, amazing, brilliant) award
event that celebrates the achievements of children looked after and care
leavers. The Munro Champions group is an effective forum, giving a voice to
practitioners and service users that is informing service improvement. The
Young Inspectors Group and their programme of inspections of local services
are making a tangible difference to services provided to all young people in
Lincolnshire.
aligned to achieving service priorities. It encompasses behaviour statements, a
practitioner capability framework and the evidence-based approaches adopted
by the local authority to improving outcomes. This is supported by a
comprehensive package of training in the Signs of Safety tools and solution
focussed methodology for social work staff and those in other agencies who
deliver the early help offer. This new approach is a strength, which is beginning
to have a positive impact on how professionals work with families and listen to
the voices of children. A recent successful bid to the Department for
Educations Innovations Fund will provide extra funding to evaluate the use of
this innovative approach.
supported year in employment) programme and all social workers are further
developed through good access to training, membership of Research in Practice
and corporate membership of the College of Social Work. There is commitment
to regular quality supervision, though there is no evidence of reflective
casework discussion in written records. Appraisals are undertaken annually and
personal developments are put into place informed by two observations of
practice undertaken by the practise supervisor during the preceding year.


the cases for which they are responsible, and they help social workers to think
creatively about how to effect change. Management information is used
effectively to track timescales for key pieces of work, such as assessments and
statutory visits. The local authority has evidenced its commitment to
manageable social work caseloads by investing in new social work posts.
Caseloads currently average between 15 and 19 in the FAST teams, 17 in the
children with disability teams and 18 to 22 in the LAC teams.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
good.
Summary of findings
The LSCB is good because:

Partnership Arrangements
 Strong and effective partnership working is delivering excellent early help to
children and families.
 The Board has contributed to the creation of a solid partnership of governance
and accountability where key partners are accountable to one another.
 The Public Protection Board enhances networking across service boundaries in
both adult and childrens services.
 Multi-agency audit findings are carefully considered, and subsequent action plans
are routinely monitored.
 Thresholds are understood and applied well by partner agencies.
 The Board challenges partners and holds them to account to improve the multiagency arrangements for safeguarding children.
 The multi-agency training plan is comprehensive, and responsive to emerging
issues and evaluation.
 There is evidence of widespread multi-agency attendance on training courses and
e-learning, including by staff working in the independent sector.

Learning from serious incidents
 There is a clear process and independent gatekeeping to manage significant
incidents.
 Learning from serious case reviews (SCRs) impacts positively on service
development and informs training.

Child Sexual Exploitation
 The CSE work stream now includes a clear overview of CSE. This is promoting an


effective response to referrals, which are carefully monitored.

What does the LSCB need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
There are no areas for priority and immediate action.
Areas for improvement
systematically to help the LSCB to measure its effectiveness more accurately
and consistently.
prevention, protection, prosecution and disruption is undertaken and that the
right support is being made available to victims.
the work of the Board and in any service developments that it oversees.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
obligations. Board membership is of a sufficiently senior level and the breadth
of membership of the Board and its sub-groups is good. Attendance is good,
promoting a consistent approach to the work of the Board. All member
agencies contribute to the budget of the LSCB. Regular meetings with the Chief
Executive, the DCS and other senior managers ensure that the safeguarding of
children is on everyone's agenda.
forthcoming years work programme and budget. An Annual Report sets out
the work of the Board in accordance with current requirements, and additional
clarity is provided by the business plan. The Board and its sub-groups are
effectively supported by a team of staff under the management of the LSCB
Business Manager. There are clear lines of communication between the Chief
Executive of the local authority, the DCS and the Independent Chair of the
LSCB which ensure that the areas of accountability for which they have
responsibility are effectively managed. There are well-established scrutiny
arrangements which enable elected members to provide challenge to both the
Childrens and the Adults Safeguarding Boards.


The establishment of the Public Protection Board is one of the ways in which
this has been achieved. This is chaired by the Independent Chair of the LSCB
and brings together Chairs and Business Managers of all Boards which have
responsibilities for safeguarding in Lincolnshire, including the Adults
Safeguarding Board, MAPPA, Community Safety, Prevent, The Health
Safeguarding Steering Group and Domestic Abuse Steering Group. This
demonstrates a collective commitment to work in partnership, and
acknowledges that there is a range of shared issues for which the various
groups are responsible.
lists the challenge made to agencies and senior managers together with agreed
actions. LSCB member agencies moderate each others section 11 Audit work,
submitted annually as part of the three-yearly cycle. This enables a greater
level of detailed understanding of the work of partners, encourages challenge
into the system, and helps to develop a more consistent approach to the
section 11 process.
agenda. He maintains regular contact with frontline practice. For example, he
and the LSCB Business Manager meet regularly with CP Conference Chairs,
from whom he receives clear descriptions of issues relating to child protection
practice. This allows him to ensure that front-line practice issues are
incorporated into the work of the Board.
authoritys quality assurance team to ensure that childrens safety is a routine
feature of all future childrens audit work. A recently appointed LSCB auditor
will further ensure that an effective focus is maintained on audit
responsibilities. A key element of the role of the newly appointed auditor linked
to the LSCB will be to establish closer links between service users and the
Board, to increase the influence of young people on its work. Inspectors have
seen examples of training and awareness-raising projects being directly
influenced by the views of young people.
from a voluntary sector organisation. The SIRG incorporates SCR
responsibilities within a wider remit, including a focus on excellence, so that the
Board can disseminate good practice. Recent enhancements to the Team
Around the Child (TAC) have been made following the publication of a local
report into the suicide of a young person.


(Individual Management Reviews) to assure quality and consistency, and
routinely attends the Boards Strategic Management Group and the SIRG,
offering support to the SCR process through to publication and beyond. Each
key agency has nominated a Senior Liaison Officer, the conduit through which
information regarding significant incidents is processed. This promotes a
consistent gatekeeping process, which is challenged periodically by SIRG
members if matters subsequently come to light which they believe ought to
have been presented to SIRG for discussion.
so that they can develop plans to roll-out the learning, including staff briefings
and e-learning. Examples of such training include a focus on pre-birth
assessments, the provision of emergency cover, and sessions about the SCR
process itself.
Training Plan is influenced by learning from SCR's, local and national, as well as
other key issues discussed by the range of sub-groups which report to the
Board. Examples of training delivered as a direct result of learning from SCR's
include a focus on pre-birth assessments, the provision of emergency cover,
and sessions about the SCR process itself. Training is well attended throughout
the partnership, a reflection in part on the practice of fining those who do not
attend. Training is widely accessible. For example, the independent sector can
access training events for a small fee.
provide; they have recently improved their evaluation process by seeking
feedback from participants, some weeks after the training has been delivered,
regarding the impact which the training they received has had on their work.
within the partnership. The Chair and Business Manager report that the
availability of guidance for practitioners, and the TAC arrangements are
working effectively.
Education and Training sub-group of the LSCB which ensures that procedures
are up to date, compliant with statutory guidance and effectively disseminated
throughout the partnership. Through this sub-group, agencies are empowered
to bring forward policy and procedural gaps which has led, for example, to the
development of a protocol about working with injuries to non-mobile babies.


added further impetus and this led to a self-assessment being undertaken
against the findings of recently published reports concerning CSE. The
appointment of a CSE Co-ordinator accountable to the Board led to a risk
analysis being undertaken. The subsequent report discusses LSCB priorities and
considers prevalence, prevention, support to victims, disruption activity and
prosecution and refers to the resources already deployed. A CSE strategy and
action plan has been developed by the relevant sub-group, ratified by the
LSCB, and a multi-agency CSE service has now been established, which is coordinated with personnel responsible for missing children. This works with
children and young people most at risk, provides a source of advice and
guidance and supports awareness-raising activity. The LSCB protocol for
missing children and young people is up to date and reflects statutory
guidance. It makes links with CSE and other forms of vulnerability and with the
procedure concerning children and young people missing from education.
Lincolnshire by other local authorities, the Board receives quarterly reports
about the various screening and contact arrangements which are in place.
These are designed to ensure that children placed in Lincolnshire are known to
relevant organisations, and that they are safe. Following concerns being
expressed by the Board Chair to the DCS about the safeguarding of residents
within a private childrens home, swift and protective action was taken by the
local authority.
in Lincolnshire, for example: licensing, taxis, hotels, and fast food outlets. The
Board is aware of this and is developing its strategic approach to this.
children and young people at risk of experiencing CSE and the need to ensure
that support services for the victims of CSE are effectively quantified or coordinated. Activity to address these issues is being progressed through the CSE
action plan.
influence its work through the Learning by Listening initiative, for example,
improving the availability of substance misuse information to young people and
involving young people in training. The involvement of young people is not yet
a consistent feature in LSCB-driven service improvements.
findings and learning from SCRs. A more systematic gathering of evidence of
impact of service developments on practice would assist the LSCB to measure
its effectiveness more accurately and consistently.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk
of harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails
to identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who have
needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and young people
who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and starting their lives as
young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives of
children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how professional staff
work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness of help and care given to
children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked to children, young people and
their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to understand what the local authority
knows about how well it is performing, how well it is doing and what difference it is making
for the people who it is trying to help, protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the Education and
Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section 15A of
the Children Act 2004.
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the review of
the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in accordance with
section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of Seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and three
Associate Inspectors from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Fiona Millns HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Carolyn Spray HMI
Team inspectors: Stephanie Murray HMI, Jansy Kelly HMI, Fiona Parker HMI, Marianick
Ellender-Gele HMI, Lynn Radley HMI, Nick Stacy AI, Nancy Meehan AI and Paul Johnson AI.
Quality assurance manager: John Gregg Senior Her Majestys Inspector.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners
of all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children
and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
work based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


