London Borough of Merton Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 12 June 2017 to 6 July 2017
Report published: 25 August 2017

Childrens services in the London Borough of Merton are good.

Good

permanence

Good


Outstanding


Good


Outstanding


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Children in Merton benefit from services that are dynamic, ambitious and successful.
Exceptional leadership and governance and strong frontline management ensure that
childrens services are consistently good. All children receive a good service and
some receive an outstanding service. Inspectors saw that significant and sustained
improvements had been achieved since the last inspection in 2012, when all services
were judged as good. Staff are very effective in improving outcomes for children.
The director of childrens services (DCS) and all senior leaders have created and
sustained a highly effective culture of clear strategic planning alongside warmth and
compassion for each and every child. The leadership style offers an ideal balance of
rigorous attention to outcomes combined with sensitivity, humility and a sound
understanding of the vulnerability experienced by children and their families. This
was described by one partner as a productive and human way of working that is
both very respectful and challenging.
Leaders and managers are highly visible and show care and concern for children and
staff. They provide a strong culture of learning and a determination to improve
further on outcomes that are already good. Innovative and creative thinking ensures
that Merton achieves maximum impact from the resources available. This includes a
coherent practice model to assist social workers in their analysis, manageable
caseloads, frequent supervision, reflective auditing and mature partnerships. This
results in an environment in which social work practice continues to develop and
flourish despite a turnover of staff.
A strong and embedded culture of review and learning enables robust analytical
understanding of all aspects of services in Merton. Regular wholescale reviews of
services or local case and threshold reviews result in a local authority that knows
itself well. This was described by one manager as, If we spot a problem, we dig,
and this professional curiosity was strongly evident during the inspection. The small
areas of practice requiring additional work that were seen by inspectors were already
known and were being actively addressed by senior managers.
Children are protected through an outstanding early help offer and a robust front
door, to consider which intervention would help them best. A review in 2016 of the
multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) and regular threshold testing audits ensure a
rounded multi-agency response to protect children when their needs first become
known. Responses are timely and proportionate to risk. Thresholds are clearly and
consistently applied for children, including when their circumstances and needs
change. Child protection plans and child in need plans help to protect and support
children and their families well and are based on thorough assessments. Some plans
are not sufficiently clear, and so families may not fully understand what is required of
them.
Children who are looked after by Merton benefit from good-quality placements, social
workers who visit them often and strong support from the virtual school.
Comprehensive assessments and support enable children to return home safely


when this is their plan. Applications to court reflect timely planning and strong social
work practice, as reflected in very positive feedback from the judiciary and court
partners. The role of the corporate parent is well embedded and is taken very
seriously. The lead member for children, the chief executive and senior managers
consider all children to be their children and they are determined to do their best for
them. Parents and carers feel included, leading to positive partnership working.
Letters to parents and children, including pre-proceedings letters or complaints, are
carefully personalised.
Permanence is secured quickly for children and progress is closely tracked. Children
placed in permanent foster care receive a certificate from the assistant director,
affirming their sense of belonging. Adoption performance is outstanding, with all
children requiring adoption currently placed and no children waiting. Creative use of
the adoption support fund ensures that adoption is well supported. Merton has not
had an adoption placement breakdown for over five years.
Care leavers do well in Merton. The vast majority are in touch with staff, and
determined efforts are made to re-engage with those who are not. Care leavers feel
safe where they live and they achieve well. Young people who have left care recently
have benefited from receiving their health histories although not all care leavers have
received their health histories yet, despite this being a longstanding issue. Only a few
care leavers continue to live with their foster carers beyond their 18th birthday; the
local authority is actively trying to increase numbers.
Risks associated with child sexual exploitation, missing children, gang involvement or
radicalisation are understood exceptionally well and overseen appropriately from a
senior multi-agency perspective. Regular scrutiny is provided through a range of
methods, including a weekly missing meeting. However, the response to each child
for each episode of missing from home or care is not sufficiently robust.
Accurate data and helpful performance information provide insight and ensure that
strategic changes to demand and need are anticipated and met. Service redesign,
including a flatter management structure, has enabled a 33% increase in frontline
social workers. The redesign has resulted in manageable caseloads and effective
spans of control, and has enabled changes to the workload of the MASH and the
safeguarding teams, as well as the creation of a dedicated permanence service. The
very recent implementation of a replacement information technology and case
recording system, just prior to the inspection, is being managed efficiently, and staff
are being well supported.
Detailed strategic plans and localised improvement plans are aligned with each other
and are overseen by mature and exceptionally strong partnerships. The strong
professional partnerships in Merton demonstrate that children and their families are
highly valued and that they deserve high-quality services.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area
Recommendations
Summary for children and young people
The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)



Executive summary
Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority does not operate any childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
January 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in January 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The DCS has been in post since January 2009.
 The chief executive has been in post since March 2004.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since March 2014.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 46,697 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Merton. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 15% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years old are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 14% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 16% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 45% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British and Black and Black British.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 47% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 36% (the national average is 16%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2017, 1,356 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 March 2017, 127 children were the subject of a child protection plan (a rate
of 27 per 10,000). This is a reduction from 138 children (30 per 10,000) at 31
March 2016.
 At 31 March 2017, four children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a decrease from nine at the time of the last published data in 2015.
 In the two years prior to inspection, two serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted and one serious case review (SCR) has been completed.
 There were no SCRs ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2017, 152 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 33 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 165 (35 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
-


-

authority area

-

two live in residential special schools3, both of whom live out of the
authority area

-

area

-

three live with their parents, none of whom live out of the authority
area

-


 In the last 12 months:


-

there have been 11 adoptions

-

six children became the subject of special guardianship orders

-

returned to be looked after

-

independent living

-

two young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in
houses in multiple occupation.

These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Social work model


The local authority uses a systemic practice model that includes Signs of
Safety.


Recommendations

Ensure that all plans, including child in need, child protection, care plans for
children looked after and pathway plans, consistently contain specific actions,
achievable timescales and clear, measurable outcomes.


Improve the use of return home interviews for each episode of missing for
children missing from home or care and ensure that risks are understood and
reduced for individual children.


Ensure that staying put is made available to all care leavers who would
benefit from this.


Ensure that all former relevant care leavers receive information on their health
histories.


Summary for children and young people


All staff, including senior managers, know children well and work well together to
consider how to help each child and their family.



Although services for children and young people are already good, staff continue
to question how they do things and are keen to do even better. They regularly
look carefully at what they have done to see what they can learn.



Planning for children is mostly done well, but in a few cases the plans are not
clear enough about what needs to change for children and what families need to
do to make children safer.



Staff work hard to keep children safe in Merton. Any risks or concerns are taken
very seriously and acted on quickly. They do this by working closely with other
people, such as the police.

 Some children have had a number of different social workers, but managers keep
a close eye on what is happening for children, to minimise the impact of changes.
 Children who are looked after by Merton are involved in the planning for their
care. They are listened to and they influence planning for the future.
 Children and families who arrive from different countries receive an exceptional
service and are supported sensitively to ensure that they feel secure. This
includes meeting with other children in similar circumstances so that they do not
feel alone.
 Children who are not able to live with their families live in safe and secure homes.
Social workers ensure that children who are placed at some distance from Merton
do not miss out on things that will be of interest or help to them.
 Care leavers are supported to do well and they feel safe where they live. Only a
small number of young people continue to live with their foster carers after their
people can stay with their foster carers if they wish to.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Good

Consistently good services support children in need of help and protection in
Merton, improving their circumstances and keeping them safe. High-quality early
help assessments help to identify needs, leading to children and families benefiting
from a range of integrated early help support services.
Staff within the MASH effectively assess and prioritise contacts and referrals,
ensuring prompt and proportionate responses so that children most at risk receive
appropriate and timely services. Strong management oversight and decisionmaking are evident on all case recording.
Effective multi-agency responses to children at risk of sexual exploitation and
children who are missing from home or school help to ensure that they are kept
safe. Good outcomes are supported by strong attendance at the multi-agency
sexual exploitation panel, weekly multi-agency missing meetings and timely
strategy discussions with a range of appropriate services. However, the response
to individual children who go missing from home, including the timeliness of return
home interviews, is not consistent, so the factors that influence the behaviour are
not clear.
Staff have a good understanding of risk. Effective early identification of risks in
relation to female genital mutilation, forced marriage, gang affiliation and
radicalisation leads to proactive and immediate safeguarding of young people. If
necessary, this includes legal orders, accompanied by comprehensive multi-agency
support. Strong multi-agency partnership working, including information sharing
and attendance at child protection meetings, is protecting children from risk of
further significant harm. However, child in need and child protection plans are not
clear enough to ensure that parents understand what needs to change, and in
what timescales, and to help monitor the progression of each plan.
Timely and effective arrangements are in place to respond to 16- and 17-year-olds
at risk of homelessness. The local authority does not use bed and breakfast
accommodation for any 16- or 17-year-olds.
Comprehensive awareness raising in relation to private fostering has led to
appropriate referrals. Children currently known to be living in private fostering
arrangements are appropriately safeguarded and supported well.
There is good use of advocacy, including appropriate advocacy for disabled
children and children and young people subject to child protection procedures,
enabling careful consideration of their voices within planning.


Inspection findings

Children and young people in need of help and protection in Merton receive a
good service. Managers and staff know their children well. Manageable
caseloads and skilled staff mean that they are able to visit children and their
families regularly, build meaningful relationships and undertake purposeful
direct work. Effective direct work is widespread, including with children at risk
of sexual exploitation, and individualised direct work with disabled children
meets the communication needs of each child.


The Merton Child and Young Person Well-Being Model guides threshold
decisions and is supported by a well-embedded wide range of integrated early
help services, commissioned and brokered by the Childrens Trust partnership.
Thresholds are understood well by partner agencies and applied appropriately,
resulting in effective and timely interventions for children.


The training and engagement with early help partners contribute to very
strong early help assessments, which are undertaken by a wide range of
partners. This ensures timely identification of need, with decision-making and
work overseen by a social work qualified team manager. Effective intervention
at an early stage is having a positive impact on reducing the number of
children who require a more specialist service. Families benefit from prompt
support from a range of innovative, high-quality early help services, such as a
dedicated victim support service for children, and mental health practitioners
in schools. Parents spoke very highly of the early help services available and
the positive difference that they are making for children.


If risks to children change, they experience a relatively seamless transition
between early help and statutory services. Step-up and step-down processes
are well considered and purposeful, with the vast majority evidencing a clear
rationale and decision-making. This ensures that children and their families
are receiving the right service at the right level of intervention to meet their
needs.


Multi-agency information sharing has improved significantly, with increased
access to a wide range of multi-agency data. Consent is understood well and
is clearly recorded. Childrens social care services, the police, health, early
help and education are co-located in the MASH, ensuring timely risk analysis
of information to inform decision-making to safeguard children. However,
consistency is still required in ensuring that information from schools is
obtained in a timely manner. The vulnerable childrens team is working
closely with schools to improve timescales.


Additional staffing resources for the MASH and first response teams, as from
handled within the agreed timescales and are monitored closely via the
recently implemented MASH live dashboard. This is enabling timely and


carefully considered responses so that children most at risk quickly receive
appropriate services. There is good liaison and handover with the emergency
duty team, which is staffed by suitably experienced childrens social workers,
who provide an effective service to children and families out of normal office
hours.

The social work model used by childrens services is helpfully also applied by
partner agencies, and this is leading to improvements in the quality of work to
assess risks to children. The vast majority of case recording identifies
appropriate safeguarding concerns and safety goals, which are developed in
regular child in need meetings, child protection conferences and conference
reviews. However, plans are not consistently clear in all cases. This means
that a small number of parents are not fully aware of what needs to change
and in what timescales, and this makes it more difficult to monitor whether
plans are progressing in a timely way. (Recommendation)


In the vast majority of cases, escalation of concerns or non-engagement by
families leads to appropriate, timely and proportionate responses to risks to
children, in line with contingency plans overseen by managers.


Child protection enquiries to protect children at risk of abuse, through strategy
discussions and section 47 child protection enquiries, are timely. In the
majority of cases, a multi-agency response informs the decision-making to
protect children. However, there is some variability for a small minority of
children, with some agencies not participating consistently. As a result of
efforts made by senior managers and the Merton Safeguarding Children Board
(MSCB), multi-agency attendance and input to child in need meetings and
child protection conferences have significantly improved and continue to be
closely monitored.


Childrens wishes and feelings are strongly heard and clearly reflected in
practice. Their views and voices are carefully considered in assessments,
strategy meetings and social work records to inform planning. Case records
are clear, timely and up to date, including assessments and chronologies. In a
very small minority of cases, case recording does not fully reflect the lived
experiences of very young children or does not consistently highlight the
separate needs of individual children in large family groups. Recording
evidences management oversight and decision-making. There is a small
amount of inconsistent recording of timescales for actions within assessments
and supervisions, which senior managers are aware of.


The local authority has undertaken a comprehensive needs analysis to
understand the prevalence of domestic abuse, mental ill health and substance
misuse within the borough. Recent developments include the appointment of
a specialist adult mental health liaison worker to enhance partnership working,
to provide training across adults and childrens services and to update the
joint protocol for safeguarding children and families who have mental health


needs. The multi-agency public protection arrangements (MAPPA) and multiagency risk assessment conferences (MARAC) are consistently well attended
and effective in supporting timely information sharing, effective risk
management and decision-making.

There are clear and effective multi-agency responses to identify and respond
to children at risk of going missing or missing education. Most cases of
children missing education close within three months, as the vast majority of
children are effectively supported back into school. Education welfare staff are
persistent in their tracking of children missing education, an example being
undertaking unannounced visits at known addresses. They liaise and share
information effectively with other local authorities and within the council, and
escalate cases to social care when necessary, overseen by the multi-agency
children missing education panel.


Risks associated with child sexual exploitation or missing from home are given
a high priority and are understood well. Weekly missing meetings are held in
the MASH. The meetings are regularly attended by social workers, the police,
a gangs worker, the children looked after nurse, the youth offending service,
the child sexual exploitation lead and a representative from the commissioned
service that provides return home interviews. Through the combination of the
multi-agency sexual exploitation panel, weekly multi-agency missing
meetings and timely strategy discussions, children missing from care or home
and children at risk of sexual exploitation are effectively identified and
responded to. A wide range of appropriate services, including commissioned
services, are in place to support and protect children. However, the processes
for offering children return home interviews following every episode of going
missing, or completing those interviews in a timely manner to fully understand
the push and pull factors, are not robust. (Recommendation)


Disabled children receive support and services that ensure that they are
protected and achieve. There is strong early identification of risks in relation
to female genital mutilation, forced marriage, gang affiliation and
radicalisation, overseen by the MSCB promote and protect young people
(PPYP) steering group. This is leading to proactive and immediate
safeguarding of young people, including legal orders, supported by
comprehensive multi-agency support.


Children living in private fostering arrangements receive a good service.
Comprehensive awareness raising has led to appropriate referrals and timely
assessments. In cases seen by inspectors, children were seen alone within
statutory timescales and they were appropriately safeguarded and supported
well.


Young people aged 16 and 17 who present as homeless receive timely and
thorough joint assessments with housing services. Assessments show that
social workers consider their views and those of their family. However,


recording does not consistently reflect social workers explanations to young
people about their legal entitlements in order to demonstrate that young
people have made informed choices about their futures. When young people
choose not to be looked after, suitable accommodation and support are
provided.

Arrangements for managing allegations against staff, carers and volunteers
who work with children in Merton are timely and appropriate, and thresholds
and intervention are applied appropriately. However, inspectors found that a
turnover of four different designated officers since April 2016, a change of line
management and the implementation of a new recording system had resulted
in inconsistent and unclear case recording. The local authority responded
promptly and appropriately and was able to evidence the work that had been
done, accompanied by a clear management overview of each case.


Inspectors saw very effective use of advocacy, including appropriate advocacy
for disabled children, when there have been issues of deprivation of liberty.
Increasing numbers of advocates are working with children subject to child
protection procedures, to ensure consideration of their views in conferences.


Social workers carefully consider the diverse needs of the families that they
work with. However, case recording is not fully reflective of the range of ways
in which this takes place and the thoughtful work undertaken.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Children looked after in Merton receive a consistently good service. The needs of
each individual child are known well. Children become looked after at the right
time and without unnecessary delay. Appropriate support and edge-of-care
services are used effectively as an alternative to care. Effective management
oversight of pre-proceedings and assessment work adds rigour to decision-making
and ensures safe oversight of the experiences for children on the threshold of
being looked after. Assessments for children returning home are robust, and
ongoing support is provided to the families.
The majority of children looked after enjoy a stable relationship with their social
workers. A small number of children have experienced changes of social worker
early in their care journey, which has made it more difficult to form trusting
relationships. Caseloads are maintained at a manageable level to enable social
workers to have time to develop relationships with the children. The service to
unaccompanied asylum-seeking children is impressive. It is sensitive and swift and
enables the children to settle quickly and to form friendships.
Childrens participation is encouraged, their individual needs are known and their
voice is evident. Children have access to advocates wherever they are placed, and
participation in reviews continues to strengthen. A committed and active Children
in Care Council (CiCC) influences service developments and provides consultation
and feedback on issues relating to their experiences.
The local authority is aware of the priorities within the children looked after
population and continues to work to meet the challenges of placement stability
and sufficiency for the significant proportion of older adolescents. Diversity is
given careful consideration. Risks associated with going missing and sexual
exploitation are known and effectively tracked on a multi-agency basis, and
effective work is undertaken to ensure that children are kept safe. However,
information gained through individual return home interviews is not always used
effectively to inform future planning.
Permanence options are considered early, ensuring that there is no delay in the
formulation of long-term plans. The work in the adoption service is outstanding.
Skilled and tenacious social work practice ensures good outcomes for children, and
prospective adopters receive excellent preparation and training. No children are
currently awaiting an adoptive placement.
The vast majority of care leavers are supported well. They develop the skills that
they need to live independently and to achieve their career and education goals.
Not all care leavers have received a copy of their health history and only a very
small number currently remain with their foster carers under a staying put
arrangement.


Inspection findings

The needs of children looked after are understood well by managers and staff.
The local authority has been proactive and rigorous in identifying and
understanding the needs of the looked after population, including the large
group of children aged over 16. Thresholds to care have been tested through
a time-limited edge of care panel and a comprehensive adolescent needs
analysis. Thresholds are applied appropriately and children receive the service
that they need to ensure that they are kept safe in a timely way. Clear
management oversight and accountability ensure that thresholds are
consistently applied. The head of service for children looked after agrees all
new admissions, adding further rigour to the decision-making.


Children are protected well through appropriate use of the court process when
necessary. Use of the Public Law Outline is effectively monitored and
supported by a court progression officer, who offers guidance and advice to
social workers. Progress is monitored well via case progression meetings and
a tracker system to ensure a timely response for children.


Permanence in all forms has a high priority and is considered early for
children. Regular permanency tracking meetings are chaired by the head of
service for children looked after and attended by heads of service for
safeguarding and resources, the court progression officer and the adoption
team manager. This ensures that plans progress in a timely and considered
manner. Separate consideration for children under five and over five provides
further rigour to permanence planning.


All types of placements, including with friends and relatives, are well
supported. Assessments of connected persons are completed in a timely way.
The number of children in special guardianship placements has increased in
the last year, and there have been no breakdowns of extended family
placements during this time.


The judiciary and the Child and Family Court Advisory and Support Service
(Cafcass) are extremely complimentary about the work of the local authority,
considering it robust and timely. With proceedings completed within an
average of 24 weeks, Merton is exceeding national guidelines and has
improved in this area of practice considerably.


When children return home to live with their families, a robust assessment
and comprehensive support ensure a successful and enduring rehabilitation.
Social workers remain involved and plans continue to be monitored.


Children experience good and stable relationships with social workers, who
are part of a dedicated looked after and permanence service. Greater stability
of social workers and manageable caseloads provide stronger social work


relationships to children and a deeper understanding of their needs. For a
small number of children, changes of social worker in the early part of their
care journey affected the quality of relationships and the formulation of their
plan.

Care planning is effective for the vast majority of children, and the needs of
each child are understood well. For a small minority of children, forward
planning is not sufficiently clear and does not include measurable timescales.
For a few children, the care plan does not reflect changes in the childs
circumstances. (Recommendation)


An effective and well-used advocacy service assists children to participate in
their reviews and provides support when they are making complaints. This
service is also available to children who are placed out of borough, ensuring
that no one is excluded. A successful independent visiting service supports
children, and more volunteers are currently being trained and already
matched to children. Due to the success of this service, in both numbers and
the relationship offered, there are still children waiting to be matched with an
independent visitor. Senior managers are aware of this and are considering
how to ensure that children do not miss out on this valued support.


An active CiCC influences and guides services for children looked after. The
CiCC has been involved in the development of The Pledge and invites other
services and professionals to attend, including the lead member for childrens
services and a representative from the housing department. The permanence
team for children looked after is seeking ways to engage younger children in
the CiCC, to ensure that the views of a wider age range are considered.


Children benefit from regular review meetings that are well attended and
inclusive. The local authority has piloted a new model of looked after reviews,
aimed at facilitating greater involvement by the child in the review meetings.
This is having a positive effect, with the most recent local authority data
showing 99.5% of children participating in their reviews. Independent
reviewing officers (IROs) report having access to court bundles and being
included more in the planning process. IROs challenge practice when
necessary, and disputes are resolved informally when possible. However, the
recording of this is inconsistent and, as a consequence, the footprint and
influence of the IROs are not evident on childrens files.


Childrens views are taken into account when forward planning, and case
records illustrate the work that is being completed with children and
discussions regarding their future. Appropriate contact with birth families is
supported, and children are assisted to understand their life histories at a time
and pace that is suitable for them. Life story work is of a consistently high
quality. A skilled and flexible in-house child and adolescent mental health
service (CAMHS) team offers consultation and guidance to social workers and
foster carers and direct work to children. The quality of this input is high, and


there are clear, improved outcomes for children. This systemic service reflects
the wider model of practice used in Merton and workers remain involved for
as long as the need remains.

The health of children looked after is effectively monitored and overseen. A
dedicated health nurse for children looked after has been in post since
November 2016 and ensures that the health needs of children looked after are
recognised and met. This includes proactive follow up of documents to ensure
that an initial health assessment can take place, and travelling to see children
out of authority if necessary. Regular reporting to the corporate parenting
board and the health strategy board, as well as providing a health presence in
child sexual exploitation meetings and missing meetings, results in a
widespread awareness of the health needs of children looked after.


Children and young people receive good support from the virtual school
wherever they live. Staff maintain good oversight of the progress of children
looked after. They know the circumstances of individual children and use this
information very effectively to work with others, such as social workers, carers
and schools, to plan the support that children need to make progress in their
learning. The large majority of children looked after (96%) go to a school
judged good or better by Ofsted. When they do not, staff carefully consider
whether the setting is meeting the individual needs of children.


A high proportion (74%) of children looked after have special educational
and/or complex needs. Their attainment is often below age-related
expectation. However, with the support of the virtual school and partners, the
majority of children looked after make good progress in their education. After
children leave school, nearly all successfully engage in further education,
training or employment.


Advisory teachers and the virtual school headteacher take the lead on the
planning of the education of children looked after. As a result, children have
good-quality, up-to-date and timely personal education plans that reflect their
needs well. Their education targets are clear and they help carers and
professionals to maintain good oversight of childrens progress. The pupil
premium grant and additional funding from the virtual school are used well to
support childrens academic progress and their personal development.


The virtual school team closely monitors children looked after who are missing
education and is an active partner in supporting their return to education. The
team makes strenuous efforts to ensure that children and young people
engage in learning. As a result, most children looked after attend school
regularly and few experience exclusion from school. There have not been any
permanent exclusions from school for the last seven years, and fixed-term
exclusions are reducing, both in terms of the number of episodes and the
number of children.



The majority of children in Merton benefit from secure and stable placements.
Sufficient in-house fostering households, with appropriate commissioning
arrangements, result in children living in well-matched placements. The
number of 16- and 17-year-olds who enter local authority care is increasing
and they now constitute 44% of the overall cohort. The local authority has
responded to this challenge in proactively analysing the need and tailoring
services as required. Despite the considerable effort and planning invested, it
remains a challenge to locate placements for teenagers who have complex
needs or who are at risk of sexual exploitation or exploitation by gangs. The
local authority continues to actively plan and respond. The learning and
development strategy is focusing on the skills needed to manage teenagers,
to encourage current carers to consider extending their offer.


Unaccompanied asylum-seeking children receive an impressive service. The
local authority ensures that it exercises its responsibilities without delay and
with considerable sensitivity. Regular, informal coffee shop group meetings
offer friendship and help to develop confidence and to reduce isolation.
Whenever possible, the children are placed in family placements. Good
connections with a local college enable the children to access courses to
develop their English language skills, and links with solicitors reduce the stress
of legal uncertainty.


Risks generally are understood, and social workers act quickly to protect
children in their care. Children at risk of sexual exploitation are effectively
monitored by the child sexual exploitation coordinator. In addition, there has
been some good joint work between childrens social care and youth offending
services, to address the risks associated with involvement with gangs.
Children who are missing from care are known, and risks are actively
monitored at weekly missing meetings. The recording of return home
interviews is not consistently good and, in a small number of cases, it could
not be determined what information had been gathered to inform risk
management and safety plans. (Recommendation)


Family finding for permanent foster placements is tenacious, and children who
are waiting for families benefit from the same determined approach as those
seeking adoptive families. Approved foster carers safely meet the needs of a
range of children, including those who have complex needs or disabilities and
groups of brothers and sisters. Within a well-run fostering service, foster
carers receive consistent support and regular announced and unannounced
visits from supervising social workers, and they are able to access a range of
appropriate and regularly available training. Allegations against foster carers
are carefully and robustly investigated and result in de-registration if
appropriate.


Foster carers understand delegated authority, and children are encouraged to
access activities that promote their social, educational and recreational needs.
Annual reviews are comprehensive and up to date.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is outstanding

The local authority gives high priority to identifying and quickly securing
adoption for children when adoption is in their best interests. Strategic
leaders, managers and social workers have an excellent knowledge about the
children in their care, and they are passionate about achieving the very best
outcomes.


Timely and accurate early identification of children, when adoption is in their
best interests, leads to appropriate and prompt family finding. Successful
outcomes are driven through case progression, monthly tracking and
permanence and care planning meetings. Managers maintain a stringent
overview for each child and provide an early alert to the adoption social
workers and wider consortium about the childrens profiles. Consortium
meetings facilitate further exchange and discussion about prospective
matches. Children benefit from early identification of potential matches with
approved adopters, including before the granting of the placement order, and
move swiftly to live with their new families following the court decision.


The experienced senior practitioners in the adoption team are highly skilled
and know their children and adopters well. Family finding is creative and
tenacious and is supported effectively by a skilled publicity officer who
provides professional profiling and marketing. Childrens drawings form the
backdrop to their profiles, which are highly personal and regularly refreshed
and updated. An extensive range of local and national family finding methods
are used and this results in an equally positive outcome for very young babies
through to older children who have complex needs. The success of the service
has resulted in there being no children currently awaiting an adoptive match,
and all children who require adoption are placed.


The assessment, preparation, training and support of adopters are exceptional
and are consistently of the highest standard, being insightful, highly effective
and responsive. Prospective adopters benefit from hearing powerful histories
from birth parents, adopters and adopted adults at introduction and
preparation sessions. Feedback from adopters to inspectors reflected the
impact of the high-quality preparation, including the increased empathy for
birth parents and a balanced expectation of parenting as adopters.


The quality of prospective adopter reports is impressive. Child permanence
reports are comprehensive and analytical and lead to a logical
recommendation for adoption. Social workers comprehensively explore a wide
range of potential issues with sensitivity and insight. All assessments seen by
inspectors bring out the unique needs of children and the individual skill of
adoptive parents, and some are of an outstanding quality. Recruitment is
effective and has led to a significant increase in the number of approved


adopters in the last year (from three to 12), which means that there is an
increased pool of suitable families waiting to provide children with a
permanent home. A well-embedded foster for adoption scheme ensures that
social workers discuss this option with all prospective adopters. A specially
tailored workshop is then offered to interested adopters to help to prepare
them further.

Social workers are determined in their efforts to find families for brothers and
sisters, children from a range of cultural and religious backgrounds and
children who have complex needs. This persistence has achieved successful
adoptions for brother and sister groups, for children who have special needs
and for older children. All of the 11 children adopted last year moved into
their adoptive families in 10 months or under. This is a significant
improvement on the previous year. For a very small number of children who
have had a change of plan away from adoption, this is well informed and the
alternative permanent placement has been secured. Inspectors have seen
positive progress for all children, and there are no children currently waiting
for a family.


Performance against the adoption scorecard demonstrates that the local
authority is performing well and has made further significant progress in the
past year. The consistently improving trajectory of Mertons performance is
evidence of the effectiveness of the authoritys sharp focus on timeliness. This
is strong practice, confirmed by feedback from the judiciary and Cafcass.


Adopters spoke consistently of the excellent quality and timeliness of
matching and placement. Success with foster for adoption placements and the
fast-track process for second-time adopters contribute to this achievement.
Excellent foster for adoption arrangements have resulted in the successful
early placement of three babies in foster for adoption families, directly from
hospital. Children benefit from particularly resourceful and, where appropriate,
culturally sensitive pre- and post-birth work to safeguard mothers and their
unborn babies and to ensure a nurturing environment after they are born.
Support for birth parents is outstanding in helping them to make difficult
decisions and to remain involved through indirect contact and by providing a
wealth of information for life story work.


A gradual phased introduction to their new family prepares children well for
adoption and proceeds at the childs pace. Social workers are creative in
supporting and directing the process, using photographs and other resources
to help children to make the transition calmly and positively. The timeframe
for the transition is led by the child. Foster for adoption introductions are
supported sensitively to take place between birth parents and adopters.


The independent panel chair and the agency decision maker (ADM) regularly
discuss childrens plans, and inspectors saw evidence of appropriate strong
challenge. Together, they achieve the highest standards in the planning for


children. The highly effective cycle of quality assurance is having a noticeable
impact, and panel and ADM decisions are very well considered and thorough.
Adoptive parents benefit from meeting with the medical adviser at panel,
which gives them the opportunity to discuss the potential health needs of
children so that they are well informed.

Adoption support is excellent and highly creative. It ensures that adopted
children form strong attachments to their families, and potential issues are
identified and addressed at the earliest stage. There is a range of provision
coordinated by a dedicated social worker post. Annual fun days for adopted
children, theraplay and individual parenting sessions are available. The
consortium provides a range of established post-adoption support groups for
birth parents and adopted adults. There is effective and creative use of
adoption support funding (ASF) and this is having a positive impact for
children and families. Families are aware of how to access the provision, and
all families who have requested support are receiving it. ASF is helping
children and families to access therapeutic work and dyadic developmental
psychotherapy. Adoption support is extended to all children in the household
when required.


Later life letters are sensitive, non-judgemental and written so that children
can understand how and why they were adopted. Letters are child-focused,
compassionate and insightful, with a respectful understanding of the
experience of the birth parents. Letterbox arrangements are robust.
Compelling life story work helps children to understand and make sense of
their past and the reasons that they are unable to live with their birth families.
Excellent work is undertaken to enable children to understand identity,
including cultural identity. The virtual school recognises the unique education
needs of adopted children and provides additional support for children placed
for adoption.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good

The majority of young people who leave care receive good support that builds
their skills and confidence well as they move towards independence. Social
workers and personal advisers in the dedicated 14-plus team are in touch with
them through regular face-to-face contact. Young people described their
workers as approachable and supportive.


If young people disengage, staff make concerted efforts to establish contact
through unannounced visits to their homes, via letter, text and email, through
known family and friends and through the job centre, if appropriate. In the
best instances, this results in young people re-engaging with the support
services on offer.



Social workers and personal advisers know and understand young peoples
individual circumstances and needs well. They manage known risks to young
people, including sexual exploitation, well. They develop effective plans with
partners, such as the police, which are responsive to young peoples changing
needs, and over time young people stabilise their lives and make good
progress. In a small minority of cases, managers do not intervene quickly
enough to help staff to consider alternative plans, when young people are not
moving forward with their lives.


Planning is effective for the large majority of young people who have an upto-date pathway plan that covers well all aspects of their lives. Plans are
detailed, and young people are effectively involved in developing their own
plans. A minority of pathway plans are insufficiently detailed, and there is not
enough emphasis on the support that the young person will receive to achieve
their goals. The pathway plans of a small minority of young people are out of
date, and planning to meet the young peoples current needs is insufficient,
although inspectors did not see any detriment to young people as a result of
this. (Recommendation)


The virtual school, social workers and personal advisers effectively support
young people to navigate the education, employment and training (EET)
options available to them. As a result, a good proportion of care leavers are in
EET. Within this overall positive picture, senior managers and staff recognise
that staff do not sufficiently promote apprenticeships to young people.
Managers are developing strategies to ensure that apprenticeships are more
widely available to vulnerable young people.


Young people seeking to study at university receive particularly good
assistance prior to applying for a university place, and they receive practical
help with their applications and personal statements. This results in a high
number of young people studying at university. The local authority is flexible
and creative in extending support. While studying, young people receive good
financial support and additional funding, for example, to purchase essential
books and for travel to see relatives.


The large majority of care leavers live in suitable accommodation. All young
people who spoke to inspectors feel that they are safe where they live. With
good support from carers, the 14-plus team and housing providers, many
young people make a successful transition from care to living independently.


There is a good range of accommodation options for young people. Most care
leavers live in semi-independent accommodation with support available that is
appropriate for their particular needs. Bed and breakfast accommodation is
never used; young people who need emergency accommodation are usually
housed within the existing housing provider network. However, the use of
staying put arrangements is underdeveloped. Managers are aware of this and


are developing plans to improve the opportunities for young people to remain
with their foster carers beyond the age of 18. (Recommendation)

Young people receive good support in developing the skills and knowledge
that they need to live independently and to manage their own affairs. Prior to
securing their own tenancies, they attend useful workshops on managing their
money, budgeting to run a household and home maintenance. With ongoing
help from social workers and personal advisers, young people manage their
tenancies successfully. There have been no tenancy breakdowns in the last
two years for young people moving into their first homes.


Care leavers who arrive as unaccompanied asylum-seeking children receive
very good support from the 14-plus team. Young people value highly the
support and help that they receive from their foster carers and social workers.
Young people settle quickly in foster care, attend school or college and
develop well in their spoken English. Their health needs are assessed and met
promptly. A monthly drop-in provides excellent opportunities for these young
people to develop friendships with their peers, receive informal support and
gain new experiences, such as taking part in outdoor activities and restaurant
visits. Many make excellent progress in their studies and are highly ambitious
for their future.


Most young people are aware of their rights and entitlements, such as the
support that they will receive while at college or university and the financial
help that they are entitled to when they set up their first homes. The
advocacy service has recently been extended to include care leavers to
support this further.


Staff effectively help young people to manage their own health needs
independently. On turning 18 years old, young people receive a useful leaflet
on important health services and contacts. Most young people register with
their local doctors and dentists. Although this year all young people who have
turned 18 years old have received a copy of their health history, this is not the
case for all those young people currently open to the leaving care team.
(Recommendation)


Care leavers who are more vulnerable, such as those in custody, are equally
well supported by staff, who are sometimes the only regular visitors while
they serve their sentences. Most young people have appropriate
accommodation available to them on their release from custody. Staff are
proactive in trying to secure EET options for young people at the time that
they leave custody and, in most cases, work well with other partners, such as
the virtual school, to ensure that young people have every opportunity to
succeed.


Leadership, management and
governance

Outstanding

Senior managers and politicians model a constructive, enquiring and engaging
style of leadership and management. It comprises a blend of compassion and
concern for the most vulnerable children and families, and conspicuous care and
support for frontline workers. A highly visible thread of meaningful childrens
participation and influence is apparent. These elements are balanced with high
expectations for skilled, evidence-based social work that improves the
circumstances for children.
This leadership and management landscape creates a lively, challenging and
rewarding environment for social workers. Strong frontline managers, carefully
managed workloads and an evidence-informed approach create time for social
workers to practise creative and effective direct work with children. This leads to
well-crafted assessments and interventions, which are concentrated on
understanding and improving the experiences of children.
High-quality data and performance information are used well at all strategic and
operational groups and across all management layers. The performance and
quality assurance frameworks are closely interwoven and provide a wide range of
useful information. This leads to services, teams or individual workers that require
attention being quickly identified. Equally, senior managers identify and celebrate
many examples of good social work, offering practitioners ample exposure to
effective social work practice. Leaders and managers are ambitious and driven to
continually develop the services that vulnerable children receive. They strive to
improve even when evidence indicates that they are already performing well.
Departmental and inter-agency senior management communication is regular and
purposeful, ensuring that childrens issues are prominent in the Health and Wellbeing Board and the Safer and Stronger Partnership Board. Relationships and lines
of accountability between the Childrens Trust Board and MSCB are strong and
clear. Strategic partnership and governance arrangements across the spectrum of
boards provide a cooperative climate for high-level conversations. This is
subsequently reflected in improved or new approaches to operational
arrangements, including, for example, young people exposed to extremist
influences, gangs and sexual exploitation.
Creative recruitment and detailed and continuous promotion of social workers
professional development at all levels of experience ensure a skilled workforce.
The impact of staff turnover is mitigated appropriately by strong operational
management oversight.



The DCS is highly skilled, dedicated and experienced. As the longest serving
DCS in London, she provides a sustained and energetic commitment to
continually improving outcomes for the most vulnerable children. The quality
of all services is good or better, building further on the good judgements at
the last Ofsted inspection in 2012. The leadership style emphasises the core
values of compassion, humility, social justice and inclusion. These sit
alongside a requirement for the highest standards of frontline practice with
children and families, and poor practice is actively addressed. This approach is
apparent in the DCSs leadership of the Childrens Trust, which maintains an
authoritative and informed overview of performance.


Strong and impressive early help services, improved educational attainment
and high-quality targeted and specialist services are prioritised in equal
measure by leaders and senior managers. These include a prominent focus on
disabled children and children who have special educational needs. The DCS
maintains a variety of formal and informal routes for regularly meeting
frontline staff, foster parents and children, including those who are looked
after and unaccompanied asylum seekers. This provides the DCS with a
comprehensive and well-informed range of insights into the effectiveness of
frontline practice.


An influential corporate parenting board, chaired by the longstanding and
experienced chief executive, illustrates the importance given at the highest
level of the local authority to effective cross-council responses to the needs of
children looked after. It enables the chief executive to understand directly the
performance of frontline services. Successful collaborative working yields
results for children. As an example, the formation of an integrated
commissioning hub assisted in opening negotiations with local social housing
providers. This resulted in the provision of additional priority accommodation
for young people leaving care and led to the housing department becoming
standing members of the board. The boards priorities are carefully considered
and take into account the joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA),
performance information and the views of the CiCC.


Strong partnership, shared accountability and challenge are clearly evident in
Merton. The chief executive, the lead member for childrens services and the
DCS all have active chair or membership roles in the Safer Merton Partnership
Board, the Violence against Women and Girls Group, the Health and Wellbeing Board and the Children and Young Peoples Overview and Scrutiny
Panel. This has resulted, for example, in the chair of the Health and Wellbeing Board and the lead member meeting before each board to plan the
inclusion of childrens priorities in the agenda. Any impact on childrens health
outcomes is considered in all local authority priorities. Additionally, progress
has been made in targeted objectives, such as improving the take-up of
immunisations and the joint commissioning of community health services for
the under-fives, with the clinical commissioning group. The capacity and
availability of CAMHS practitioners in social work teams have increased,


including the provision of more direct support and consultation for children
looked after.

The DCS chairs the Youth Crime Executive Board. This cross-representation
means that domestic abuse services for families, including MARACs and the
independent domestic violence advisers, are closely aligned with adult
services. Well-devised strategic and operational relationships with the police
enable rigorous responses to child sexual exploitation, gangs, missing children
and other adolescent vulnerabilities. Similarly, frequent meetings with the
chair of the MSCB result in well-aligned single- and multi-agency training
programmes and auditing schedules. The assistant director social care and
youth inclusion chairs the MSCBs quality subgroup, demonstrating an intent
to expand relevant parts of the practice model across partner agencies, and to
have oversight of the quality of multi-agency practice.


Interventions with children and young people vulnerable to extremist
influences are well planned and effective. Arrangements for multi-agency
governance, awareness raising, operational oversight and partnership work
with the local police and counter-terrorist police are all well designed,
including regular work with local schools. A partnership board coordinates
intelligence carefully and oversees a wide spectrum of community cohesion
work, embracing local mosques and churches through a safe faith approach.
Local MSCB guidance for partner agencies is clear and helpful. A Channel
panel meets monthly to plan and review interventions with a small number of
children where concerns are greater.


Children exposed to risks of sexual exploitation receive protective and welldeveloped strategic and multi-agency responses. Multi-agency governance
arrangements are tightly coordinated and led by the MSCB. A multi-agency
sexual exploitation panel closely tracks the impact of risk reduction work
provided by a range of locally commissioned services. Joint work with the
police is highly integrated, and targeted strategy meetings are attended by all
involved agencies, chaired by an experienced and knowledgeable specialist
child sexual abuse coordinator. The coordinator routinely checks the quality of
responses to contacts and referrals into the MASH, and is further developing
the use of screening and assessment tools through ongoing consultations with
social workers. Multiple risks to missing children are also well understood and
evaluated through pan-agency weekly meetings. However, the individual
response for each child through completion of return home interviews is
inconsistent. This is being carefully monitored and addressed by senior
managers.


High-quality performance information is closely scrutinised at all management
levels and at the childrens and young peoples overview and scrutiny
committee, through weekly, monthly, bi-monthly and quarterly datasets. The
chief executive and DCS discuss performance information at their regular
meetings. Accessible dashboards provide snapshots of all local and national


indicators across the spectrum of services, and useful hyperlinks allow closer
examination of particular teams and individual practitioners. This enables early
attention to emerging difficulties.

Performance management and reporting are firmly established with a stable
team manager group. Remedial actions result in notable improvements,
including, for example, additional investment to increase social worker
capacity in the first response teams. This resulted in an improvement in both
the quality and timeliness of assessments. Following manager attention,
participation rates in EET for young people leaving care climbed above
national levels.


Performance and quality assurance frameworks are closely aligned and
mutually reinforcing. Auditing is well targeted, based on sound performance
intelligence, resulting in practice learning and improvement. When
performance trends require greater exploration, periodic deeper dives are
undertaken. An adolescent needs analysis is a recent example of a detailed
and probing analysis of factors underlying placement instability, triggered by a
surge in the numbers of older young people becoming looked after. A care
leavers service improvement board, chaired by an assistant director, has led
to important service improvements. The assistant director childrens social
care meets regularly with the team manager group to discuss and highlight
learning points arising from audits and quality assurance activities, further
demonstrating a deeply ingrained learning and development culture.


New elements of the practice model are being introduced and piloted,
including regular practice observations and a live auditing model to promote
coaching for social workers facing difficult, complex issues in their casework.
The DCS, assistant director social care and youth inclusion and all managers
maintain a high level of interest, curiosity and knowledge about childrens
cases. Social workers highly value these appreciative inquiries and interest in
their work. Regular, high-quality supervision and management oversight are
evident across all services. They are largely evaluative, analytical and well
recorded, providing helpful direction for practitioners.


Developments in childrens needs are understood by increasingly bespoke
JSNA reports that are regularly updated. Incisive analyses have been
undertaken, for example, of child sexual exploitation and children living in
families exposed to the higher risks associated with the trigger trio of
parenting vulnerabilities: domestic abuse, mental ill health and substance
misuse. Joint and single commissioning of universal and targeted services is
concentrated on the most deprived parts of the borough, where outcomes for
many children are known to be poorer. Young people are both involved and
highly influential as young inspectors throughout commissioning
programmes. Their participation in the design and development of a
forthcoming community hub has been extensive. Commissioned services, and


those provided directly by the local authority, such as parenting programmes,
are subject to rigorous and regular contract monitoring.

Both the judiciary and Cafcass report a consistently high standard of evidence
preparation by social workers in care proceedings, which are completed within
the required 26-week timescale. Communication with the local authority is
positive and constructive, enabling any issues to be quickly addressed.


Mertons social work practice model is at the centre of the continuous
development of effective and evidence-based social work with children and
families. The model is based on systemic theories and appreciative, critical
enquiries to assess the strengths, needs and risks in families. It is led by the
assistant director for childrens social care, who chairs a social work board and
a practice development group. The model features a number of evidencebased practice tools and direct work methods, such as motivational
interviewing with older children. Social workers and managers are provided
with phased and continuous training in the model through a close and wellestablished partnership with a local university. Social workers ongoing
professional development is promoted at all stages of their experience. Welldefined career progression pathways encourage committed and talented social
workers to progress and flourish. The continuing development of the practice
model is supported by additional funding and a well-formulated project plan,
illustrating a demonstrable corporate and departmental commitment to highquality social work with children and families.


A restless ambition to continuously develop better practice is discernible, led
by the assistant director for childrens social care who is a committed,
motivational and skilled social work leader. The learning and development
programme is centred on the model, providing many openings for social
workers to learn new approaches, for example in direct work with
adolescents. Senior managers are outward facing and regularly invite external
peer reviews of their services. They are actively engaged with, or lead,
regional groups and initiatives and are eager to learn about social work
practice in other local authorities. This is exemplified in the leadership of the
introduction of a Family Drug and Alcohol Court, and the active participation in
an evolving social impact bond edge-of-care service, which will include multisystemic and functional family therapies.


Annual turnover of social workers is approximately 25%. This turnover occurs
despite a supportive and dynamic professional environment for social workers,
positively reported on in their annual survey. Recruitment and retention, a
constant senior manager preoccupation, are of critical importance, featuring
constructive joint work with human resources. Recruitment initiatives are
widespread and continuous. Additional annual funding of 1 million each year
over the last three years, through corporate growth and contingency use as
well as recycling money within the childrens services department, has
increased frontline social worker posts by 33% and enabled manageable


caseloads and smaller teams with tighter management oversight. Students
and newly qualified social workers are provided with high-quality support and
training. The Frontline programme is well established and Step Up to Social
Work is being developed. Market supplements and retention incentives are
used to attract experienced social workers and to retain them in service areas
where turnover is typically greater. Senior managers resist recruiting too many
newly qualified social workers, as they are aware that this will add to the
responsibilities and pressures on their existing experienced frontline workers.
Senior managers remain resolute in their commitment to recruit able and
committed social workers, who will continue to provide high-quality services to
the most vulnerable children and families.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is outstanding
Executive summary
Mertons Local Safeguarding Children Board (MSCB) is outstanding. It is highly
effective in holding agencies to account for their individual safeguarding
arrangements in the welfare and protection of children. The strength and maturity
of the board are reflected in the established strategic arrangements and the high
level of engagement across the partnership and with other strategic boards. The
board benefits from decisive strategic leadership by the independent chair and a
highly competent business manager. The board is well attended by capable senior
strategic leaders who can influence safeguarding in their individual agencies. The
contribution and participation of the voluntary sector and lay members greatly
enhance the effectiveness of the boards work within the wider community. There
is effective communication between the chief executive, DCS, lead member and
chair of the MSCB, and accountability for the work of the board is strong.
The boards strategic priorities are relevant and informed by detailed analysis of
local need to target the most vulnerable children, including children at risk of
sexual exploitation and extremism and children missing from home or care. There
is a sustained commitment to and focus on the delivery of the boards
safeguarding priorities, including families in which adult mental health, neglect,
alcohol, drugs and domestic violence feature in childrens lives. The safeguarding
needs of children pervade the boards work and business and subgroup plans.
The systems and processes underpinning the work of the board result in the
availability of detailed multi-agency performance information of frontline practice,
including around the application of thresholds for intervention (known locally as
Mertons Well-Being Model) and compliance with the pan-London child protection
procedures. The board promotes a culture of continuous development. Learning
from SCRs and learning improvement reviews (LiRs) is used to improve
safeguarding practice and in the development of multi-agency policies. The routine
and innovative use of single- and multi-agency case file audit means that the
board can assure itself of the quality and impact of frontline social work practice
and take decisive action to drive improvement. The collaboration of partners at
both strategic and operational level allows for alerts and trends to be identified and
acted on swiftly.
There is a comprehensive suite of training available and attendance is good. The
impact of training is actively monitored to ensure that it remains relevant and
impacts on raising awareness and changing behaviours in the protection of
children. The contribution and participation of children and young people are
actively promoted and used well in the design and delivery of training and the
development of priorities. There are no recommendations for the MSCB.



The MSCB is highly effective. There are strong governance arrangements
underpinned by established partnerships with other strategic boards, including
the Health and Well-being Board, the Corporate Parenting Board, the
Childrens Trust and the Safer and Stronger Partnership. Strategic leaders,
elected members and partners work collaboratively and focus relentlessly on
what matters to children in keeping them safe and promoting their welfare.
There is strong engagement between the chief executive, DCS and lead
member; roles and responsibilities are clear and accountability is strong.
Suitable measures are in place to strengthen the partnership further with the
Adult Safeguarding Board.


The independent chair provides decisive strategic leadership and challenge to
partners. The chair has been central and extremely influential in driving
forward the boards priorities and is highly respected by partners. The
maturity of partners relationships is reflected in the mutual trust and respect
shown to each other. This is reflected in the sustained focus on ensuring that
childrens welfare and protection are at the heart of their work. Members
expect, receive and are open to challenge, as the board seeks assurance on
individual agency safeguarding responsibilities. Partners contribution to the
work of the board is valued and acted on. This supports collaborative and
effective working relationships.


The business manager is highly experienced and competent and actively
monitors the risk and challenge log and drives the business plan forward. His
detailed knowledge and experience of MSCB priorities and subgroup work
plans is impressive. The work of the board also benefits from excellent
business administrators. This supports detailed scrutiny in the monitoring and
reviewing of the progress of plans. The establishment of the business
improvement group two years ago has enabled additional rigorous scrutiny of
the boards priorities and supports partners in challenging each other in
delivering against their individual agencys safeguarding responsibilities, on
time and to the highest standard.


The experience and expertise of board members are used exceptionally well in
partners discharging their safeguarding responsibilities and in holding each
other to account. This is a notable strength, which permeates the work of the
board and subgroups, the impact of which is demonstrated through the
maturity of the partnership in collaboratively working to deliver single and
joint priorities. There is a shared vision to safeguard all Merton children and a
sustained and unyielding commitment in driving forward MSCB priorities:
Think Family, vulnerable adolescents and early help. The boards priorities are
the result of rigorous analysis of local need and reflect learning from SCRs,
LiRs and national issues. The subgroup plans are closely aligned to the boards
priorities and crosscutting themes around vulnerable children, including
disabled children and children at risk of sexual exploitation. The joint focus on
families in which neglect features in childrens lives is well managed.



The culture of openness across the partnership is established and embedded.
This, coupled with effective systems and processes, makes for a powerful
force in the board holding partners to account and in understanding the
effectiveness and impact of the quality of services in safeguarding children.
There is a strong engagement across the partnership, including with schools,
the voluntary sector, faith and wider community groups on safeguarding
issues. Members are drawn from a wide range of partners who hold strategic
safeguarding roles in their agency, and are experienced and influential in their
organisations. All partners make a proportionate financial contribution to
MSCB.


Members, including lay members, actively drive the business planning
priorities. Members receive appropriate induction training and are clear about
their collective and individual responsibilities. The impact of joint work on
increasing awareness and supporting change is well evidenced. The business
manager is effective and determined in driving and supporting change within
the community to promote and safeguard children.


The understanding and application of thresholds by partners are reviewed
regularly to ensure that they remain fit for purpose. The influence of the
MSCB in evaluating and scrutinising the application of thresholds across
frontline practice, including early help, is far reaching and innovative. The
routine and detailed audit of frontline practice, including single- and multiagency case file audit, focuses on the evaluation of the quality of childrens
lived experience and progress and is exemplary.


The wide range of audit activity includes a recent comprehensive audit of
private fostering and was undertaken to ensure that practice met required
regulatory standards. A recent sexual abuse threshold audit report in October
police, childrens social care and early years services, effectively reviewed the
quality of decision-making. A themed multi-agency audit of child sexual
exploitation over a number of years helped the board to determine whether
changes in safeguarding practice were sustained. This is an effective approach
to evaluating practice and determining the long-term impact of joint work with
this vulnerable group. The quality assurance subgroup effectively conducted
an audit of the quality of decision-making and practice with regards to
children when disability is a feature of their lives. The learning from these
audits informs business planning and wider training needs, including joint
training.


There is an exceptionally effective section 11 process. The incisive analysis
through the annual peer challenge and review meeting process ensures
appropriate and respectful challenge of partners compliance with
safeguarding standards and seeks assurance of impact on practice. All senior
agency representatives attend these annual challenge sessions. Partners


spoken to by inspectors said that they found the process to be rigorous but
supportive.

The terms of reference for the child death overview panel (CDOP) and all
subgroups are clear and link well to the boards priorities. The recently
established Merton CDOP, which had been a joint panel with a neighbouring
authority, fulfils its statutory responsibilities. The rapid response team
convenes within timescales. Membership of the board is at appropriate senior
and strategic level. The panel sensitively and appropriately supports the
engagement of families. The panel uses learning events well to drive
improvement. For example, a presentation to health professionals covering a
five-year review of the work of CDOP was received well. Information on
trends in cases of child deaths, both locally and nationally, is distributed
through articles and has included features on alcohol poisoning, child mental
health issues and internet safety.


The MSCB Annual Report 201516 gives a clear commentary and assessment
of the performance and effectiveness of services across the partnership. The
report outlines progress in the reporting period and future challenges for the
board linked to the Wood Review. Since the last inspection, the board has
reconstituted itself, placing greater emphasis on quality assurance. It has
sharpened its focus on prioritising work at a time of reducing resources to
ensure maximum impact on the welfare and protection of children across the
partnership. The report provides an overview of each of the subgroups against
the work plans, including the CDOP, and in particular focuses on the SCR in
respect of Child B published this year and the LiR for Child C. The report
reflects clear links with other strategic boards, and current priorities for 2016
executive, the Childrens Trust and the Health and Well-being Board, enabling
effective challenge on key areas of improvement.


The MSCB has an established learning and improvement framework with
statutory partners. The board has recently endorsed a revised learning and
development strategy and has aligned learning needs to the boards priorities.
This ensures that safeguarding training, including multi-agency training across
the workforce, is targeted at the appropriate level. The opportunity for
learning through SCRs and LiRs is robust and clearly aligned to the boards
strategic priorities, subgroup work plans and frontline practice.


There are detailed action plans following the recent SCR and LiR, which
appropriately link to recommendations. Progress is closely monitored through
the quality assurance subgroup and the business improvement group. The
importance of joint working in protecting children and young people where
mental health and neglect feature are key priorities of the board. There is
increasing joint development work with the adult mental health trust, and a
Think Family coordinator has recently been appointed to strengthen strategic
and operational integration across childrens and adults services. The impact


of neglect, which featured in the learning review of Child C, is underpinned by
the MSCB multi-agency neglect strategy and implementation and action plan
to ensure that neglect is recognised and that childrens voices are heard and
acted on.

The local authority uses learning from reviews to effect change. For example,
the learning from an SCR in 2014, underpinned by joint research with
education colleagues, has been effectively used to drive improvement by
promoting a lower tolerance of chronic school absence. This has helped to
identify vulnerable children, including children at risk of sexual exploitation
and those missing from education or care. This effective joint approach is now
established and embedded in practice. This demonstrates the direct link
between learning and improving practice. It also reflects the commitment of
the board to driving improvement. Social workers and other professionals who
spoke to inspectors understand well the findings of reviews and learning from
training.


The comprehensive range of high-quality, up-to-date policies and procedures
are exemplary. These are regularly reviewed by the board and the business
improvement group to ensure compliance and to ensure that policies are
relevant. The board promotes a strong and transparent learning culture,
setting high standards and drawing effectively on independent research. The
promote and protect young people subgroup (PPYP) provides strategic and
effective oversight of multi-agency policies, protocols and procedures
regarding children at risk, including risk from sexual exploitation, radicalisation
and extremism.


The board has access to a comprehensive suite of multi-agency performance
information, which is monitored and regularly and actively scrutinised. Joint
performance information is detailed and clearly aligned with audit activity and
supported by commentary on progress. The good attendance of partners at
MSCB and subgroup meetings supports effective analysis and challenge.


Listening to childrens views permeates the boards work in ensuring their
welfare and protection. The most recent joint annual conference for
practitioners and managers, which focused on the complexities of domestic
abuse, involved young people. The conference content underpinned the
strategic approach to engage partners and professionals, and to raise
awareness and understanding.


The voice of children and young people is actively encouraged, including
through their attendance at MSCB meetings. One example is a research
project on young peoples views on safeguarding that was commissioned in
partnership with the board and London South Bank University. The project
took into account the views of 148 young people in secondary schools,
including children subject to child protection plans. A training day was held in
May 2017 to consider lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender issues, and those


questioning their sexuality or gender, and young people ran part of the
programme. The event focused on mental health, transgender identity and
hate crime. A shorter version of the event was recently presented to the board
by young people from a local school.

There is close alignment between the training programme and strategic
priorities, ensuring the effective targeting of programmes to drive
improvement in safeguarding practice. Future training needs are identified
through the extensive single and joint audit programmes and findings from
SCRs, LiRs and national and local issues. Attendance is very good, and
feedback at the point of delivery and three months later is sought to evaluate
impact on practice and to inform future training needs.


The board is actively engaged with the Prevent duty on radicalisation, which
includes a wide range of partners, including the police, schools and early
years settings, and faith, voluntary groups and the wider communities. MSCB
guidance on safeguarding children and young people from the harmful
messages of violent extremism and terrorism has been reviewed to ensure its
current relevance. The guidance is clear and informs partners of their
safeguarding responsibilities. It incorporates helpful lists for recognising risk
and links to referral pathways for the MASH and the Channel programme,
which focuses on providing support at an early stage to people who are
identified as being vulnerable to being drawn into terrorism. The board has
also consulted with a range of community groups, especially with regard to its
strategy on female genital mutilation, which is reviewed appropriately through
the policy subgroup.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This includes children and young
people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and starting
their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted
and one Ofsted inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Louise Hocking
Deputy lead inspector: Nick Stacey
Team inspectors: Tara Geere, Matthew Reed, Kate Malleson, Jon Bowman, Mary
Candlin
Senior data analysts: Neil Powling, Stewart Hartshorne
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance, Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for children looked after and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


