North Tyneside
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 27 February to 23 March 2017
Report published: 13 June 2017

Childrens services in North Tyneside are good

Good

permanence

Good


Good


Outstanding


Good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Services for children in North Tyneside are good. In the vast majority of cases seen
by inspectors, children have benefited from high-quality social work and wellcoordinated partnership working, and this has demonstrably improved their lives.
There is an excellent focus on seeking the views of children to shape services and to
ensure that individual targeted services meet their needs.
Strong political and senior manager leadership ensures that improving outcomes for
children and young people is at the heart of North Tyneside Council. This shapes its
strategic priorities and effectively influences partners in sharing their ambition and
commitment to improve childrens lives. Engagement and participation are a
particular strength and children are not only heard, but their views are shaping and
driving service improvement. Good workforce development, commissioning of
services and performance monitoring contribute to delivering effective services and
solid social work practice. However, actions identified from thematic and casework
audits are not always specific and measurable or have timescales. At the last Ofsted
inspection in 2012, safeguarding and services for children looked after were judged
to be good. The quality of those services has continued to be developed and
improved, and inspectors saw evidence of robust social work practice that is
improving the lives of children in North Tyneside.
There is a broad and developing early help offer, which is of good quality and
supports families, preventing children from needing to be referred to childrens
services. Significant harm is identified and responded to well. Assessments are timely
and comprehensive, although in a small number of cases not always updated to
reflect the changing needs of children. Planning for children is effective and driven by
social workers who know children well and supported by effective operational
partnership working, providing a wide range of services to support and protect
children. Responses to children at risk of sexual exploitation and those who go
missing are well developed and effective. A good range of accommodation informed
by a prompt assessment is provided for 16- and 17-year olds who present as
homeless. Awareness raising of private fostering is good, but the social work
response following notification is not always prompt. The designated officer
coordinates agencies well when issues are raised about professionals who may be
behaving inappropriately towards children. However, the completion of investigations
is not always timely.
North Tyneside Council is a highly ambitious and nurturing corporate parent for all of
its children and ensures that there is an excellent range of work experience and
apprenticeship opportunities.
Edge of care services work well to support children to stay at home. Children only
become looked after when it is in their best interests, and, in these instances, the
response is timely and appropriate. A good range of permanence options combined
with a wide range of local accommodation, including foster carers and childrens
homes, means that most children maintain their local support networks. This


promotes stability and security for children. Effective services from health, education
and specialist support promote good outcomes. The caseloads of independent
reviewing officers (IROs) who chair child protection conferences and children looked
after reviews are high, and this impacts on their ability to monitor progress between
meetings. Children and carers who met inspectors reported that they have too many
changes of social worker.
Achieving permanence for children is a key priority in North Tyneside. There is strong
oversight of children to ensure that children find their forever homes. Although it
has taken a long time to secure permanence through adoption for some children,
this is due to the additional time required to find adoptive families for older children
and sibling groups. Overall, adoption timeliness is improving. There is a wide range
of effective post-adoption support available, including therapeutic assessments of
attachment to enhance adopters understanding of childrens needs. Life story work
and later life letters, however, take too long to complete and are of variable quality.
Adopters who met inspectors reported that they feel extremely well supported and
prepared throughout the process.
The services for care leavers are outstanding. This is because council leaders and
senior managers have high aspirations for all care leavers and consistently listen to
the views of young people and value their contribution. The care leavers team has
an excellent focus on working proactively with the young people. As a result, all care
leavers are in touch with their workers, live in suitable and safe accommodation, take
increasing responsibility for their health and have excellent support to continue their
training and to find jobs. They benefit from highly effective individual support,
including through their pathway plans, and many of them have benefited from
apprenticeships with the council. The result is that the vast majority have the skills
and knowledge that they need to become successful adults.
Despite much good work across childrens services, the recording of social workers
involvement with children is inconsistent. There are variable approaches to social
work recording and completion of key documentation. The quality of supervision
notes is also variable and, for a small number of cases, this means that it is not
always possible to evidence reflective and directive management oversight. These
issues are due to an electronic client database, which is barely fit for purpose. The
local authority is well aware of the issues and is procuring another system, which will
become live in 2018. In the interim, it has put in additional support to address
current deficits and to ensure that the problems with recording do not impact on the
high quality of support that social workers provide to children and their families.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. Three were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements /
arrangements for the protection of children was published in May 2012. The local
authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was published in May 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since July 2015.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services.
 The chief executive has been in post since November 2013.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since March 2014.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 40,460 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in North Tyneside. This is 20% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 18% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years old are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
in primary schools is 16% (the national average is 17%)
in secondary schools is 12% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 5% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian/Asian British and Mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
in primary schools is 5% (the national average is 20%)
in secondary schools is 4% (the national average is 16%).

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 27 February 2017, 1,319 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 27 February 2017, 169 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 42 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 179
children (44 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 27 February 2017, four children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from three at 31 March 2016.
 In the two years prior to inspection, six serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted, and no serious case reviews have been completed.
 There is one serious case review ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area


At 27 February 2017, 298 children are being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 74 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 290 (72 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
authority area
none is in residential special schools
area
two children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
there have been 19 adoptions, and 14 children are currently placed for
adoption
returned to be looked after
four young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to independent
living
no young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in houses of
multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that assessments are regularly updated to reflect the changing needs
of children and that they fully consider childrens identities, contingencies and
research.


Ensure that support to children who are privately fostered is timely, managed
well and effectively meets the needs of children.


Improve the timeliness with which designated officers complete investigations.


Improve the oversight of IROs of the progress of plans between child
protection conferences and between children looked after reviews, and
evidence this on the childs records.


Ensure that life story work and later life letters are of consistently good quality
and completed in a timely way to ensure that children and their adopters have
a clear understanding of a childs history in preparation for placement and for
later life understanding.


Ensure that supervision for all staff is consistently of good quality because it is
reflective, directive, regular and well recorded.


Ensure that actions identified as a result of audits are specific and measurable
and have timescales.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children and young people in North Tyneside are good. This is
because the council listens carefully to your views, you have helped to improve
services and everyone is working together to make things better for children and
young people.
 Sometimes when you need extra help, particularly if you do not feel safe,
everyone works closely together to make sure that you and your family receive
the right sort of help quickly. This means that social workers, police and teachers
work well together to make sure that you are safe and well protected. It also
means that families get help before problems are too big.
 Social workers provide good and helpful support to you. They write good
assessments about what needs changing when they first start working with you
and your families. However, they are not always good at making sure that these
are updated and include all the things that have changed. Everybody needs to
know when things should be done, who should do them and what should happen
next if there is a problem.
 When you have to leave your family, social workers are good at making sure that
you live in stable, caring foster families and in good childrens homes. Managers
are very good at making sure that you can live locally, near to your school and
friends. When it is safe for you to return home, you and your families are helped
to do so with lots of support to make it work.
 If you are being looked after by the local authority, you have plenty of help to
make sure that you stay healthy, go to the doctor and dentist regularly and do
well at school. If problems arise, then plans are made, which are reviewed
regularly so you can continue to make good progress. You are helped to say what
you think in reviews, and people listen to what you have to say.
 You have helped to improve the care leaving service, and this is now outstanding.
Social workers and personal advisers develop excellent relationships with young
people. They work extremely hard to make sure that care leavers feel safe and
happy with their accommodation and have a pathway plan that is right for them.
Everyone in the council is involved, for example by offering an apprenticeship or
work experience. A high number of care leavers are attending further and higher
education. Personal advisers and social workers are in touch with everyone.
 You told inspectors about a very small number of things you would like to see
improve. For example, a very small number of you had changed social worker too
many times. This sometimes makes you lose trust in the people trying to help
you, although this has not happened very often. Finally, you told us that some of
you wanted to complete your life story work, but in too many cases this has not
happened. We listened to you and asked the council for these things to improve.


The experiences and progress of
Good
children who need help and protection
Summary
Children are at the centre of the social work practice in North Tyneside. Childrens
voices and opinions are the foundation of assessments and planning. Direct work
with children is of good quality and undertaken by social workers who know the
children they work with very well.
No children were found to be in situations of unassessed or unmanaged risk of
significant harm. In the vast majority of cases, inspectors saw good-quality social
work, with appropriate support and intervention resulting in reducing risk and
improving outcomes for children.
An extensive range of early help services is available to support the differing needs
of children and families. This is resulting in improving outcomes for many children.
Children in need receive good, timely support, ensuring that needs are met early,
and risks are reduced safely, so they do not enter the child protection system
unnecessarily.
Thresholds are well understood and appropriately applied. The multi-agency
screening and coordination team (MASCT) deals with all contacts appropriately and
promptly. When children are potentially at risk of significant harm, enquiries are
swift and robust, including an effective, well-coordinated response to children who
are missing or at risk of child sexual exploitation.
Assessments are timely and thorough and provide a good platform for planning
and intervention to meet childrens needs and reduce risk. However, not all
assessments are updated to reflect childrens changing circumstances, and written
plans are not of a consistently good quality.
Multi-agency response to risk is well managed through timely information sharing
in strategy meetings, conferences and core groups, and as a result actions taken
are appropriate to the levels of identified risk, and statutory intervention is taken
only when it is necessary.
Multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARAC) and multi-agency public
protection arrangements (MAPPA) are well established and demonstrate a
coordinated multi-agency response and shared understanding that reduces risk to
children.
However, although there has been much done to improve the recognition of
private fostering in North Tyneside, too many children experience delays in these
arrangements being formalised. The designated officer provides a good service,
ensuring that children are safeguarded. However, the investigations are not always
completed in a timely manner.


Inspection findings

Children who need help and protection in North Tyneside benefit from highquality social work, robust multi-agency working and a strong focus on
ensuring that their views are at the centre of all decision-making. This enables
outcomes for these children to improve.


A well-considered early help and prevention strategy that also includes the
Troubled Families work has been developed, and is informed by a thorough
analysis of local need. It is clear and used by all agencies across North
Tyneside. As a result, children benefit from the provision of a good range of
universal, targeted and specialist services. This reduces risk and helps to
reduce the need for statutory social care intervention. Feedback provided by
children who met the inspectors was positive. They described enthusiastically
how the support has improved school attendance, self-esteem and
relationships within families. One child reported, I am able to contact the
family partner and discuss how Im feeling. She has supported my mum with
doing volunteering and she has now got a job. She has helped my brother to
improve his school attendance, and there is a good atmosphere at home.


Families can access a good range of early help services, based in their own
communities. These provide parenting support and targeted assistance related
to substance misuse, mental health and domestic abuse. Intensive support is
also provided, including during evenings and at weekends, to better meet the
needs of children and families. The support is being effective at tackling issues
and concerns earlier and preventing crises that result in referrals to childrens
services.


The MASCT is an effective single point for all contacts with childrens services.
In all cases seen by inspectors, thresholds were appropriately applied.
Qualified social workers make all decisions about whether referrals meet the
threshold for a social work assessment. Decision-making is informed by
thorough information gathering and good consideration of previous
involvement with agencies. There is effective information sharing within the
MASCT to ensure an appropriate response to risk. Advice and decisions are
clearly recorded and reviewed by the senior social worker and are of sound
quality. A large majority of contacts (97%) have a decision made about
whether to progress to referral in one working day. Referrers are routinely
informed of the outcomes of their referrals. Consent is sought appropriately.
The out-of-hours service responds swiftly and proportionately to presenting
risks. There is a robust handover and information sharing with the MASCT,
and this minimises delay in follow-up and keeps children safe.


The presence of a detective constable and domestic abuse worker within the
MASCT enables timely joint working and decision-making between the
agencies and, as a consequence, families gain access to prompt support so
that needs are met early and risks reduced. The domestic abuse worker
provides timely advice and support to victims of domestic abuse and


undertakes short pieces of work with families, making swift referrals for
ongoing therapeutic support and interventions when appropriate. The housing
officer responds quickly to any housing issues and expedites searches for
suitable accommodation. In the main, arrangements for step up and step
down from early help to the MASCT are effectively managed to ensure timely
and appropriate information sharing. However, in a very small number of
cases seen by inspectors, there had been a delay when signposted to early
help services. The local authority advised inspectors that it is introducing a
new series of checks to improve the management oversight from the MASCT,
to ensure that families receive the support that they need at the time that
they need it.

The quality of assessments is good. They are timely and comprehensive,
consider historical information, effectively identify risks and strengths and
make appropriate recommendations for future action to reduce risk and meet
childrens needs. Views of children and family members are integrated well in
the assessment process. However, in a small number of cases, assessments
are not updated to reflect the changing circumstances of children.
(Recommendation)


Children in need and their families receive a good range of well-coordinated
services and interventions to ensure that childrens needs are met effectively
within their families, and positive changes are sustained. In addition to wellcoordinated and regular children in need reviews, inspectors saw a range of
assistance from practical support to bespoke 1:1 sessions with parents as well
as social workers working closely with other professionals, such as from
education, housing, health and the youth offending service to ensure that
support is coordinated and leading to positive outcomes.


Significant harm is recognised well. Strategy meetings are thorough, timely
and very well attended by an appropriate range of agencies. Coordinated
multi-agency responses result in good understanding of risks and inform
decision-making. Appropriate actions are taken promptly to ensure that
children are safe. Decisions to progress from a child protection enquiry to an
initial child protection conference (ICPT) are timely. Subsequent child
protection conferences are held promptly. Effective multi-agency information
sharing ensures that immediate risk is identified, assessed and managed
promptly and results in children receiving proportionate interventions.
Decisions to make children subject of a child protection plan are appropriate.
Children are well supported to participate and contribute to their conferences
either via completion of child protection consultation forms or in person, with
the support of an advocate. Since April 2016 to date, 30 children aged over
eight have been supported at ICPCs.


Child protection, core groups and child in need (CIN) reviews are regular and
well attended, resulting in well-coordinated planning that protects and
safeguards children. IROs chair both child protection conferences and children
looked after reviews. Despite caseloads for IROs being high, 90% of initial and


have an overview of the progress of plans between reviews, however, is
compromised by the poor recording system in North Tyneside.
(Recommendation)

When children are on child protection plans, work is focused on managing and
reducing risk. Evidence was seen of effective use of family group
conferencing, resulting in additional support being provided by the extended
family members and enabling children to remain safely with their parents.
Parents are referred to appropriate intervention programmes, such as
domestic violence perpetrator programmes, parenting programmes and
services that provide support for families with drug- and alcohol-related
problems. When parents have engaged positively, this has resulted in risk
reduction and improved outcomes for children.


The electronic client database does not support good social work practice.
Senior managers are fully aware of the issues, and the system is due to be
replaced in 2018. Temporary arrangements have been put in place to attempt
to strengthen the current system. However, social workers raised issues to
inspectors about the additional work needed and about how the different
screens needing to be completed do not help them to record ongoing work
and key documentation fully. Despite these significant issues, social workers
work around the system, and much recording is of a good quality. However,
this was not consistent on all of the childrens files seen by inspectors. For
instance, written plans do not always evidence the high-quality work being
undertaken.


Children who have disabilities have their needs assessed promptly and
comprehensively, and, as a result, they receive packages of care and support
that reflect and meet their individual needs. Individual childrens cases seen
by inspectors were supported to a high standard. The team of experienced
childcare social workers has recently transferred to adult services as part of a
whole life approach to supporting disabled people and to improving the
transitions between childrens and adult services. It is too early to see
improvements in outcomes. Potential risks have been evaluated, and a report
has been produced for the North Tyneside Safeguarding Children Board
(NTSCB) on the potential benefits of this new approach.


Children are regularly visited by their social workers, who engage in ageappropriate direct work with them. Inspectors saw the use of various tools,
including three houses, three islands exploration and analysis of childrens
own drawings and writing, which enables children to share their feelings and
understanding of their experiences. The childs voice is at the core of social
work practice, and social workers have a sound understanding of childrens
needs, which leads to effective planning.


Individual children at risk of child sexual exploitation or missing receive timely
and robust multi-agency consideration from the missing, sexual exploitation


and trafficking group (MSET). Good partnership working and coordinated
information sharing mean that risks are promptly assessed and inform safety
planning to reduce risk and keep children safe. Intelligence is effectively
shared across the multi-agency group to inform local understanding of highrisk areas to influence disruption activities. Social workers have a good
understanding of risks associated with child sexual exploitation, resulting in
focused and comprehensive support packages to reduce risk.

All missing children receive a safe and well check from the police. The
appointment of a designated missing persons worker has improved planning.
In 96% of missing episodes, children were offered a return interview in a
timely manner, with 19% refusing the offer. The information gathered is used
effectively to inform strategy discussions, risk assessments and care planning
and to further protect children.


Procedures for children missing education are well established and effective.
The Children Missing Out on Education (CMOOE) task force focuses on
absence levels of vulnerable pupils. Effective links are in place with social care,
and regular half-termly meetings track and monitor individual children. Daily
checks are carried out on all referrals for children missing from education.
Pupils who cannot be traced are added to the lost pupil database. A range of
checks continue to be made, for example to housing and health colleagues
and, in exceptional circumstances, to the Border Agency, to locate missing
pupils. As a result, the central register provides an accurate picture of children
and young people, known to the authority, who are not attending school. At
the time of the inspection, the local authority has 27 open cases of children
missing education in which enquiries are ongoing.


Good arrangements are in place to support children who are electively home
educated. The Alternative Placement Team encourages parents to register
and, once this has occurred, a home visit is offered. In the majority of cases,
the authority successfully registers those families who come to their notice, so
they can support them, make suitable checks to ensure that children are safe
and assess the quality of provision. Currently, 41 pupils are being educated at
home. The Alternative Placement Team makes concerted efforts to ensure
that parents are well informed about the most suitable education for their
children. The team offers home visits, support, advice and guidance to
parents.


There is a good range of services to address domestic abuse, including victim
and perpetrator programmes and services for substance misuse. The Harbour
and Freedom Programme provides victims with a range of support to enable
them to safeguard themselves and to protect children. The risk to children of
living in families with multiple needs, such as domestic violence, substance
misuse and parental mental ill health, is well understood and effectively
managed by the MARAC and MAPPA. Operation Encompass also effectively
ensures that nurseries and schools are alerted when incidents of domestic
abuse occur, so that children can receive timely support.



Support for 16- and 17-year-old young people at risk of homelessness is
strong. Social workers undertake timely and thorough assessments, and
complex cases are heard at the joint housing and social care protocol panel,
ensuring a holistic consideration of broader emotional, practical and
educational needs. There is a good range of accommodation options, including
emergency crash pads and fully supported, semi-independent and selfcontained accommodation, which enables young peoples differing needs to be
met. Appropriate consideration is undertaken as to whether children should be
looked after to ensure that their welfare is promoted. No young person has
been accommodated in unsuitable accommodation, including bed and
breakfast provision, in 201617 and this is good practice.


The local authority has undertaken steps to increase awareness of private
fostering in North Tyneside. At the time of the inspection, there were four
children identified as living under private fostering arrangements. The services
provided to the children were not consistently good. In the cases seen by
inspectors, a number of issues were identified, including delays in assessing
and confirming arrangements. (Recommendation)


The management of allegations of abuse by professionals against children is
robust, and this ensures that children are safeguarded. However,
investigations are not always completed in a timely manner.
(Recommendation)


The local authority and its partners have a robust joint strategy in place for
children who may be at risk of radicalisation. Although there have been no
referrals to the multi-agency Channel panel, an exercise was undertaken by
agencies in May 2016 to gain assurance of the effectiveness of the process.
Training has been provided to staff to identify and respond to risks of
radicalisation and female genital mutilation. There has been one case of
female genital mutilation in North Tyneside, and the judge dealing with this
wrote to the local authority commenting on the sensitive and efficient way in
which social workers had managed the case.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Services for children looked after are good and outstanding for care leavers.
Children become looked after when this is in their best interests, and edge of care
services help to prevent them from becoming looked after unnecessarily. When it
is required, decisions for children to become looked after are timely and
appropriate. Prompt action to seek legal advice ensures that permanence for
children is timely. A wide range of permanence options are available, providing
children with safe and secure placements when needed.
The health needs of children looked after are well met, and there are effective
responses to support childrens emotional well-being and attachment disorders.
Current educational progress for children looked after is positive, and a significant
majority of pupils make expected levels of progress. The pupil premium is being
used creatively to help to support the educational progress of children looked
after.
Responses to children who are missing and/or at risk of sexual exploitation are
good and have resulted in improved outcomes, especially for those children living
in childrens homes.
The Children in Care Council (CiCC) is highly influential and effective in challenging
professionals and politicians to ensure that services for children looked after are
good and improving.
In a few areas, the local authority needs to improve to make services for children
looked after even better. Examples include IROs challenging the progress of plans
for children, reducing the number of changes of social workers for children and
improving timeliness of life story work.
The local authority is committed to securing permanence through adoption and is
working to improve timeliness for children waiting for a match and to ensure more
consistent and timely delivery of good-quality life story work. Tenacious family
finding for harder-to-place children and therapeutic post-adoption support
demonstrate positive impact for children.
Excellent, aspirational services and support mean that the vast majority of care
leavers are engaged in education, training or employment, and all live in safe and
supportive housing arrangements. Staff work tirelessly to help them to reach their
potential. Care leavers are very regularly consulted and feel valued. This has
resulted in ensuring that the service they receive is outstanding.


Inspection findings

Children in North Tyneside only become looked after when it is in their best
interests and, in these instances, the response is timely and appropriate. The
number of children looked after at the time of the inspection was 298, a slight
increase from 291 in 20152016, which is above the England averages but
below that of statistical comparators.


Effective edge of care services, working closely with multi-agency
professionals, including education, health, youth offending, Raising the Health
and Education of Looked After Children (RHELAC) and child and adolescent
mental health services (CAMHS), provide good, targeted work to prevent
children from becoming looked after and to support them when they return
home. A parenting programme delivered to 13 families of children looked after
was very successful and resulted in eight children returning home and staying
at home.


Good use of the Public Law Outline (PLO) ensures that decisive action is taken
when children need to be looked after. Letters before proceedings clearly set
out what families need to do to support children. Family group conferencing
(FGC), commissioned from a national charitable organisation, is increasingly
used, so that all options are considered before children become looked after.
FGC has been effective in helping children to remain with their own families
and in improving relationships within families to sustain good outcomes for
children.


The local authority has forged productive working relationships with the
Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass). Effective
communication, particularly with IROs, and performance monitoring of the use
of the PLO, means that children and young people benefit from efficient and
timely progression through the court system. The average duration for care
proceedings is 27 weeks: better than the national average of 30 weeks in
evidence of managerial oversight of quality.


When the plan is for children to return home, comprehensive assessments are
undertaken to evaluate any risks, so that children are protected and
supported. Children placed at home are visited regularly by social workers,
and the frequency of visiting is adjusted according to risk. Oversight by
managers ensures that, when appropriate, necessary action is taken to
discharge care orders or escalate any concerns.


The local authority is achieving permanence for children in a timely way.
Monitoring is also used successfully with children who are accommodated
under section 20, to assure that this is the best legal option to promote their
welfare and to ensure permanency. As a result, the number of care
proceedings has increased and the percentage of children accommodated


under section 20 has reduced from 31% (90) in 20152016 to 27% (81)
currently.

Short-term and long-term placement stability is better than that of comparator
authorities. This success is maintained because there is a wide range of
permanence options. SGOs and regulation 24 placements with connected
persons are increasingly being used as permanence options for children, which
helps them to maintain close bonds with people they know. The local authority
also has five childrens homes, two of which are increasingly evolving their
services in response to childrens needs, including staying close and staff
supporting the edge of care services.


The local authority fostering service is very responsive. The fostering strategy
has clear priorities to meet the complex and changing needs of children
looked after. In response to the rise in the number of older children becoming
looked after, there is a focus on developing the specialist fostering scheme for
teenagers. There are also a small number of mother and baby placements and
foster carers who focus solely on brothers and sisters living together. Most
placements for children (92%) are within 20 miles of the childs own
community, and the large majority (67%) are within North Tyneside. This
enables children to retain their local support networks and friends, promoting
stability and security and, importantly, their feeling of identity in belonging.


Placements for those children living out of area in excess of 20 miles are
usually specially commissioned services for children who have complex needs
and display challenging behaviour. In those instances seen by inspectors,
there is good access to specialist health provision, education and support.
However, there are sometimes delays in transferring children to local CAMHS.


The needs of children are prioritised well by the local authority fostering
service. Foster carers value the good support from the service, which is
responsive, approachable and friendly. As a result, 98 foster carers have
remained with the local authority for longer than six years, and 12 in excess of
committed carers. Foster carers receive a good range of flexible support and
training to help them to care for children. Assessments for new foster carers
are completed within timescales, and this is tracked on a daily basis. Training
is efficiently managed and well organised, and there is a good monitoring
system in place to track gaps in foster carers training, which has led to a 50%
increase in take up on the training offer since December 2016. Training,
including access to parenting programmes, is also offered to connected
persons and SGO carers. Carers value the experienced staff and quality of
training provided, which enables them to provide appropriate care for
children, some of whom have very complex needs.


Independently chaired annual reviews of foster carers are detailed and
analytical and incorporate the views of children. This helps to ensure that
foster carers continue to be able to meet the needs of children. Independent


unannounced supervisory visits of foster carers further strengthens oversight
of foster carers and safeguards children.

A dedicated worker, who knows the needs of carers and children well,
undertakes placement matching for children requiring a foster placement.
Placement planning meetings take place in a timely way to make sure that all
aspects of a childs care plan are considered within a day of placement,
whenever possible. There is a clear priority given to identifying a suitable inhouse match. Proposals to place brothers and sisters together or separately
are addressed in childrens plans. Appropriate assessments, including
independently commissioned assessments, are undertaken to fully consider
issues relating to age and the impact and appropriateness of different
placement options for brothers and sisters.


Supervised contact is well supported and managed. Social care assistants are
allocated to a number of families to support contact arrangements and
provide consistency for children. There is good provision of contact venues
available for supervised contact as well as a variety of community-based
activities and facilities. Supervised contact referral forms provide all necessary
information in relation to any specific issues, frequency and duration of
contacts.


Care team meetings are an example of excellent practice. Professionals, young
people and, when appropriate, family members meet on a monthly basis to
ensure that the plan is being implemented and any risks are addressed.
Although detailed agency reports are produced for the children looked after
reviews, formal assessments are not updated on a regular basis. This means
that the changing needs, circumstances and ages of children are not always
fully considered. The quality of assessments in respect of court applications is
variable. In a few instances, this can lead to unnecessary delays in decisionmaking and planning for childrens futures. (Recommendation)


Overall, plans for children looked after are detailed, with clear actions and
timescales. These are regularly updated at children looked after reviews with
any changes or new actions to further progress outcomes for children.
Although the good outcomes for children in North Tyneside and the support
by dedicated staff who know children well are acknowledged, the quality of
assessments to inform ongoing work and plans with children is not consistent.


Supervisory visits to children are regular, and the recording demonstrates
good consideration of childrens plans and childrens views. However, children
and carers report that, despite the more recent stability of workers and
regular statutory visiting, there have been too many changes in social
workers, which have resulted in some children being unable to develop longstanding, trusting relationships with social workers. Social work team
structures have recently been changed to improve this situation.
(Recommendation)



Despite a recent emphasis on life story work through training and support by
the Participation Team, and some recent good examples seen of life story
books, delays in progressing this work mean that some children do not always
have important information about their lives, families and histories. Children,
carers and IROs all expressed concerns about this and about the impact on
children. (Recommendation)


Current educational progress for children looked after is positive, and a
significant majority of pupils make expected levels of progress. Cohorts are
small in most cases, which accounts for variations in annual performance in
key stage 1 and key stage 2. In addition, a significant number of pupils have
additional needs, and a third attend special school provision. Despite this,
progress in mathematics at key stage 2 remains above the national average.
Proactive interventions by virtual school staff are ensuring that those pupils at
key stage 4, a high number of whom have additional needs, are on track. The
pupil premium and pupil premium plus are being used creatively to help to
support the educational progress of children looked after. This includes
counselling and additional resources to support crisis situations.


The vast majority of pupils (90%) attend good or outstanding schools within
North Tyneside. Attendance is well monitored, and attendance rates for
children attending in-borough schools is high, at 97%. There have been no
permanent exclusions for a number of years.


Children looked after not in receipt of full-time education are provided with a
wide range of good-quality alternative provision. Two key partners provide the
bulk of the service. Currently, 16 pupils looked after are accessing 25 hours of
alternative provision. In very occasional circumstances, a young person might
access less than 25 hours education per week, for example when they are reintegrating into mainstream provision following long-term illness, but this is
very much the exception. Quality assurance arrangements are suitably
rigorous, and providers submit regular quality reports on pupils achievement
and attendance. All providers are also subject to annual visits from the
authority to ensure that young people are receiving good-quality education
that best suits their needs.


Following a full-quality audit, the virtual school recognised the need to
improve the quality and timeliness of personal education plans (PEPs). As a
result, PEPs were redesigned two years ago, with the help of social workers,
carers and young people. The resulting PEP is much simpler to complete, and
most are good.


Good attention is paid by virtual school staff to identifying any child looked
after who has concerns about bullying. A recently appointed counsellor is
being used well to support any young people identified as at risk of being
bullied. The CiCC Care 4 Me group is providing training to schools to improve
their understanding of the specific needs of children in care. The Mind Your


Head lesson plan helps to support teachers to raise awareness of mental
health issues.

Children looked after in North Tyneside are encouraged to access leisure
facilities and are provided with free passes. A free pass is also available to any
friend who wants to accompany them. The passes can be used for gyms,
swimming pools and a range of classes and activities. The CiCC is also
involved in organising an annual Christmas party and celebration of
achievements events. Carers receive prompt information and confirmation of
their delegated authority. This helps them to enable children to access any
leisure activities and not to feel different from other children.


Children who are at risk of offending are given good, well-considered holistic
support. The youth offending team works closely with education, police and
health staff to look at appropriate resources and support for young offenders
who have undiagnosed health needs.


A well-established healthcare team, most of whom are co-located with the
RHELAC team, including designated paediatrician, lead nurse, school and
specialist nurses, provides very good health support for children and their
carers. North Tyneside demonstrates consistently strong performance across
all health measures, including 100% of initial health assessments and reviews,
immunisations and developmental checks and 93% of dental checks
completed on time.


Much good work is being done in relation to supporting childrens emotional
well-being and attachment disorders through the RHELAC team counsellor,
and the dedicated education psychologist. In addition, CAMHS provide a daily
triage for all children at high risk. Other CAMHS assessments are completed
within a 12-week period. As a result, the mental health and well-being
services for children looked after and care leavers up to age of 18 are well
coordinated, and children generally receive a prompt service.


The influence of the voice of children in North Tyneside is very strong and
results in services for children looked after that are increasingly responsive
and effective. The CiCC, comprising three different groups according to age, is
highly motivated and influential. The CiCC is well supported by the local
authority Participation Team. The CiCC has been proactive in developing
training so that multi-agency professionals understand what it is like to be
looked after. The CiCC undertakes quality assurance inspections of childrens
homes, assists with training and carries out assessments of foster carers and
their homes.


The CiCC, supported by the Participation Team, is very good at providing
information to children looked after. A monthly newsletter is sent out to all
children looked after, including those who live out of area. This helps to
ensure that children are aware of their rights and entitlements. The
introduction of the Mind of My Own (MOMO) application (app) gives children


an opportunity to contact their IRO or worker to give their views, comments
or complaints. Advocacy is provided for all children and young people who are
or have been looked after, up to the age of 25. Advocates are tenacious in
resolving issues for children and only cease their involvement once the issue
has been resolved.

Caseloads for IROs are high. IROs have caseloads for both child protection
cases and children looked after. Despite the high caseloads, children looked
reviews are timely, with 99% within timescales. The vast majority of children
(94%) also participate in their reviews, and more children are able to
contribute to their reviews using the MOMO app. Due to the poor quality
electronic client recording system, IROs struggle to have an overview of
progress between reviews, and their impact and challenge are not always
evident in the childrens files. (Recommendation)


Robust responses to when children go missing and/or are at risk of child
sexual exploitation have been instrumental in safeguarding children. Recent
data, April 2016 to February 2017, shows that in most instances (96%)
children were offered a return interview and most of the interviews (92%)
were completed within 72 hours of the child returning home. The information
collated from the interviews is used efficiently to inform strategy discussions,
risk assessments and care planning. Evidence of the effectiveness of this work
can be demonstrated in the reduction, by more than half, of children missing
from in-house residential care. There has been an increase in overall missing
and absent episodes in 20162017. However, the local authority has a clear
understanding of the reasons why and has responded appropriately.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

North Tyneside is committed to securing permanence through adoption, and is
working to improve timeliness for all children waiting for a match with
adopters. It has robust oversight of parallel planning from when children first
become looked after until a permanent placement is identified, through
regular tracking meetings and scrutiny of performance information.


Experienced workers support permanence planning and are tenacious in
finding permanent homes for harder-to-place children. Successful adoptive
placements have been achieved for sibling groups and older children. Recent
data shows that nearly half of children adopted in the last 12 months were
aged five or over. For a small number of children, adoption plans have
appropriately changed in favour of other permanence options, and there is a
clear rationale underpinning such decisions, based on childrens views and
updated assessments of need and attachments. Overall, there have been 19
children adopted in the last 12 months, which is slightly fewer than the 25
adopted in each of the previous four years. This is in line with national trends
and the increased and appropriate use of SGOs as an alternative route to
permanence in the local authority.


Recent adoption performance data evidences an improving picture of
timeliness for children with an adoption plan in the last 18 months. The vast
majority of children are now meeting scorecard timescales for both key
indicators, and effective use of the tracker ensures that plans for permanence
are closely monitored and progressed in a timely way.


Arrangements for the recruitment, assessment and training of adopters are
effective and timely. The quality of the prospective adopter reports (PARs) is
good, and clear analysis of applicants strengths and areas for development
underpin matching considerations. The completion of PARs includes a quality
assurance visit, undertaken by the manager prior to approval
recommendations presented to panel. Assessments for approved adopters
completed in the last 12 months have all been within timescales. Adopters
particularly value the access to therapeutic input for extended adoptive family
members. This has helped adopters and their wider family to develop greater
understanding about attachment issues and to feel more prepared to help
children to settle into their new families. Adopters spoken to were very
positive about the helpful and supportive service, felt well prepared
throughout the process and welcomed the expertise provided.


Many adopters are identified for children locally, but, when this is not possible,
regional and national processes are used in a timely way. Two approved
adopters are currently waiting for a match, and have been linked to the
national adoption register and other regional and national initiatives, ensuring


that there is good support to help them to identify a potential adoptive
placement.

Pre-matching meetings are effective in identifying the best possible match for
adopters and children. The service consistently discusses the potential for
foster to adopt placements with all adopters, as part of the assessment
process and has utilised such placements effectively to place a small number
of children. Family finding efforts are extensive and creative, making good use
of adoption activity days to identify potential families for older children and
sibling groups. Family finding efforts are under way for two children with a
placement order, and potential adopters have been identified for both
children, including an older child for whom a national search has taken longer
to identify a suitable family.


The adoption and fostering panel is timely and efficient and offers appropriate
scrutiny and challenge to all matching decisions and approval
recommendations. The chair is independent and experienced, and there is an
appropriately constituted group of panel members who are knowledgeable
about the needs of children for permanence, in relation to both fostering and
adoption. The chair ensures that the rationale for decision-making is recorded
clearly. The agency decision-maker ratifies decisions in a timely manner,
ensuring that children and families are informed promptly. The panel is
effective in listening to the views of children and includes representatives from
the CiCC on annual panel training. This has led to childrens views on
improving the quality of life story work informing the work of panel, which has
been taken forward by the participation team in the local authority.


The vast majority of adopters receive good support when children first move
to their care. Therapeutic assessments of attachment enhance adopters
understanding of childrens needs, including those of brothers and sisters
placed together.


Life story work and later life letters for some children can take too long to
complete and are of variable quality. The service has plans in place to ensure
greater consistency, and recently has provided a rolling programme of training
on life story work to social workers, which has resulted in some improvement.
(Recommendation)


Effective post-adoption support plans are detailed. They are based on
therapeutic principles and show clear actions and responsibilities, including
financial support when it is required. There is a good range of support offered
to adopters, utilising the adoption support fund, including Theraplay, Safebase
and independently commissioned attachment training. Adopters reported to
inspectors that the training is incredibly helpful and uplifting. They have
access to a range of support groups in the region, and effective work is
undertaken with birth families to support appropriate letterbox contact. The
post-adoption social worker also offers support and advice to schools and


ensures that adopted children are very well supported by school staff, in
accordance with their assessed needs.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is outstanding

Outstanding services for care leavers mean that the vast majority of them are
either in education or training or employed. Many of them have benefited
from work experience with the council, and a significant number have gone on
to complete apprenticeships locally. All of them live in safe and supportive
housing that includes staying put with their foster carers or successfully
managing their own tenancies. As a result of building open and trusting
relationships with staff, care leavers make excellent progress in developing
their independent living skills and taking full responsibility for their health and
the choices that they make. They have also been instrumental in making
improvements to the service, for example in relation to pathway plans, and
these developments are helping the vast majority to make significant progress
towards successful adult lives.


Staff and managers are extremely effective in staying in touch with young
people. Workers on the care leavers team are passionate and committed and
work tirelessly in supporting young people, being persistent especially with
those who are more difficult to engage. As a result, they are in touch with
rights and entitlements, and their achievements are rewarded and celebrated.
They have been fully engaged in developing the care leavers pledge, and
regular efforts are made by staff to further canvass their views.


Highly effective collaborative working with health colleagues results in care
leavers being very well supported in ensuring that their health needs are
identified and met. Care leavers have been fully involved in developing a
health passport, which provides them with a copy of their health background.
The passport also provides excellent health guidance, for example on matters
such as promoting good sexual health, quitting smoking and receiving help
with drug and alcohol issues. To ensure high-quality continued healthcare for
care leavers, a copy of this passport is shared with their general practitioner
(GP), which is excellent practice.


Workers assess and manage risk very well and, as a result, care leavers feel
safe. Pathway planning helps to drive the work with young people. Plans are
comprehensive, regularly reviewed and used as a working tool to help young
people to focus on their next steps and on reducing risks.


North Tyneside is a very good corporate parent, and is highly aspirational for
care leavers. The authority listens to them, acts on their suggestions very well
and provides consistently excellent support to enable them to move
successfully into adulthood. Care leavers who met inspectors were very


positive about the support that they receive from the council, the dedication of
politicians and senior managers, and ways in which they are actively involved
in the development of future services. As a result, participation and
involvement by care leavers are very high and demonstrably impact on
improvements in services.

Care 2 Work is an extremely successful council initiative, working across the
region to help care leavers into work. High numbers of care leavers have
benefited from bespoke training opportunities, for example vocational taster
programmes, English and mathematics and work experience. Young people
are extremely positive about the support that they receive. As one apprentice
put it, I could never have done this without the support of the team and I
probably would not have completed my education. Now I am a mother and
also have a career which I love. Apprentices are located across the whole
authority. So far, a high number of young people (19) have benefited from
either extended work experience, apprenticeships or traineeships within the
authority.


Staff and managers have very high expectations for all care leavers. This helps
to account for the 84% of care leavers engaged in education, training or
employment. This compares favourably to 61% of care leavers nationally.
When young people are not engaged, they tend to be the older, 19-plus
cohort, 58% of whom are engaged in comparison to 49% nationally. This
reduction in engagement post 19 has been recognised by the authority that is
taking robust action. For example, a monthly not in education, employment or
training (NEET) monitoring group focuses on individual cases, and there is an
excellent peer mentoring programme, which is re-engaging young people and
giving them a mentoring qualification.


There is excellent support for young people to help them to move successfully
towards independence, particularly in managing everyday living tasks. The
proportion of care leavers who are in suitable accommodation is extremely
high at 98%. This is because innovative and effective work is being
undertaken to develop and improve the housing options for care leavers in
North Tyneside. The care leaving team and the strategic housing lead work
very closely together to ensure that a wide range of provision is available.
Twenty care leavers currently benefit from staying put arrangements.


Accommodation providers and other partners communicate extremely
effectively, ensuring that everyone involved with care leavers is kept informed
about their progress. Care leavers reported to inspectors that they feel
extremely well supported and grow in confidence in relation to such things as
budgeting, getting their driving licence and managing to cook for themselves.
Many of them are able to achieve an additional social development
qualification.


Excellent guidance is in place to assist young people in tenancies with external
providers and in local authority tenancies. This ensures that high-quality


planning, support and preventative work are in place, to assist young people
when things are not going well or if there is a potential threat of eviction. The
housing advice team, community protection team and leaving care workers
communicate closely and aim to work proactively with young people at all
times to reduce and prevent any evictions.

Support for leisure activities and sporting opportunities is excellent. Care
leavers have access to Ease Extra cards, which entitle them to visit any public
leisure facility in the borough free of charge. They can take a friend with them
also free of charge. They can use gyms and swimming pools and access a
range of classes and activities during the day and in the evening. Young
people spoken to by inspectors were particularly appreciative of this facility,
especially of being able to take a friend. They said that it helps them to
become fitter and gives them something positive to do.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Senior managers, leaders and politicians provide a clear vision to improve
outcomes for children and young people. Core social work practice is good and
means that services for children and families contribute positively to improving
their daily lives. The alignment of strategic plans provides a shared sense of
ownership and ambition across partnerships, with a clear drive to enhance
childrens lives. Engagement and participation are highly visible in the evaluation
and development of services. Consultation with parents, carers, social workers and
children and young people is central to the everyday workings of the local
authority, and this ensures that senior managers and leaders have a
comprehensive understanding of frontline practice.
The directors efforts are well focused on understanding local need and demand for
services, forming the basis of a local authority transformation programme to target
services. The director takes an open and transparent approach to understanding
frontline services and uses this to improve and strengthen social work practice.
Social workers spoken to by inspectors feel highly supported and valued.
A whole-council approach to corporate parenting ensures that this responsibility is
held across the local authority and that the family firm provides work experience
and apprenticeship opportunities, and uses strong partner relationships to secure
ownership of corporate parenting across services and local businesses. The
corporate parenting board is highly ambitious for its children and young people
and tightly monitors their progress. The CiCC is highly effective in shaping and
improving local services, and in leading on regional standards that all children
looked after can expect from their home authority.
Good commissioning of services, performance monitoring and quality assurance
contribute to delivering effective services and solid social work practice. Weekly
performance information is circulated to all managers, allowing them to interrogate
and act on identified issues. There is a significant programme of audits identifying
service strengths and where practice needs improvement. Resultant action plans,
however, are not always specific and measurable and with timescales. The
electronic client database does not support good recording and consistent social
work practice, and the local authority has improved some of its functionality prior
to a new system being introduced in 2018.
Children and carers reported to inspectors that their main concern is changes in
their social workers. Increased turnover in staffing is new to North Tyneside, but
the reasons are well understood by the local authority and it is taking assertive
action to retain and recruit staff to ensure continued high-quality services.


Inspection findings

Improving outcomes for children and young people is a clear priority across
North Tyneside. The local authority has strategically aligned a number of plans
with the Our North Tyneside plan. This identifies three clear priorities to
ensure that children are ready for school, ready for work and life, and are
safe, supported and cared for. These outcomes form the foundation of the
corporate parenting plan, the children and young peoples plan, and the joint
health and well-being strategy. Each plan details how partners work together
strategically with the single focus on improving services for children and
young people, which provides a shared sense of ambition and a commitment
across the council and its partners. These are translated into actions that are
well coordinated and, more importantly, underpin the effective services that
are delivered to children and make a difference to their lives.


Leaders and managers are proud and passionate about the services for
children in North Tyneside. They ensure that safeguarding is firmly embedded
in all council activity. Monthly leadership forums for all managers hold them to
account and explore national areas of safeguarding, learning and local
concerns raised by children and young people. Actions are agreed and swiftly
implemented. For example, national learning led to more council staff
receiving training to recognise concerns relating to child sexual exploitation.


Senior managers and leaders have a clarity about what is happening at the
front line, through regular communication with children, carers, parents and
social workers, and this has influenced decision-making. When young people
raised issues about housing options, the local authority reviewed its housing
stock and developed two-person supported accommodation, enabling young
people to live with their friends.


The voice of children and young people is woven into the fabric of the local
authority. Despite times of austerity, a highly effective and dedicated team
has been developed, providing participation, advocacy and engagement and
focusing specifically on ensuring that the voice of children is heard and taken
seriously in the local authority. The CiCC is a significant strength and is
successful in influencing service design, delivery and evaluation. Its influence
is far reaching, not only locally but also on a regional scale. North Tyneside
has led a Regional Children in Care Council Campaign, which has agreed a
memorandum of understanding to ensure consistency of services for all
children in care across the region.


Governance and accountability are clear are well established. A dedicated
children, education and skills scrutiny subcommittee meets on a monthly basis
and has a particular focus on children and young people. This provides a
broad overview of how children and young people are helped and protected.
When particular areas of concern arise, thematic subgroups are developed
with a specific purpose to review current provision and provide direction.



There are well-established lines of accountability between the NTSCB, the
DCS, chief executive and deputy chief executive, through regular scheduled
meetings. Relationships are based on respectful challenge, and the NTSCB
chair is a critical friend, informing and shaping service strategies and testing
what this means for safeguarding children.


The DCS has worked for North Tyneside for eight years, two of which have
included the role as director for children services, while already holding
responsibility for adult social care. She has successfully forged solid partner
relationships and invested heavily in understanding local demand to prevent
children coming into care. The use of extensive research to identify the needs
of children and families and their communities forms the basis of North
Tynesides ambitious transformation programme and the remodelling of early
help services into localities with the highest need, providing a broad and
developing range of support. Given the breadth of the directors responsibility,
this has been assurance tested independently to ensure that she has sufficient
capacity to fully meet the demands of the two roles.


Partnership working is built on strong and established trusting relationships,
enabling the local authority to be nimble in identifying and addressing specific
areas of concern. For example, a twice-yearly corporate assurance group
brings together senior officers with responsibility for safeguarding, including
police and health. Recently, this identified a number of children and adults
engaging in the use of legal highs, and through the development of a places
of concern meeting, chaired by the deputy chief executive, intelligence was
shared, leading to effective, targeted disruption activity.


North Tyneside takes a whole-council approach to corporate parenting. Led by
tenacious and dedicated senior leaders, the lead member for children and the
elected mayor ensure that all areas of the council understand the challenges
faced by children looked after and take responsibility as a corporate parent to
improving childrens live. The local authority successfully uses its influence to
ensure that partners and local businesses recognise their responsibilities and
play an active role in providing care leavers with bespoke training
opportunities, creating apprenticeships and work experience opportunities to
enhance the offer already provided by the local authority.


The corporate parenting committee is ambitious for its children and receives
regular reports on education, health and placements and meets regularly with
the CiCC to monitor progress of care leavers and children looked after. For
example, effective data analysis ensures that pupil progress is well tracked
and monitored. Educational achievement for children looked is a high priority,
and there is regular scrutiny by the committee.


The local authority meets its sufficiency duty and ensures that children remain
close and connected to their community, when possible, and an impressive
changing needs of children it cares for, identifying that children who have


more complex needs entering care are older, and this led to the development
of specialist foster placements. Effective regional consortium relationships
enable commissioners to actively manage the childrens placement market to
achieve the best outcomes. The alignment of children, adults and public
health commissioning in the same directorate provides efficiency of effort and
shared strategic priorities. The commissioning cycle is well embedded within
the strategic planning framework, and, because the prevalence of need is well
understood through the joint strategic needs analysis (JSNA), this ensures
that a sufficient range of provision is available to meet local need.

The director is committed to improving social work and has taken an open and
transparent approach to understanding and strengthening frontline practice,
through commissioning a number of external and independent reviews. This
includes peer reviews, independent assessors, external audit and targeted
consultation, to work alongside staff to identify what good looks like. More
recently, additional senior management capacity has been created to focus on
improving the quality of its services. It has been five years since the last
Ofsted inspection of childrens services, and this judged services for help and
protection and children looked after to be good. The quality of the support
and outcomes achieved by children continues to be of a high standard
because the local authority has continued to build on the solid foundations of
good practice that were identified at the last inspection in 2012.


An extensive suite of information, tailored to meet the needs of its audience,
monitors performance at all levels. Thematic audits and the recent
introduction of systematic case reviews completed by managers have
effectively identified key themes for improvement, the learning from which is
disseminated though regular learning forums and team meetings and is
impacting on improving practice, including assessments, strengthening the
voice of children, and better care planning. However, subsequent action plans
are not always specific, measurable or with timescales. (Recommendation)


The current electronic client database does not facilitate good recording,
management oversight of practice, or quality assurance by IROs. The local
authority has commissioned a new electronic system, which is being
introduced in 2018. Meanwhile, it has been working on improving the current
systems functionality, utilising a number of short-term measures. Although
the system is acknowledged to be poor and makes recording and retrieval of
performance information difficult for social workers, managers and IROs,
inspectors did not find that this had a direct negative impact on the outcomes
for children.


Social workers and managers told inspectors that management oversight is
strong and co-location of all managers alongside their teams facilitates regular
communication. However, due to the deficiencies in the electronic client
database, this is not evident in all childrens records. Regardless of the longerterm solutions identified, recorded oversight of practice and supervision
require improvement. Although all social workers receive regular supervision,


this is not recorded in a consistent way. Where this is weaker, the recorded
supervision does not demonstrate professional challenge, clarity and direction,
and, where actions are agreed, no timescales are given, resulting in a lack of
progress against tasks. (Recommendation)

Children spoken to by inspectors reported that they are concerned about
changes in social workers and that this impacts on their ability to form stable
relationships. Historically, North Tyneside has had a stable workforce.
However, there has been a recent increase in staff turnover, due to increased
wages and benefits being paid elsewhere in the region. Agency staff are
providing temporary cover: this has increased from 4% in 201516 to 11% at
the time of the inspection. The local authority has swiftly responded, offering
staff a market supplement as part of their recruitment and retention package
in the short term, while a longer-term competitive remuneration package is
being agreed. The impact of the increased use of agency staff is recognised
and action is taken, including utilising the agency staff in the main in shortterm teams, ensuring effective case handover arrangements, good quality
staff induction and training opportunities. All managers are permanent
members of staff.


There is good investment in developing a culture for good social work to
flourish, with a strong emphasis on continuing professional development
leading to solid social work practice. This includes good levels of support for
newly qualified social workers, practice teacher training, leadership
development programmes, monthly learning forums and an annual pride of
practice event, and improved support and mentoring provided by experienced
senior practitioners based within social work teams. Engagement in frontline
graduate programmes and step up to social work have successfully led to
employment. The local authority has decided to introduce a model of social
work practice and, at the time of the inspection, all staff and managers were
receiving the relevant training to support the implementation of that chosen
model of practice. The authority has also successfully addressed issues of high
caseloads. These are regularly reviewed and monitored, and social workers
told inspectors that these are now manageable.


Social workers and managers spoken to by inspectors were highly positive
about their experiences of working in North Tyneside, and the director places
high importance on ensuring that staff are well supported and feel valued.
Social workers and managers told inspectors that North Tyneside promotes a
nurturing, personable culture, with visible and supportive management at all
levels of the service, which enables social workers to deliver good, solid social
work practice that benefits children in this authority.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good

Executive summary
The North Tyneside Safeguarding Children Board (NTSCB) is an efficient and
reflective Board, meeting its statutory requirements, and effectively coordinating
and assuring itself of the quality of multi-agency safeguarding work.
Governance arrangements are strong, and constructive working relationships
between senior partnership managers ensure multi-agency ownership and
prioritisation of safeguarding.
The chair of the NTSCB is central in developing a culture of openness and
challenge, along with the business manager, who has ensured that efficient board
processes are in place to support effective board functioning.
Focused multi-agency performance information, audit activity and specific reports
mean that the Board is appropriately sighted on all areas for which it has
responsibility, and this supports the effective prioritisation of board activity.
There is positive identification and dissemination of learning, and a wide-ranging
flexible training programme is linked to board priorities. However, clear actions
with timescales, including ways in which the impact of learning will be evaluated,
are not consistently in place to further support improvements in frontline practice.
The voice of children and young people is evident in discrete areas of work, but
does not sufficiently inform wider board activity and developments.
The Board is influential in multi-agency service planning, through rigorous scrutiny
of plans and evaluation of practice. This ensures that safeguarding practice is not
compromised and the implementation of strategic developments is effectively
supported. The annual report 20152016 comprehensively describes services.
However, further improvements could be made in the Boards evaluation of their
effectiveness.


Recommendations

Ensure that the outcomes of all learning activities are supported by clear
actions with timescales, including ways in which the impact of the activity will
be evaluated.


Ensure that the voice of children and young people effectively informs wider
board activity and developments.


Ensure that the annual report rigorously and succinctly reflects the evaluation
and effectiveness of safeguarding services in North Tyneside.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The NTSCB has made clear and continuing improvements since the current
chair came into post in April 2014, and effective arrangements are in place to
ensure that the Board fulfils its statutory functions.


Strong governance arrangements, NTSCB membership of key strategic boards
and constructive working relationships between senior partnership managers
ensure that there is effective prioritisation, coordination and multi-agency
ownership of safeguarding work in North Tyneside.


The independent chair of the NTSCB has been instrumental in steering the
board developments, setting a culture of openness and challenge and
influencing senior management engagement with the safeguarding agenda.
The chair is appropriately held to account by the deputy chief executive,
through regular meetings, which also include the DCS. The lead member is
regularly briefed to ensure that he is sighted on key board issues. The local
authority commitment to the work of the NTSCB is further evidenced by
additional funding for a part-time business support post, which has
contributed to increased efficiency of the Board.


The NTSCB is constituted in line with statutory requirements. Development
work by the Board and preparation and support for individual board members
have ensured effective multi-agency ownership of and contributions to board
activity, including by lay members. The Board has clear priorities, supported
by a detailed business plan. The voice of children and young people is evident
in discrete work areas, but does not sufficiently inform wider board activity
and developments. (Recommendation)


The Board is well managed and operates very efficiently, with limited direct
resources. Sub-groups of the Board are chaired by partnership managers of
sufficient seniority and board processes, including timely circulation of good-


quality reports and clear work plans, and coordination of the sub-groups
supports effective board functioning.

The Board has appropriate oversight of all practice areas for which it has
responsibility. Multi-agency performance management data, including trends
and comparator information, supports a clear overview of key areas and
identification of where more detailed or qualitative assurance is required.


Audit activity gives a qualitative view of frontline work and enables practice
themes to be identified. Recommendations arising from the audits are not
sufficiently focused and do not have clear timescales to support more timely
practice improvement. The audit programme is planned, reflecting areas of
board priorities. Multi-agency audits are effectively supplemented by singleagency audit activity as part of the quality assurance for the Board. Some
areas of work have also been subject to re-audit, to evaluate impact and
progress. (Recommendation)


The Board has been effective in increasing the coverage of section 11 and
section 175 audits to assure partners about the quality of wider agency
safeguarding practice across the partnership. The most recent audits have
been further evaluated by an external provider who has been commissioned
to evaluate and lead a planned challenge event.


Clear reports to the Board on specific work areas, supported by board
manager quality assurance, underpin effective oversight and challenge. The
Board has been sighted and influential in a number of practice areas and in
structural changes within agencies that impact on safeguarding practice.
Examples include the improvements required for children who are privately
fostered and the structural changes for children who have disabilities, prior to
the service being moved to adult services to implement a whole-life approach,
and ways in which robust safeguarding arrangements would continue. Another
example is the plans to move health visiting and school nursing to the local
authority, which have been subject to rigorous board scrutiny to ensure that
safeguarding capacity and practice are not compromised. The Boards
oversight of early help has also ensured that any practice deficits identified by
audits have been directly addressed by management planning.


Effective processes are in place to identify cases from which there may be
learning, and information gathering and decision-making in relation to SCRs
are timely and in line with national guidance. Cases are brought to the
relevant sub-group for consideration by a range of agencies. There have not
been any recent SCRs published. However, the NTSCB is contributing to a
significant case review, following a serious incident occurring to a Scottish
child placed in North Tyneside. The Board has undertaken learning reviews to
identify where practice can be further improved. Learning is effectively
disseminated through a variety of methods, and the Board has ensured that
learning from previous reviews and local and national SCRs are embedded in
ongoing training.



The North of Tyne child death overview panel (CDOP) is a collaboration
between North Tyneside, Newcastle and Northumberland LSCBs. It benefits
from an independent chair and maximises available information and data to
identify and act on areas for learning and development. Examples of positive
impact include a contribution to a reduction in maternal smoking rates
following targeted intervention, improving consent for child health
immunisations and increasing awareness of safe sleeping. The CDOP
demonstrates a learning approach to improving its function and effectiveness,
and there is evidence of challenge from the Board and chair to support this.
The annual report is clear and accessible.


The NTSCB policies and procedures, including practice guidance, are
appropriate and clear, cover key areas of responsibility and are updated in a
timely way.


The Board has been instrumental in providing support and challenge to
developing and evaluating effective partnership responses to children at risk
of child sexual exploitation and those who go missing. The oversight of the
work is undertaken jointly with the Safeguarding Adults Board. There has
been clear coordination between the sub-groups in undertaking audits and
reviews, providing and refining relevant training and evaluating and
evidencing direct improvements in frontline practice. The voice of young
people has been central in developing more effective and timely responses
when they go missing.


Effective induction and support have ensured the development and
maintenance of an extensive pool of trainers to deliver a wide-ranging and
well-regarded NTSCB training programme. Training is delivered in line with
board priorities, and a range of methods support flexibility in the timeliness
and targeting of delivery. NTSCB training is effectively overseen by an
experienced workforce leader who also leads local authority training. Methods
of evaluation continue to evolve, with electronic methods used to provide
feedback at key points after the training to assess implementation and impact.


The annual report for 201516 describes key areas of safeguarding activity,
but does not analyse the effectiveness of this with sufficient clarity. The report
also has much content on the challenges for improving board effectiveness,
but the overall improvements evident in board functioning and oversight in the
last year should support a more succinct and evaluative annual report for


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of four of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted
and three additional inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Neil Penswick
Deputy lead inspector: Lisa Summers
Team inspectors: Shabana Abasi, Fiona Millns, Lorna Schlechte, Pam Blackman,
Graham Reiter
Senior data analyst: Peter McLaughlin
Quality assurance manager: Christine Williams


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2017


